
                               1 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. and U.N. Said to Study Vietnam Resettlement Offer

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 149 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


A State Department official said today that the Reagan Administration was
working with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees ''to determine
whether the Vietnamese are in fact prepared to release persons from re-education
camps for resettlement abroad.''

The official estimated that there were about 100,000 people in socalled
re-educatiom camps, many of them confined because of past ties to the United
States. The official said that ''significant'' numbers of these Vietnamese could
be absorbed into the United States, because Hanoi's orderly departure program,
under which Vietnamese are allowed to leave the country, has been kept down.

Under the program, 1,000 Vietnamese are allowed to leave Vietnam for the United
States each month. Since October, however, the figure has averaged 332,
according to State Department officials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AT HOME ABROAD;
THE CONSENSUS CRACKS

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Francois Mitterrand is the best friend Israel has had in Elysee Palace for
years: a French President who made a point of visiting Israel early in his term
of office, one with close personal connections to the Jewish community of
France. So his reaction to the war in Lebanon is a signal to which attention
should be paid.

Mr. Mitterrand was muted in his first comments. Then, as the objectives of the
Israeli invasion escalated, he became strongly critical. He made diplomatic
moves to keep Israel from pressing on into Beirut. He urged the summit meeting
of the European community to try to prevent ''the annihilation of the
Palestinian people.''

Mr. Mitterrand's reaction shows the danger of the Lebanese war for Israel. The
campaign has been a military triumph. But it has cracked the moral and political
consensus that sustains Israel, abroad and at home.

In France the Lebanese war has produced signs of division even in the Jewish
community, which in recent years had become more outspoken in behalf of Israel.
There was a protest against the invasion by 500 leading Jewish intellectuals.

Of course European support, among politicians or the public, matters much less
to Israel than America. But in the United States, too, there is much evidence of
troubled feelings about Lebanon. We know that Israel's sweep on Beirut worried
President Reagan and his White House advisers, even though Secretary of State
Haig had effectively encouraged it. Commentators long supportive of Israel have
been critical.

The American Jewish community has on the whole remained publicly supportive or
silent. But underneath there is concern. Those television pictures of Israeli
bombs smashing apartment houses in Beirut, of children with amputated limbs,
have left troubled consciences. Americans who have read Kurt Vonnegut's
''Slaughterhouse Five'' are not likely to be impressed by Prime Minister Begin's
statement that those who bombed Dresden in World War II have no right to
criticize Israel's bombing of Beirut. We deplore both.

But by far the most important part of the consensus is in Israel itself. And
there again the signs of division are now unmistakable.  They are found in the
Knesset, in the press and - most tellingly - among soldiers.

Hirsh Goodman, the highly respected military correspondent of The Jerusalem Post
and a former paratrooper himself, reports on a revealing episode. He was at the
front in Lebanon with two other military correspondents when they were
confronted by men from four top Israeli units.

''We were accused,'' Mr. Goodman writes, ''by the overwhelming majority of the
men - including senior officers - of allowing this war to grow out of all
proportion to the original goals by repeating official explanations we all knew
to be false.''

Israeli reservists called up for active duty are allowed to speak out critically
once they are released, and some have already done so. An Air Force captain who
took part in the bombing of Lebanon, in an evident reference to Defense Minister
Ariel Sharon, said the war was one that ''a man thirsty for war wanted.'' He
said the declared objective of a line 25 miles north of the border had never
been serious: ''We dashed northwards as far as possible without any intention
whatsoever of stopping.''

Supporters of Israel often say that the world holds it to a double standard
-that people criticize its invasion of Lebanon, for example, when they said
little about brutal Syrian or P.L.O. actions there.  Yes, there is a double
standard. From its birth Israel asked to be judged as a light among the nations.
We expect its leaders to tell the truth about their objectives. We expect them
not to commit armed aggression.

Ideals apart, there is a self-interested reason for Israel to keep to its
standards - as the reaction to Lebanon shows. A democratic government cannot for
long carry out fundamental policies opposed by a substantial part of its body
politic. The United States learned that in Vietnam. Consensus is crucial in
Israel, the most democratic of countries, where every citizen feels involved.

The end of the Israeli consensus for this war was signified by the belated
demand of the Labor opposition, rejected by the Begin Government, that it
foreswear an attack on Beirut. A Labor figure weighty in military matters,
General Mordecai Gur, a former chief of staff, said that all the fighting in
Lebanon had been pointless after the first week, costing Israeli lives
needlessly.

Labor's role in the Lebanese affair has in fact been pathetic.  Shimon Peres,
the party leader, allowed himself to be drawn in by General Sharon to a share of
responsibility for the war, and hence was in a poor position to object when Mr.
Sharon went on to bloodier objectives. No one will take Labor seriously now
until it has a new leader. But the division in Israel is real, and dangerous.

If Israeli forces go into Beirut, it will be worse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

No. 2 Man in Veterans Agency Resigns Over Policy Disputes

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 21, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 201 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


Charles Hagel, deputy administrator of the Veterans Administration, submitted
his resignation to President Reagan last week, the agency said Tuesday.

There have been reports that Mr. Hagel and Robert P. Nimmo, administrator of the
veterans' agency, have had sharp differences over the agency's policies,
particularly those involving Vietnam veterans. A group of Congressmen recently
wrote a letter to the President asking that Mr. Nimmo either resign or be
dismissed. The letter was announced the same day that Nimmo said he had repaid
more than $6,000 for unauthorized use of a chauffeur.

The repayment was made after a report by Frank S. Sato, the veterans agency's
inspector general, detailing Mr. Nimmo's use of a government driver and the
expenditure of more than $54,000 to redecorate his office.

A spokesman for the veterans agency said Mr. Hagel informed the President of his
intention to resign Friday in a letter in which he said he made the decision
''with deep sadness, but with a clear conscience.'' The letter said Mr. Hagel
wished to leave his post by Aug. 1, the spokesman added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW DEFENDS QUALITY OF ARMS IT SELLS TO ARABS

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 1


The Soviet Union has taken the unusual step of publicly rebutting assertions
that the weapons supplied by Moscow to the Arabs were inferior to Israeli and
American arms.

''In a bid to diminish the potentialities of the forces opposing the
Israeli-American aggression in Lebanon, the U.S. and Tel Aviv propaganda organs
have lately been intensively circulating deliberately false information on
Soviet combat equipment,'' the official Soviet press agency Tass said in a
commentary issued Wednesday.

Tass said the ''combat qualities of American arms used by the Israelis are being
extolled in every way, while the losses being sustained by the interventionists
on Lebanese soil are understated.''

The press agency went on to cite what it said were specific instances of Arab
successes against Israeli armor, adding that ''some advantage'' was inevitable
for Israel after ''a sudden and massive blow on Lebanon by all its armed
services.''

The Kremlin's Sensitivity

The commentary betrayed Moscow's sensitivity to assertions that Soviet arms had
been unable to stand up to Israeli and American arms. The Soviet Union rarely
refers in public to its arms sales, and even more rarely discusses the
effectiveness of its weapons in battle.

Another Tass commentary on Wednesday suggested that the Soviet Union had been
stung by Arab accusations that the Kremlin failed to give proper support to its
Arab allies. The commentary was in the form of a report on an article in the
Jordanian newspaper Al Rai, a technique often used by the Kremlin to make an
indirect point.

Tass said the Jordanian newspaper had refuted ''the assertions of some circles
in the Arab world that allegedly the Soviet Union renders insufficient support
to the Arab cause.''

With evident approval, Tass cited Al Rai's reminder that the Soviet Union had
never fought alongside a liberation movement, ''even after the U.S. had entered
the war in Vietnam or even after the Americans bombed a Communist ally country
such as North Vietnam.''

The arms given to the Arabs, the article said, ''are those which were in the
hands of the Vietnamese and which defeated the U.S. war machine.''

Soviet Denies Responsibility

The suggestion seemed to be that the Arabs had been responsible for whatever
setbacks they suffered and that the Soviet Union had fully discharged its
responsibility to the Arabs by supplying them with the same weapons that had
proved adequate in Vietnamese hands.

''The Soviet Union has never promised to any Arab country to bring its armies to
defend it,'' Al Rai was quoted as saying. ''But the Soviet Union pledged to arm
its Arab friends and started many years ago to give them arms at a price which
has not affected their development, and replace the arms they had lost as it
happened to more than one country after 1967.''

Al Rai was quoted as saying that six Israeli Phantom fighterbombers had been
shot down in one week by Soviet-built MIG-21's, ''which some people in the Arab
world accused of 'technological weakness,' ''

Tass concluded with a quote from the Jordanian newspaper saying that ''what is
happening in Lebanon is not because of the Soviet delay and hesitation but
because of us, the Arabs, and because of our wooden swords which we use against
each other.''

Israeli Reports Challenged

Israel has reported great success in destroying Syria's Sovietsuppied MIG jets,
antiaircraft missile batteries, tanks and other weapons. Israel has also
reported capturing about 4,000 tons of Soviet arms supplied to Palestinian
guerrillas.

The Tass commentary said such reports had given a false picture.  ''According to
numerous comments of the participants in battles, Soviet tanks, infantry combat
vehicles, antitank guided missiles and artillery have demonstrated well their
efficiency,'' the agency said.

''In the course of fierce fighting, trained crews of Syrian tanks, in repelling
Israeli attacks, each destroyed four and more tanks of American and Israeli
make,'' it said.

In one battle, Tass said, Syrian armor destroyed 50 ''aggressor tanks.'' It said
Israel showed its respect for Soviet equipment by holding its tanks more than
two miles away from the front line.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Student Enters Plea In Draft Registry Case

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 170 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, July 1


A college student who said he wanted to be neither an antidraft martyr nor a
leader was arraigned before a Federal magistrate today for failure to register
for the draft. He is the first American to be so charged since the Vietnam War.

Benjamin H. Sasway, a 21-year-old student at Humboldt State University, pleaded
not guilty to the felony count and was released on a $10,000 personal surety
bond. Magistrate Harry R. McCue ordered Mr. Sasway to appear in Federal District
Court on Tuesday for the setting of a trial date.

Outside the Federal courthouse, about 150 demonstrators marched in a circle and
chanted, ''Ben Sasway, we support!'' Antidraft groups staged similar
demonstrations around the country.

Mr. Sasway was buoyant at the outpouring of public support before his
arraignment, but he appeared shaken afterward. He told reporters outside the
court: ''I don't want to be a martyr. I'm doing what I think is right. I don't
want to be a leader of the movement.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Sculptor Is Selected For Vietnam Statue

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


A District of Columbia sculptor was chosen today to create a statue for the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial that is now being built on the Mall near the Lincoln
Memorial.

''I wish to create a sculpture which evokes the experience of Vietnam veterans
and pays proper tribute to their faithful service,'' said Frederick Hart, a
38-year-old native of Atlanta who was chosen for the task by a panel of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund. ''The work will be figurative in style and
humanist in substance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
Farewell To Stalemate

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


One week ago, as the Israelis were trying all sorts of psychological warfare to
scare the P.L.O. out of the capital of Lebanon, a White House spokesman, Larry
Speakes, was announcing that ''assurances were given'' by Prime Minister Begin
to President Reagan that the Israelis would not enter Beirut. Press reports
escalated this to a solemn ''pledge'' and commentators have since been
excoriating Israel for seeming to threaten to break its word.

Now we know that this Arabist undermining of the pressure on the P.L.O. had no
basis in truth. President Reagan, in a commendable display of candor at his
press conference, flatly contradicted his press spokesman: it was ''more
accurate'' to say that Mr. Begin had said in the meeting in Washington that he
did not want to send forces into Beirut, but did not make any promises. The
''pledge'' was a myth.

Two facts are thus revealed: First, somebody in the White House - who disagrees
with the President's policy to keep the heat on the P.L.O. to depart Beirut -
caused the spokesman to put out a wholly inaccurate report. It would have been
stupid for Mr. Begin to announce that the P.L.O. leaders were under no threat of
attack, and he did not; the false report, which with the Haig resignation
emboldened Mr. Arafat, had a cost in human lives. (Mr. Speakes is saying he got
his misinformation from the State spokesman, who denies it.)

Second, and completely unremarked, is the restraint and respect shown by the
Israeli Government in the face of a White House misrepresentation. For a long
and painful week, as dovish writers compared Ariel Sharon to a Nazi and equated
the liberation of Lebanese with the Soviet slaughter of Afghans, no Israeli with
access to notes of the meeting branded the ''assurances'' statement as untrue.
Why? Because Israel is determined not to get into a dispute at this crucial
moment with its only ally.

The moment is crucial not because doves in America, and a minority in Israel,
worry about the soul of a nation that refuses to be victimized. Nor because a
world that was unconcerned with a hundred thousand deaths in Lebanon following
the P.L.O.-Syrian ''invasion'' has discovered immorality in Israel's need to end
the threat on its northern border. Nor because a medium that meekly accepted
exclusion from the Falkland war is infuriated by censorship in this one. Nor
because terrorists who hold a section of a city hostage, using innocents as
shields, are portrayed as heroic while the soldiers who are making a genuine
effort to minimize civilian deaths are castigated as brutal.

What makes this time so important is that it may well be a turning point. If not
totally rooted out of Lebanon now, the P.L.O. will regroup and rearm; but if all
foreign forces -P.L.O., Syrian and Israeli - are made to leave, a Lebanese
nation may be reborn that will be capable of signing a peace treaty.

Underlying the dovish anger at Israel is the realization that the military
option can sometimes be a success; that hostages do not offer terrorists
automatic protection; and that the fundament of the dove's solution - a P.L.O.
state limited to Israel's side of the Jordan - is never going to happen, no
matter if the next Prime Minister of Israel is Ariel Sharon or Yitzhak Rabin.

With the option of taking over Israel denied, it must now occur to the most
intelligent Arabs in the Middle East -the dispersed Palestinians - that they no
longer need to be pawns in the power games of the Arab states. If not guaranteed
an immediate homeland, they at least deserve a home.

King Fahd reportedly offered Ayatollah Khomeini $25 billion to refrain from
invading Iraq; could not this new Saudi monarch, through his Ambassador in
Washington (who, unlike his Israeli counterpart, gets to talk to our national
security adviser) spare a fifth of that sum to build a great, modern Palestinian
metropolis on the East Bank? Hire Bechtel; call it Fahd City; rejuvenate the
economy of Jordan; make the Israelis jealous; turn Palestinian energies from
destruction to construction.

The stalemated old chessboard has been overturned; whether outsiders are
anguished or satisfied at the way it has been done, the needed deed has been
done. With Palestinian welfare as well as Israeli safety in mind, this is the
time to put all our diplomatic pressure on King Fahd to open his purse and on
King Hussein to abandon his timidity. The Arab world needs Western protection;
we should parlay the Saudi and Kuwaiti fear of Iran and the Jordanian fear of
Syria into a new deal for the refugees.

Doesn't that make more sense than to join the well-meaning crew with the Vietnam
fixation in hollering at the Israelis for breaking imaginary pledges and daring
to lift the yoke of terror from their land?

Taking and inflicting casualties in a just cause has always posed a moral
dilemma for ethical societies. In this case, the scores of provocations were
real, the threat was worsening, the retaliation was justified, and the
Soviet-Syrian decision to back off opened an ultimately life-saving opportunity
that would have been foolish to fail to exploit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PILES OF RUBBLE WERE THE HOMES OF PALESTINIANS

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1399 words

DATELINE: BURJ AL


SHEMALI, Lebanon, July 1 - In the densely populated Palestinian refugee camps of
southern Lebanon, the end of the fighting has not meant the end of the war.

Since the guns fell silent in this region more than two weeks ago, the Israeli
Army has systematically destroyed many of the Palestinians' houses that survived
the battles, increasing the number of homeless families, many of them with
children.

Over the years the Palestinian guerrillas had adopted the practice of
integrating military installations in the camps' civilian settlements. Israeli
army demolition teams have been blowing up what they say are underground
''bunkers'' - the Palestinians call them ''shelters''- and that has meant taking
the houses above too.

The combination of combat and subsequent demolition has left many of the
children and their mothers to pick through the broken and crushed slabs and
chunks of concrete that cover their possessions.

Many Are 'in Israel'

Many fathers and older brothers are ''in Israel,'' the people say, meaning that
they have been arrested as guerrillas and taken to Israel for questioning. ''My
father is not here,'' said Arif Masri, 10 years old. ''How can I sleep?'' He and
other boys in the Rashidiye camp find amusement playing a game called ''Live.''
Everyone puts on a blindfold and runs wildly to touch another; whoever remains
untouched lives.

''I didn't know war was like this,'' said Ali Gaziz, 11. ''I did not expect all
these things.'' He has not seen his father since the fighting and does not know
whether he is alive.

The structures that still stand in the refugee camps, including houses and
schools into which the homeless have crowded, have no electricity and no water.
In the cities, which are more visible and are populated mostly by Lebanese, the
Israeli Army has quickly moved to restore vital services, but there is no
evidence that it has done anything similar for the Palestinian civilians who
live in the camps.

Consequently, a terrible sense of aloneness hangs in the grim and dusty streets,
as if the outside world - the Arab world, the international relief
organizations, the philanthropic Western world - has simply evaporated, leaving
only this desolate landscape of broken houses.

Mariam Shaami, who lost her son in a shelling attack, spoke of the future as she
stood in a pose of grieving piety, her hands clasped before her. ''Everything
that will happen to my people will happen to me,'' she said, her face etched in
sadness. ''I am completely broken.''

For many, the pain has been multiplied by a bitter sense of injustice.  ''I
agree, war is war,'' said Sami Masri, 29, a nurse. ''But I raise the white flag,
and you destroy my house after that. I don't think that's right. If this
happened in Israel, and the Arabs did it, I would say this is madness.''

Fate of a House

Aisha Massal, a grandmother with a scarf around her head and a deeply lined
face, had taken refuge in the shelter beneath her house when the attack began.
After the battle had ended and she emerged, she was relieved to see that her
house, which she had built with money sent by her son in Abu Dhabi, was still
intact. She and her family followed the Israelis' instructions to leave
Rashidiye and wait in the nearby orange groves.

After a while, the Israeli troops let her and her neighbors return for half an
hour to take food from their houses for a few days, but they never said a thing
about further destruction, she said, and so she left everything she owned
inside. When she was allowed to return days later, her house was a pile of
twisted slabs and chunks; a corner of a refrigerator stuck out from beneath one
huge concrete block, and a water heater lay bent beneath another.

She stood at the edge of the pile, but she could not seem to look at it. ''I
give the problem to Allah,'' she said. ''My house is gone, what can I do?''

Reporters Have Been Barred

The methodical destruction by the army, whose bulldozers often followed the
demolition teams, carving rows of houses and narrow alleyways into broad
boulevards of rubble, has coincided with the Israeli Government's accusations
that news organizations have exaggerated the severity of the damage in the
coastal cities of Tyre and Sidon. But the damage in the refugee camps is much
more extensive than in the cities, and the army has kept it out of public view
until recent days by barring reporters from entering the camps, which cannot be
seen from the main roads.

The worst devastation is in the camps of Burj al-Shemali and Rashidiye near
Tyre, and Ein Khilweh near Sidon. These were sprawling towns of narrow streets
and jumbled concrete houses, built gradually over the years since the refugees
from Palestine were driven here by the fighting in Israel's 1948 war of
independence.

A total of 112,000 Palestinians were registered by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency as having lived in the Tyre and Sidon areas. The agency said that,
as of June 23, before the demolition and bulldozing were completed, 60 of the
houses in Rashidiye, 35 in Burj al-Shemali and almost all in Ein Khilweh had
been destroyed.

Ein Khilweh fared worst as the site of a protracted battle between Palestinian
guerrillas and Israeli troops, who shelled the camp for days after neighboring
Sidon was taken.

No Explanations Are Given

The office of the army spokesman declined to explain the reasons for the
demolition that has followed the fighting. But it seems clear that the Israelis
want to deny any future guerrillas the use of the shelters and the camps for
military purposes, much as American troops in Vietnam obliterated villages to
deny their use to the Vietcong.

In effect, it was the P.L.O that exposed the Palestinian civilians to Israeli
attack by weaving their military presence into the fabric of the residential
camps.

The P.L.O. built the shelters, one for each six or seven houses, and then stored
ammunition in many of them. Antiaircraft guns were placed beside churches,
mosques and schools. In Burj al-Shemali, a young man gestured to a neighborhood
reduced to rubble and said that a P.L.O. military unit had been located at the
edge of the devastation; the Israeli air and artillery strikes had been a little
off target, but not much.

Aside from these purely military considerations, however, Israel has been
heavily influenced by a certain psychology that was also common in Vietnam, a
difficulty in separating the fighters from the noncombatants who support them,
or who are their wives and children.  Although Defense Minister Ariel Sharon has
said that Israel's struggle was not against the Palestinians, but against the
P.L.O., ordinary Palestinians in the camps have generally been seen as hostile
and deserving of rough treatment.

''They are all terrorists,'' an army officer said, when asked why bulldozers
were knocking down houses in which women and children were living.

Some Palestinians Omitted

When Israeli authorities released their estimates of civilian casualties from
the war, their count of approximately 500 deaths did not include any
Palestinians in the camps or in west Beirut. Shulamit Aloni, an opposition
Member of Parliament, said it was as if the Government did not consider the
Palestinians human beings.

But many Palestinians have a sinewy resilience and a ready smile amid the
rubble.  ''Any human being who is living on this earth has a right to live,''
said a smiling, charismatic woman named Fawziah Karabash.  ''We feel we deserve
a state because we are refused by all the other nations.'' An Israeli Army
officer suggested that someday there would be peace and perhaps the Palestinians
would have their state.

''But in the meantime,'' Mrs. Karabash said, her eyes flashing merrily, ''you
have buried us - a little.'' And everyone in a surrounding crowd laughed,
perhaps in relief that the officer laughed too, and seemed sorry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of residents of Tyre sifting through rubble photo
of Defense Minister Ariel Sharon in East Beirut

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRITISH REPORTERS TELL NEW SIDE OF FALKLAND STORY

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: LONDON, July 2


British journalists returning from the Falkland Islands, no longer constrained
by censorship, have been writing critical accounts of apparently inadequate
British intelligence and military bungling there.

The news stories, unfolding each day for the past week, provide a background for
the forthcoming parliamentary inquiry into the South Atlantic war. Many of them
recall the reporting of the war in Vietnam.

Many reporters and editors believe that it was the Vietnam experience that
influenced the British Ministry of Defense in its handling of the press during
the Falkland fighting. John Nicholson, a correspondent for Independent
Television News, said ''it was a question of 'Look what you people did in
Vietnam, turning a nation against the war.' ''

The written testimony is being submitted to a bipartisan panel of the
Parliamentary Defense Committee, which will begin hearings July 21 into the
Government's handling of public and press information.

Non-British Journalists Excluded

Parliament's inquiry into information procedures will be followed by an
investigation of intelligence matters by the Foreign Affairs Committee and then
a committee of the House of Commons into the entire background of the invasion
by Argentina.

The difficulties over coverage of the Falkland war began with a dispute over the
selection of correspondents and grew worse as major difficulties developed over
censorship and related matters. It has extended to non-British journalists,
still unable to visit the islands.

They might find, as did John Witherow of The Times of London, that ''the initial
mood of delight'' among Falkland Islanders that Argentine troops were gone had
changed to a realization ''that they are still an occupied people, albeit this
time occupied by their own forces.'' He described bitter words between soldiers,
who lost friends in the fighting, and locals seeking to get on with their lives.

Fred Emery, executive editor for news at The Times, said the comparison with
Vietnam, where he served twice as a correspondent, was ''stunning.'' The
American policy, he said, is to ''let it all hang out - the press could go
anywhere and see anything, and it did.

''We got free helicopter rides all over the country and were just told not to
take pictures out of an aircraft, a rule that was generally violated, and not to
report operations until they began, which was followed because it was for
everyone's safety, including our own.''

'An Amazing System'

''That's an amazing system for a British reporter,'' he said, ''because the view
of our people is, 'If you are not with us, you're against us.' '' The Defense
Ministry, he said, ''was out to provide facilities under fairly close
supervision and it expected people to be part of the team.''

A spokesman for the Defense Ministry took exception to a reference to
censorship, saying it was the job of ministry officers aboard the task force
''to be of assistance to reporters.'' He declined to describe the terms of
reference of the inquiry and said he would not respond to allegations of what
ministry officials ''did or did not do'' aboard the task force.

Peter Archer of the Press Association, Britain's domestic news agency, was
aboard the aircraft carrier Hermes, the flagship of the task force. He said it
was ''a problem of too many censors, or press officers, on board the ship who
did not know what was being done in London.''

According to Mr. Witherow, who was on the Invincible, the other aircraft carrier
in the task force, news reports went through at least three hands - ''the
Defense Ministry officer on board the ship, the ship's captain and then the
Defense Ministry in London.''

''The real problem was being told we could not write about the Sheffield being
hit, the Belgrano being sunk or two Sea Harriers colliding at sea, only to turn
on the BBC World Service and hear it being announced in London.''

Press Blamed for Cod War Defeat

The censorship at sea was ''not bad,'' however, ''and on a few occasions they
let out stories reluctantly.'' Editors in London would collect the accounts from
the Defense Ministry, sometimes with phrases bracketed indicating that Defense
officials hoped they would not be printed.

He said the reporters were briefed fully each day aboard the Invincible by its
captain, Jeremy Black, ''who told us at one point that he felt Britain lost the
cod war with Iceland,'' a dispute in the early 1970's over fishing rights,
''because of a bad press, and he was trying to rectify it.''

But another high-ranking officer in the task force drew another conclusion from
the Vietnam parallel, a reporter said. ''He referred to 'America's traumatic
experience,' saying immediate coverage of soldiers being wounded and civilians
being killed as turning the public against the war.''

In any event, life changed in the war zone. The disputes between reporters and
military officials revolved not over restrictions on security matters, which the
press accepted, but over delays in transmission, discrepancies in policy with
London and the seemingly arbitrary deletion of adjectives, phrases and sometimes
entire accounts.

Film Was Not Transmitted

''I know of some copy that never got through,'' said Mr. Witherow.  ''A reporter
was alongside Sir Galahad when it was hit, killing 50 men. It was the worst
single incident of the war for Britain, and the account never arrived.''

Brian Hanrahan of the BBC said ''the censor on one occasion had a piece of paper
on his desk saying no messages are to be transmitted to London.''

He added: ''We asked him to ring London and request that the restriction be
lifted, but he said no messages were to be sent.  Finally somebody did ask, and
London lifted the restriction.''

Mr. Nicholson and Mr. Hanrahan were aboard the Hermes, working as a team with a
television crew, but film was never transmitted from the ship. It came later,
after the landings, and is still arriving from the Falklands.

Some press officials believe the navy never intended there to be television
coverage. Others have said that the width of the transmitting band was
insufficient for television, a circumstance known only after the television
teams were aboard.

But Mr. Nicholson said ''there's no doubt that the signal from Hermes to
Scott,'' a military satellite, ''could have worked - black and white and poor
quality, perhaps - but we never had the chance.  We had a senior technical
manager who said all we needed was a test, but it was never granted.''

Security Called Main Concern

Military officials, perhaps represented by the Defense Minister, John Nott, are
expected to testify that the press agreed to certain restrictions and that
security was the main concern. The transmission equipment was to be turned over
to television when its was not needed for operational traffic, but that moment
never came.

But Mr. Hanrahan, describing what he said was a generally frustrating
experience, said ''there is a balance to be struck between the military need to
keep things secret, to keep their communications locked up, and to provide
information in an acceptable form to the country which is supporting, financing
and running the operation.''

Reporters said they saw the need for censorship, offering as one example the
disclosure that many Argentine bombs failed to explode.  If that was reported,
one journalist said, ''it would have prompted the Argies to look quickly to
improving their fusing and timing, and we understood that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of wounded Britons on East Falkland from June 13

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 69 words


VIETNAM VETERANS MEMORIAL ON SCHEDULE: Construction crews working yesterday on
the foundation of the memorial near the Washington Monument. Backers of the
controversial structure said it would be completed on schedule and dedicated on
Veterans Day, Nov. 11. The monument's two black granite walls, each 241 feet
long, will bear the names of the 57,709 Americans killed or listed as missing in
the undeclared war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of construction site

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SECRET WORLD OF A GREEN BERET

BYLINE: By Philip Taubman; Philip Taubman, a Washington correspondent for The
New York Times, frequently reports on intelligence matters.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5352 words


The first call came on a muggy July evening in 1977. Luke Thompson, a master
sergeant in the Army Special Forces, was at home in Fayetteville, N.C. The
caller identified himself as Pat Loomis from Washington and asked if Thompson
might be interested in recruiting a team of former Green Berets for an overseas
mission that would pay well. Loomis provided no other information. Thompson
conditionally accepted the proposal, not knowing that he was about to become
involved in one of the strangest and most disturbing operations in the annals of
international espionage.

When the conversation with Loomis ended, Thompson, who says he was initially
concerned that the offer might be a trap by a hostile foreign intelligence
service, phoned military intelligence officers at Fort Bragg in Fayetteville,
headquarters of the Special Forces, to report the call and to seek their
guidance. Two officers drove to his house, according to Thompson, and the three
men spent the evening discussing the operation.

The next day, Loomis called again and told Thompson he wanted to arrange a
meeting the following day in Fayetteville. They agreed to meet at the Sheraton
Motor Inn. The day of the meeting, Thompson recalls, he was informed by the
military intelligence officers that they had checked the offer ''to the top''
and found it was ''legal and aboveboard.'' They told him, ''You can pursue it as
you desire,'' he says. Later, at the Sheraton, Loomis identified himself as a
covert agent for the Central Intelligence Agency. Less than a week later,
Thompson - who had been granted a leave by his commanding officers -and three
former Green Berets he had recruited were in Libya. Their mission: to train
terrorists.  Five years later, the Libyan operation remains a subject of
mystery, controversy and investigation. The organizers of the mission, Edwin P.
Wilson and Frank E. Terpil, both former American intelligence agents, were
indicted by a Federal grand jury in 1980 on charges of illegally shipping
explosives to Libya as part of the terrorist training operation. Wilson was
recently caught in an international trap set by the Justice Department and he is
now being held in the Washington area pending trial, with bail set at $20
million. Terpil remains a fugitive, at last report living in Beirut. Loomis,
shortly before his meeting with Thompson, had been dismissed by the C.I.A. for
helping Wilson but because of administrative procedures was still on the
agency's payroll when he contacted Thompson. The Central Intelligence Agency has
repeatedly denied authorizing or supporting the operation, but some sources
suggest that senior agency officials who were close to Wilson may have given
approval to the Libyan scheme, perhaps in the hope it would produce valuable
intelligence information on Libyan terrorism. There is also a possibility, which
Federal prosecutors are exploring, that the same senior C.I.A.  officials might
have been silent business partners of Wilson.  Federal prosecutors in
Washington, Houston, Denver and several other cities are still investigating
various aspects of the case and additional indictments are said to be likely
this year.

Of the many riddles that arise from these events, one of the most difficult to
solve may be this: Why did a group of former Green Berets, men who were trained
to be America's elite commando troops and who consider themselves unwavering
American patriots, accept an offer to train terrorists for a hostile foreign
government? The men themselves say the reasons are not hard to comprehend. The
money was good (they say they were promised $6,500 a month), the action was
appealing and, at least as important, they claim that they were firmly convinced
that they were enlisting in an officially sanctioned American mission to
infiltrate the Libyan intelligence apparatus. But was there something about
these men, the training they had received and the tasks they had carried out in
the past that discouraged them from questioning what was clearly a questionable
mission? Had they become so accustomed to accepting unsavory assignments from
shadowy sources of authority that they saw nothing unusual or suspicious in
being sent by the United States Government to aid an anti-American dictator? And
was there something about the organization of the American intelligence system,
particularly the relationship between the C.I.A. and the Green Berets, that
encouraged agents to operate without clear lines of authority?

Since the mid-1970's, the nation has known that the Government has conducted
questionable operations overseas, including assassinations. But the country
never got to know any of the men who carried them out, the details of what they
did or the impact their work had on them. Most of the missions were highly
classified and the men were instructed never to discuss them. Luke Thompson, now
retired and disillusioned, decided to break that silence. This is the story of
his experiences, a story which opens a window into the Byzantine, rarely viewed
world of modern espionage. It is also a story which reduces certain governmental
policies to a human scale on which the costs - for individuals and society - can
be better fathomed.

Not all of what Thompson claims can be checked against other sources of
information. The Government refuses to discuss some of the missions he
describes. And his thoughts and emotions are clearly his alone. But most aspects
of his story, including the incidents involving larger units of Green Berets,
were witnessed by others and many were recorded in Government files. These
sources, including current and former Defense Department officials, former
intelligence officials and published and unpublished Government records, confirm
that his account is solidly grounded in fact.

For the years that he wore a green beret, from 1962 to 1978, Thompson inhabited
the dark corners of what might have been a Graham Greene novel. He was part of a
secret American army of covert agents who handled the dirty work of United
States foreign policy - often under the supervision of the C.I.A. - all over the
world. For example, Thompson says he took part in a previously undisclosed
assassination plot in the Dominican Republic in 1965. He claims his colleagues
later went to Bolivia where they helped Government soldiers hunt down and
assassinate Ernesto Che Guevara, the Cuban revolutionary leader. In Southeast
Asia, Thompson says he and his fellow Green Berets assassinated province chiefs,
businessmen and political leaders suspected of being Vietcong sympathizers, made
reconnaissance missions into North Vietnam and carried out secret attacks in
Cambodia months before the formal American incursion in 1970.

His story raises questions that may be difficult for the nation to answer. Among
them: How does one measure the costs to a free and lawful society of sending
citizens to assassinate foreign political leaders just because they happen to be
troublesome? Is there not a line between unconventional warfare and unacceptable
warfare? Can men be trained as elite, obedient commandos without destroying
their ability to make independent judgments when necessary? And what
responsibility does the Government bear to help such men readjust to civilian
life?  Luke Floyd Thompson was born on March 13, 1934, in Lewis County,
Kentucky, the seventh of 15 children; four of his siblings died in infancy. The
area was so rural, he says, that his home was located in no specific town. His
father, Meredith, was a steelworker. His mother, Verna Gillum, was a full-time
mother and housewife. When Luke was 3, the Ohio River overflowed its banks and
washed away the Thompsons' house. The family moved to Ashland, where his father,
unable to find a mill job, went to work for the W.P.A.

The military was always an important part of the Thompson family.  Luke's father
served in the cavalry in France during World War I. His six brothers all
enlisted in the military when they became old enough, and four of them saw
action during World War II. Luke joined the National Guard when he was 14.

Thompson was an ''unruly'' youngster, as he puts it. He recalls taking part in
the robbery of a bootlegger in Kentucky. ''We went into the Red Bud Tavern, shot
up the jukebox with a .45, and robbed the guy of $75 We had to park our getaway
car on a hill 'cause that was the only way it would start.'' An encounter with
the police the next day convinced Luke that he was finished with what he calls
''the gangster business.''

In l955, however, he ''started becoming delinquent again,'' he says. This time,
that delinquency took the form of going absent without leave and other
violations of military regulations. Thompson was eventually brought up before a
court martial hearing in 1956 and given a dishonorable discharge as well as a
year at Fort Leavenworth Prison in Kansas. He was told, however, that he could
restore himself to active duty if he served the time with good behavior. Even
so, it took Thompson several years after his release from prison to persuade the
Army to waive his dishonorable discharge and permit him to re-enlist, which he
did in 1959.

At the time Thompson was admitted to Special Forces training in 1959, the Green
Berets were still a small, relatively untested group, established by the Army in
1952 to provide the United States with a unit capable of conducting both
unconventional warfare operations, including commando and intelligence
activities. They accepted for training only seasoned soldiers prepared to endure
several years of additional highly specialized and intense training, followed by
a career on the cutting edge of American military activities around the world.

In the late 1950's, the C.I.A. began turning to the Special Forces to provide
manpower for covert operations around the world. The relationship between the
agency and the Green Berets flourished in Southeast Asia during the 1960's and
1970's, according to Defense Department officials, as hundreds of Special Forces
troops served in operations supervised by the C.I.A. Such cooperation has
continued, intelligence officials acknowledge: Before the unsuccessful hostage
rescue mission in Iran in 1980, a number of Green Berets based in West Germany
entered Teheran posing as German businessmen to help with rescue preparations.

Part of the mystique of the Green Berets has always derived from their training
program. More than half the men who take the rigorous course either do not
finish or are not considered qualified at the end for induction into the Special
Forces. Skill at killing is required of all Green Berets and Thompson apparently
learned his lessons well. ''There are only two ways to die,'' he says
matter-offactly. ''If you stop breathing or your heart stops pumping blood.
Everything else is a practical application.''

After being inducted into the Special Forces, Thompson was selected to attend
intelligence school, one of several areas in which Green Berets may specialize.
But when he found out there would be a sixweek delay before classes started, he
opted for a specialty in medical training instead. At first, he recalls, he
thought ''all medics were conscientious objectors or queers,'' but as time
passed, Thompson became intoxicated with the healing arts.

After completing the initial phases of medical training in 1961, Thompson joined
the Seventh Special Forces Group based at Fort Bragg. He was immediately
assigned to an A Team (the basic Special Forces unit, composed of 12 men) which
was sent to Vietnam to train civilian irregular forces to fight the Vietcong.

Thompson's next major assignment came in early April 1965. At that time, he
says, he was selected to serve on a covert team sent to the Dominican Republic,
where Col. Francisco Caamano Deno, was leading guerrilla forces in an attempt to
overthrow the Government. The United States, in that period, was ostensibly
taking a neutral position in the Dominican civil war. In late April, however,
when violence escalated and the rebels appeared to be near seizing power,
President Johnson sent in the Marines, claiming that American lives were in
danger. The Marines helped prevent a left-wing takeover.

Whether Thompson's secret mission was organized by the C.I.A. is unclear. Some
former agency officials who asked not to be named said such an operation did
take place. Other retired C.I.A. officials who were involved in the Dominican
Republic at the time denied that the operation was managed by the agency.
Thompson says it began initially when a team of Green Berets was sent to the
island only to monitor the activities of American civilians, including Peace
Corps workers, to help assure their safety. When the Green Berets came upon
evidence that some of the Americans were assisting guerrilla forces, however,
their major objective shifted from protecting their fellow countrymen to spying
on them.

The surveillance mission was abruptly cut short when Thompson and his colleagues
were given orders to link up with a team of United States Navy
unconventional-warfare specialists and develop a plan to assassinate Caamano, he
says. The joint team decided to attack Caamano at a building in Santa Domingo
where he often met with other guerrilla leaders. They would approach from the
beach down two parallel streets and carry explosives into the building by hand.
After laying the charges, the Americans were supposed to fight their way back
out, carrying any casualties with them to avoid detection of American
participation. At the last minute, he says, the mission was cancelled. No reason
was ever provided. Former intelligence officials now say the plan was considered
too risky and might have harmed rather than helped American interests by making
Caamano a martyr.

Thompson never returned to Latin America, but he reported that two years later
several of his fellow Green Berets secretly took part in the capture and killing
of Che Guevara, the Cuban revolutionary leader. Thompson's description of the
operation in Bolivia was confirmed by another former Green Beret who was a
participant, and by former Defense Department and intelligence officials who
were involved. All of them asked not to be identified.

According to these accounts, a team of 10 to 12 Green Berets from the Eighth
Special Forces Group based in Panama was sent to Bolivia in late 1967 as part of
a C.I.A.-sponsored plan to train Bolivian forces in counterinsurgency techniques
and to help the Bolivians stalk Guevara. In a camp located at the outskirts of
La Paz, the Americans worked with 100 to 150 Bolivian special-forces troops.
During the training program, Bolivian intelligence agents reported that Guevara
was in the mountains east of La Paz. The Green Berets, according to a
participant, conducted their own intelligence check and confirmed Guevara's
presence.

The next step was to formulate a plan to capture him. The bulk of this
preparation was handled by the Americans, and over the course of several weeks a
small team of Bolivians was specially selected and trained for the operation. In
the end, the action was relatively straightforward, with the Bolivians and their
American advisers tracking down Guevara in a remote mountain village where he
was training guerrillas. ''He was caught and executed on the spot,'' said a
former Green Beret who was there. ''The Bolivians pulled the trigger. They
needed to get the credit.'' Guevara's body was brought back to the camp, where
it was identified by two American intelligence agents who had flown in from
Panama.  Following the aborted assassination scheme in the Dominican Republic,
the focus of Thompson's career shifted back to Southeast Asia. He returned to
Vietnam for the first of several tours of duty there and in Thailand, with
frequent missions into Laos, Cambodia and even North Vietnam.

Thompson says the purpose of the missions into North Vietnam was to collect
strategic intelligence. He says he went on four such missions himself, and knew
of dozens of others. Former Defense Department officials say such missions
involving Americans were made during the early years of the Vietnam War but were
reduced and eventually ended by 1967-68. After that, they say, infiltration into
North Vietnam was handled by mercenary forces and was restricted primarily to
border areas.

Next, Thompson was ordered to join a covert operation in Thailand run by the
Army and the C.I.A. Supervised by the MACV-SOG (Military Assistance Command,
Vietnam-Special Operations Group), the mission involved the training of Thai
special-forces teams, followed by their deployment with Green Berets to
interdict the Ho Chi Minh trail.

It was during this tour in Southeast Asia that assassinations became almost
routine for Thompson. He still remembers the first vividly. ''The man was a
Vietnamese interpreter. It was proved to the satisfaction of our intelligence
sergeant that he was supplying information to the Vietcong. I was told, 'This
one's yours.' '' A week later Thompson and the interpreter were sent on an
operation together. ''We came into contact with the Vietcong. As soon as we hit
the ground, he got wiped out. He was a few feet away. When the shooting started,
I put a burst in him. He never knew it.''

Although Thompson knew the man and hadn't considered him an enemy, he didn't
dwell on the assassination. ''It was a mechanical thing.'' he says. ''It had to
be done. It was a chore just like brushing your teeth.'' Whenever possible, he
says, the Green Berets would try to disguise their involvement and make it seem
as if the killing had been done by the Vietcong or either of the Vietnamese
armies. ''You try to isolate the subject from anyone or any situation that might
lead back to the true source of his death by using 'sniper,' 'a firefight,' or
'explosive device.' There are no words. Just bang.  You're not a tribunal.
You're just a machine.''

Thompson says that assassination targets included anyone considered a Vietcong
supporter or sympathizer. The list included civilians such as district chiefs,
businessmen and political leaders. Former Green Berets and Defense Department
officials confirm that such assassinations were common. ''We had the most basic
law: survival,'' Thompson says. ''When it became obvious that someone was a
threat to our efforts, it was just a job. On reflection, it's not something that
I'm proud of. ...I hope I didn't kill innocent people.''

Thompson says he was troubled by a killing only once. It was in combat. He
recalled the moment: ''It was a straightforward case of kill or be killed. I was
walking along a trail in textbook style, alert for anything. Suddenly, someone
stepped around a bend in the trail with his weapon on his shoulder. I killed
him. Immediately after, it was the greatest thrill in the world - I guess
because I was alive - but as the day wore on, I was moved to distraction
thinking about this guy. He seemed more like a friend. He was doing exactly what
he was told to do, and we had come into conflict and I had beat him. I didn't
have any sense of victory. Here's this Joe Gook walking along and I'm G.I. Joe.
I didn't know his name. He was a soul in the jungle, I was a soul in the jungle.
I had an affinity for the guy. This was probably the worst any killing's dwelled
on me.''

During the same period that Thompson, in the jargon of the Green Berets, was
''greasing'' suspected Vietcong, he was also busy tending to wounded and sick
Americans and Vietnamese, including Vietcong forces. The contradiction never
troubled Thompson. ''I'd go from curing to killing,'' he said. ''I'd take off my
scrub suit and put on my camouflage fatigues and move out. I had no problem
making the transition.''

Thompson says he treated anyone who came to his field clinic. ''I had to
maintain a neutral posture. I might've treated a bunch of people who killed my
buddies but I had to help gain the good will of the local population. That's
money in the bank for everyone on the team.'' Thompson's career in Southeast
Asia concluded with missions that took him into Malaysia and Cambodia. In late
1967, after serving briefly as a medical instructor back at Fort Bragg, he was
sent to Thailand, where he faced his biggest crisis as a medic: an epidemic of
typhoid fever. He said that his primitive clinic had six beds to handle more
than 170 patients suffering from the disease. Thompson lost only a dozen
patients, a far lower mortality rate than for other medics in the area, and he
received commendations from the Army Surgeon General's office equating his
efforts with the feats of Walter Reed, the famous Army surgeon. He showed me
copies of commendations.

Thompson's penultimate tour began in January 1968, when he was assigned to a
mobile strike force conducting search-and-destroy missions along the Vietnam
-Cambodia border. Thompson says that the Green Berets commanded three battalions
of mercenary troops composed primarily of Cambodians. ''We were in and out of
Cambodia all the time,'' he says. These raids into Cambodia took place two years
before President Nixon announced that American and South Vietnamese forces were
moving into Cambodia to attack North Vietnamese command headquarters and
military stockpiles.

Smaller raids, which Thompson and other former Green Berets say began in 1967,
also predated the secret American bombing of Cambodia begun by the Nixon
Administration in 1969. Thompson says that he and his colleagues were told the
operations in Cambodia were highly classified and that they were instructed not
to discuss them with anyone. The British journalist William Shawcross described
the operations in ''Sideshow,'' his book about the secret American war in
Cambodia.

Thompson's final assignment in Southeast Asia took place in 1972, when he was
sent to Thailand to train mercenaries for operations in Laos. The training
program, he says, was run by the C.I.A. Former intelligence officials confirmed
that such an operation was mounted in Thailand at the time, but said they did
not know whether Thompson was involved.

By the time Thompson left Southeast Asia for the last time, late in 1972, he was
exhausted and more than a little bitter. ''I could have been a killer when I got
out,'' he says. ''I would just walk up to a man and swing at him. Long hair,
anything would set me off. If the U.S. decided to have a civil war, I would have
fought on either side, as long as Jane Fonda and George McGovern were on the
other side.''

Fortunately, Thompson says, ''I had time to straighten out my head.'' During a
leave in Japan after his last mission in Vietnam, Thompson married a Japanese
tour guide he had met at Expo '70 in Osaka. The Thompsons spent several months
at a Special Forces base in Okinawa before going to Fort Bragg. The marriage and
the interval in Okinawa gave him time, he says, to shed some of the violent
instincts he had developed.

From 1972 to 1977, Thompson spent most of his time on training missions in the
United States. Twice during those years, he traveled to Taiwan to help train
Taiwanese special forces, and he spent several weeks in Zaire helping to train
commando forces there. None of these operations, he says, were clandestine.

Throughout all of this, Thompson remained an obedient soldier. ''I personally
can't say that the Government ever asked me to do something improper,'' he says.
''Maybe you or others would consider it wrong, but I think I've never been asked
to do something wrong by my superiors.'' The man who, in the summer of 1977,
proposed that Thompson recruit a team of former Green Berets to train Libyan
commando troops was Patry E. Loomis, an ex-Green Beret himself and a covert
agent for the C.I.A., according to Federal investigators and former intelligence
officials who again declined to be named. He described the work when he talked
to Thompson but he did not reveal that he had been dismissed several weeks
earlier because he had assisted the former agents Wilson and Terpil in obtaining
explosive timers for shipment to Libya. Wilson and Terpil, it was later
discovered, had signed an agreement with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi to help train
terrorists.  Wilson had served for 20 years as a covert agent for the C.I.A. and
for a secret naval intelligence group called Task Force 157. He left Government
employment in 1976, the same year he and Terpil reached their agreement with
Libya. Terpil worked as a communications technician for the C.I.A. before he was
forced to resign in 1971. He went on to become an international arms salesman
and a key supplier of military equipment to the former Uganda strongman Idi
Amin.

Thompson's assumption that the Libyan operation was legitimate was partly
conditioned by his background. Other Green Berets, including Thompson's
commanding officer at the time, told me that the operation was no more bizarre
than many they knew about which were sanctioned by the intelligence agency. The
go-ahead Thompson says he received from military intelligence officials also
alleviated his doubts. How military intelligence officials got the impression
that the operation was approved by the Government remains one of the major
unresolved mysteries of the affair. Thompson is unable to recall the names of
the two men who he says came to his home after Loomis first called.  Two other
Army intelligence officers at Fort Bragg gave contradictory accounts of what
happened in interviews and were unable to recall the specific steps they took
after Thompson first notified military intelligence following the call from
Loomis. The two men declined to be named. A third figure, Carl H. Oelschig, who
was a senior intelligence officer at Special Forces headquarters in 1977, said
in an interview that he first learned about the Libyan operation only after
Thompson returned from Libya. ''I almost fell out of my chair when Luke told me
what he had been doing,'' he recalled.

Oelschig said he instructed Thompson to report to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and talk to other military intelligence officers at Fort Bragg.
Meanwhile, Oelschig informed his superiors and recommended that a check be run
through a more senior intelligence unit stationed at Fort Meade, Md. He said he
never learned what results, if any, were sent back to Fort Bragg. ''I carried it
as far as I could,'' he said, ''and assumed it was being handled correctly.''
Federal investigators believe that senior officials at the C.I.A. who worked
closely with Wilson while he was at the agency may have intercepted the
inquiries from Fort Bragg.  Others speculate that Wilson, who had friends at the
Defense Department, might have somehow been able to get them to reach into the
military intelligence system and persuade key officials that the Libyan
operation was sanctioned. Finally, there is the possibility that Thompson, in an
effort to justify his actions, did not get the approval he claims he received.
He says, however, that he is certain about these recollections.

Another still-murky question is why Thompson's superiors at Fort Bragg granted
him a leave of absence. Thompson assumed his request for a leave was approved
because his commanding officers had received orders from their superiors in
Washington to allow him to participate in the Libyan mission. The record,
however, is not clear. Col. Robert A. Mountel, who was Thompson's commanding
officer at the time, says he never received orders from anyone about the Libyan
operation. He says that Thompson's leave was approved because Green Beret
officers thought Thompson wanted to check out a possible civilian job
opportunity.

Others say that it was fairly common for veteran Green Beret troops to receive
leaves so they could participate in official - and unofficial -overseas
missions. Some Federal investigators suggests that senior Special Forces
officers permitted Thompson to go to Libya, even though they did not know
whether the operation had Government approval, because they thought it might
develop into a productive intelligence venture. If so, they overstepped their
authority, Army officials say. Intelligence operations involving the Green
Berets are supposed to be cleared and approved by senior Pentagon officials with
formal orders issued by the staff of the Joint Chiefs and passed down through
the Army chain of command to Special Forces commanders. No such orders were
issued in the Thompson case, according to Army officials.  Whatever the
explanation, any doubts that Thompson may have had vanished when he and three
recruits who accompanied him met Wilson in the international zone of the Zurich
airport in August 1977 to receive final instructions. ''Ed Wilson is the most
remarkable man I've ever met,'' Thompson says. ''Professionalism came out of
every pore ... He was aces.''

According to Thompson, Wilson told the men that, once in Libya, they should make
themselves ''indispensible,'' that they should do nothing that would endanger
United States security and that they would receive the best hospital care in the
world should they be injured. He closed by adding that he would kill them if
they doublecrossed him, just as he would expect them to kill him if he backed
out of the deal.

Thompson and the other former Green Berets flew on to the Libyan capital of
Tripoli carrying with them small arms and other military equipment in a
400-pound locker, plus several bags filled with technical manuals and blueprints
of advanced electronic equipment.  Following an initial round of meetings with
Libyan colleagues, the Americans were taken to a palace outside Tripoli where
they were shown an explosives laboratory. A group of American ordnance experts,
most of them military veterans who had been recruited by Wilson's associates,
were already there, instructing Libyans how to manufacture terrorist bombs,
according to Thompson. At this point, he recalls becoming troubled by the direct
link with terrorism.

After several weeks of training Libyan forces in commando tactics, Thompson says
he decided he could not adjust to working in Libya's terrorist organization.
After claiming that he needed to return to the United States for personal
reasons, Thompson was issued a ticket to Fort Bragg via London and Washington.
Back home, he reported to military intelligence officials, apparently including
Oelschig, and was told to talk to the F.B.I., which by then had begun
investigating the Libyan operation.  Despite middle-of-the-night phone calls
threatening his safety if he cooperated with Federal prosecutors, Thompson did
testify before a grand jury and, as a result, was not indicted. But it quickly
became clear to him that his military career was at an end. In July 1978, he
retired from the Green Berets. He says no Green Beret representative has
contacted him since.

The transition to civilian life has not been easy. In 1978, Thompson moved to
Hawaii in search of solitude and an escape from the turmoil that followed the
Libyan mission. For several years, he worked as a safety officer on oil rigs off
the coast of Newfoundland and in the Gulf of Mexico, commuting for the two-week
shifts from Hawaii. Thompson quit that job last December after relations with
the company soured in the wake of publicity about his involvement in Libya. He
is now training to become a registered nurse, working the night shift at a
hospital in Honolulu. His wife and three children, ages 3 to 12, have made
friends and settled into their neighborhood.  Thompson says he has not. ''I
don't have any friends,'' he once told me. ''You're the first person I've
confided in.''

Almost every day, he retreats to his sailboat. It's Japanese name is
Sayochidori, which Thompson translates as ''Nightbird.'' With no formal training
in sailing but lots of self-taught skill, he navigates around Kaneohe Bay,
reefing the sails when the trade winds become brisk or rain squalls blow in from
the Pacific. ''I know I'm running away from something, or to something,'' he
says of his time on the boat. ''I'm transported. If you asked me, though, it
would be difficult for me to tell you what I think about.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 2 photos of Luke Thompson photo of Luke Thompson in Viet
Nam (Page 20) photo of Bolivian troops (Page 21) photo of Edwin P. Wilson (Page
21)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENTS' FORUMS A BLOOMFIELD BONUS

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 14, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


BLOOMFIELD ABOUT 10 years ago, this Essex County community began to hold New
England-style Town Meetings for high school students. The motivating force was
Dr. Martin Siegel, a local dentist, who attributes his interest to a talk he had
with his son, Bart, now 21 years old.

''As we were talking, I realized that my son had become completely cynical about
much of this country, and that he was typical of his generation,'' Dr. Siegel
recalled.

''I was going on and on about what the Fourth of July parades meant to me when I
was a kid, and how I was proud of the fact that my father was a veteran of World
War I and I was a veteran of World War II.

''So he said to me, 'Look, Pop, I hear what you're saying, but all I know is
that two Kennedys were shot and a lot of Presidents have been liars or crooks.
And the only war I know anything about - Vietnam - was a lousy war.' ''

''I became concerned,'' Dr. Siegel went on, ''and my arguments about the
benefits of the American way of life sounded unconvincing, even to me. I thought
that a practical demonstration would be worth more than any amount of words.

''So I went to the Board of Education and proposed that we set up in Bloomfield
a Town Meeting in the New England sense. I felt that the most important thing
about it would be the direct participation of high school seniors.''

Since then, the Bloomfield Town Meetings, which Dr. Siegel chairs, have covered
minimum academic standards for high school graduation, served as a platform for
debates between political candidates and reported on the prevalence of drugs in
high schools throughout the country.

''At every one of these sessions, the questions are raised by the high school
students,'' Dr. Siegel said. ''I am particularly proud of the way we handled the
discussion of the drug problem.

''In many parts of the country, drug-enforcement agencies complained that they
couldn't get into the high schools because the principals and superintendents
didn't want to get involved. Here in Bloomfield, they invited those agencies to
come in. They also sent in undercover people and actually broke open one drug
ring.''

The Bloomfield Town Meetings have not gone unnoticed. Former President Gerald R.
Ford sent the community a letter of commendation, the State Assembly adopted a
resolution praising the town for the open discussions and Representative Peter
W. Rodino and then-Gov.  Brendan T. Byrne, among many others, publicly expressed
their appreciation.

Four of every five current Bloomfield High School students old enough to vote
have registered to do so. One of the contributing factors in this exceptional
interest among students may have been a statewide poll that Bloomfield seniors
conducted of high school students prior to the last Presidential election.

The Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University coordinated the poll.
The results? New Jersey high school students chose Ronald Reagan as President by
a wide margin. John Anderson finished second and Jimmy Carter ran last.

Earlier this year, Bloomfield seniors, Dr. Siegel and the Eagleton Institute
conducted another statewide poll in which 5,000 New Jersey high school students
were queried about the credibility of newspaper coverage.

Analysis of the results has not been completed, but early indications are that
the great majority of students are extremely skeptical about what they read in
the papers.

At 60, Dr. Siegel is as active as ever. He spends a great deal of time on his
sculpture, and his works, which include a bust of Leonard Bernstein and of
Biblical figures, have been exhibited in many galleries.

Among his works is ''The Dance of the Dow Jones Averages,'' sculptures in metal
that depict the ups and downs of the Dow Jones stock averages from 1929 to the
present.

Whatever he does in the future, he does not intend to ''ignore the town that has
done so much for me,'' Dr. Siegel said, adding: ''I came here when I got out of
the army, built a good practice and raised my family in Bloomfield. I can never
entirely pay my debt to this town and its people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW'S JULY 4: A BURST OF POLEMICS

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 4


The American Ambassador to the Soviet Union used a July 4 address on Soviet
television today to assure millions of Russians that the United States would
never use conventional or nuclear weapons ''except in defense against attack.''

However, the four-minute statement by the Ambassador, Arthur A.  Hartman, was
followed almost immediately by a longer Soviet commentary that called all such
assurances hypocritical and asked mockingly whether the American involvement in
Vietnam and Israel's invasion of Lebanon could be called defensive.

The Soviet riposte, aired on the same nightly news program that carried the
Ambassador's address, was believed to be the first time that Soviet authorities
had directly countered a televised statement by a foreign envoy on his country's
national day.

TV Audience Probably Large

The exchange was broadcast barely an hour before the live telecast from Spain of
the World Cup soccer match between the Soviet Union and Poland, and hence was
likely to have been seen by an unusually large audience.

Televised national day addresses have been customary here for many years, and
American Ambassadors have intermittently been using the opportunity since an
initial broadcast in 1964.

The addresses in 1977 and 1980 were canceled by the American Ambassadors rather
than submit to the elimination from their texts of references to human rights
and Afghanistan to which Soviet censors objected.

Mr. Hartman's text avoided any direct references to Afghanistan or Poland. But
the Ambassador told viewers that ''our bilateral relationship has detriorated''
and that efforts to ''arrest the decline'' could not depend solely on the United
States.

''It will be necessary for both of our countries to act with restraint in the
world,'' he said. ''We remain ready to discuss with your leaders ways to
accomplish this; we remain ready for frank and open dialogue between our
Governments and our peoples.''

'Situation We Want to Preserve'

It was at this point that Mr. Hartman, speaking in English with simultaneous
Russian translation, pledged the United States to peace.  ''Today America is a
country of peace,'' he said. ''Not a single American soldier is fighting
anywhere in the world. That is a situation we want to preserve. As President
Reagan said clearly and simply in a recent speech, 'Our goal is peace.' ''

The Ambassador added, ''The President has asserted many times that the United
States will never use any arms, nuclear or nonnuclear, except in defense against
attack.''

The Ambassador also reminded viewers of the recent resumption of strategic arms
talks in Geneva, saying: ''As President Reagan has said, in a nuclear war there
can be no winners. That is why we have just entered into negotiations with your
Government in Geneva to reduce strategic arms. We pledge to do our utmost to
insure that those negotiations are successful.''

The assurances appeared to have been fashioned to counter Soviet allegations
that the United States is preparing for nuclear war and to answer Moscow's
pledge last month that the Soviet Union would never be the first nation to use
nuclear weapons.

Analyst Calls U.S. Hypocritical

After Mr. Hartman's address came a brief, unrelated news item, and the program
then went directly to a commentary by Aleksandr Y. Bovin, a senior political
analyst for the Government newspaper Izvestia. Mr. Bovin's theme was that the
Reagan Administration was the most hypocritical American Government of the
century, particularly on arms issues.

''Yes,'' Mr. Bovin said, ''the Americans say, 'We'll use nuclear arms only as a
defense.' This sounds convincing and logical. But then we run into a problem.
Let's put it this way: What were they doing in Vietnam? Was that defensive or
offensive? Of course, Reagan will say they were on the defensive. Or what is
Israel doing in Lebanon? Again, they'll say, 'We're on the defensive.'

''So,'' Mr. Bovin continued, ''with such an understanding of defense, when
aggression is called defense these American statements come to appear two-faced
and hypocritical.''

By implication, the commentator also mocked Mr. Hartman's statement that the
United States wanted better relations.  ''It's difficult to have relations with
the United States,'' the commentator said. ''With or without Haig, they say one
thing and do another. They lack understanding of the problems.

''But there is little we can do,'' he said. ''You don't choose your partners. We
have to talk, we have to negotiate, and we need to do all we can to improve
relations. Maybe life will teach them, but this is only a rather feeble hope.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAELIS KEEP REMINDING BEIRUT THAT SIEGE IS ON

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: BAABDA, Lebanon, July 4


At leisurely intervals, the Israeli shells lofted down from the hills here above
Beirut's airport and crashed into the battered apartment buildings below.

In a courtyard of St. Anthony's School, where the Israelis have established a
command center, three soldiers played volleyball. As groups of soldiers and
journalists watched the shelling, a radio played an old Beatles' song, ''Eight
Days a Week.''

In the latest phase of the campaign against the Palestinians holed up in the
western side of the capital, it was what military people call a day of
''softening up.'' For the record, the Israeli military spokesman, Barry Swersky,
said the shelling was in retaliation for a bazooka attack on an Israeli position
Saturday afternoon.

If a City Is Under Siege

''It's part of the position of the warnings,'' an Israeli officer said,
following with an expert eye the trajectories and the explosions. ''If a city is
supposed to be under siege and nothing happens, they will start doing their
laundry and making coffee.''

Then, as bullets whizzed overhead, the Israeli officer said jokingly, ''He
doesn't like you.'' The bullets fired toward St. Anthony's School were a small
retort to the overwhelming Israeli firepower coming from the hills, or from the
Merkava tanks nestled near the deserted Faculty of Sciences at sea level.

Some radio reports mentioned ''exchanges of artillery fire,'' but it was mostly
a one-way exchange, save for the ocassional burp of a defiant rocket-propelled
grenade.

Since Saturday night, the Israelis have been inching toward Burj al-Barajneh,
once a teeming slum of Palestinians and Shiite Moslems beside the airport
highway. Burj al-Barajneh is now almost empty of people, except for the
fighters, and they could easily be cut off from the rest of western Beirut in a
swift sweep from the coastal road.

The identity of the fighters is uncertain. A few days back, some Syrian troops
were known to be caught near the airport. The combatants might be Palestinians.
Or they might be Lebanese Shiites from the Amal militia, now lukewarm supporters
of the cornered Palestine Liberation Organization.

P.L.O. Losing Allies

As the Israelis and their Christian allies have choked off western Beirut, the
Palestinians' one-time comrades in arms have begun to desert them. Three days
ago, Nabih Berri, the Amal leader, told the P.L.O. that it should ''accept the
reality that it is vanquished.'' In case that reality was not clear enough to
Mr. Berri, his turf is being pounded by the Israelis.

Sipping coffee in an apartment in this upper-class Christian suburb, a Lebanese
businessman who was caught out of west Beirut by the blockade said that on
Makdisi Street where he lived, militia from the leftist Popular Socialist Party
were preventing outsiders, including their erstwhile Palestinian allies, from
entering, hoping to be spared the Israelis' ballistic wrath.

''I hope they end it quickly,'' said the businessman, a specialist in
fire-fighting equipment and childrens' toys, speaking of the Israelis. ''We have
work, we have businesses. We can't wait forever.  This has gone on for eight
years.''

For the people in the hills around Baabda, it is not the first time a foreign
army has installed itself to shell the Palestinians. In the summer of 1976, the
Syrians bombarded Burj al-Barajneh.

'Better Finish the Job'

In the Relais de la Chasse, a pleasant restaurant that is a twominute drive from
the Israeli artillery, a Lebanese interrupted a Sunday lunch with his family to
offer his opinion that the Israelis ''had better finish the job.''

''If they don't,'' his wife said in French, ''they will be like the others''
-meaning the Syrians. ''They should finish the job and then leave Lebanon.''

Today Jane Fonda and her husband, Tom Hayden, briefly visited the Israeli
position at St. Anthony's School and watched the shelling.  The movie star and
her husband have been visiting Israeli soldiers and Lebanese wounded in the
invasion. Israeli soldiers crowded around Miss Fonda to be photographed with
her, but she looked distant and uncomfortable.

Mr. Swersky, the Israeli command spokesman, gave Miss Fonda and her husband a
private briefing on the military situation. Mr. Hayden, who was a leader of the
opposition to the Vietnam War, has said that the Israeli invasion is justified
because the P.L.O. refused to recognize Israel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Israeli soldier patrolling 'Green Line'

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL'S PRESS AND THE WAR;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, July 5


Israel has been a study in extreme contradictions in the last month, displaying
the most diverse capacities for both open debate and suppression of information.

The army and the Government have exercised substantial control over television
and radio broadcasts in an effort to protect what they see as the morale of the
troops and of the nation.

Political and military authorities have tailored the information available to
Israelis in a way that some Israeli and foreign journalists say has disguised
the objectives of the military campaign in Lebanon, enhanced the humane image of
the army and played down the hardship of the war on Israeli soldiers and Arab
civilians.

Vehement Criticism Voiced

Yet vehement criticism of the Government, even by soldiers, has been permitted
and widely published. Dissenting officers have met with Government officials.
Antiwar demonstrations have drawn tens of thousands. Politicians and former
generals have spoken and written in sharp disagreement with the aims of the
invasion.

The paradox is inherent in Israel's smallness, openness and vulnerability. This
is a country passionately dedicated to political debate, but also imbued with an
intimate patriotism. It has never been accustomed to taking its continued
survival for granted, and it is so small that its army is made up of the men and
boys next door.  Everyone knows someone in battle; one Jerusalem woman says she
has already been to six funerals.

Consequently, the interconnections between military and civilian life are
tightly woven, and the politicians and journalists often weigh their words as
carefully as the generals.

Like most countries at war, Israel portrays its enemy in unambiguous terms. The
guerrillas and soldiers of the Palestine Liberation Organization are always
described as ''terrorists,'' whether on state-owned radio and television, or in
privately owned and often anti-Government newspapers.

Despite the increasingly conventional nature of the Palestine Liberation
Organization's military equipment and organization in southern Lebanon, Israeli
officials and most journalists speak of ''terrorist tanks,'' ''terrorist
headquarters'' and ''terrorist artillery.''

Little Attention to Darker Side

One result is that the Israeli public is largely unaware of the suffering of the
Palestinian women and children in the refugee camps where intensive fighting has
taken place. Television, radio and the largest-circulation newspapers have
stressed the warm welcome given the Israeli troops by Lebanese Christians and
Moslems who are glad to be rid of the P.L.O. The darker side of the picture has
usually been ignored.

Two weeks ago in Sidon, for example, an Israeli radio reporter was present when
a prominent Lebanese physician, Labib Abu-Zahr, complained that the Israeli
army, relying on Arab informants with hoods over their heads, was marking black
X's in charcoal on the backs of suspected guerrillas and detaining many innocent
people.  The Israeli reporter did not record the doctor's remarks, nor did he
look into the charge and broadcast a report on it.

Like most of the Israeli journalists who cover the war, he was in uniform,
mobilized and issued a rifle to give him an access to the battlefields
unavailable to foreign correspondents and other Israeli reporters. In exchange,
he and others have had their material heavily censored, and some have censored
themselves. One Israeli said that the censor had deleted his descriptions of
civilian casualties to soften their impact.

Three Kinds of Censorship

There have been three kinds of censorship, observed Hannah Semer, editor of the
Hebrew-language daily Davar. ''Censorship at the source,'' she said. ''You're
not given correct news, or you know half of the truth, but the other half may be
much more important.''

Then there is military censorship, to which all domestic and foreign dispatches
on military matters are subject. This is aimed mainly at specific
security-related information, and has been relaxed considerably since a strict
period during the first week of the war, when the censors would not allow even
United Nations observers' reports on the fighting to be transmitted to foreign
newspapers.

Finally, Miss Semer explained, ''There is voluntary censorship.'' ''In the first
week,'' she said, ''you didn't see any criticism in the newspapers, and no
unpleasant questions were asked. This changed after the first week, at least in
Haaretz and Davar.'' Both of these papers are chronically critical of the
Government.

Beginning June 27, Davar began publishing critical letters from soldiers, many
of them back in civilian life after three weeks in the reserves. This took some
soul-searching.

'The War Is Very Close to Home'

''We were not used to writing about war the way you wrote about Vietnam,'' Miss
Semer said, ''because the war is very close to home, you know the boys, they're
there and you feel guilty about not being there yourself.

''But what happened later was that you could feel just as patriotic by trying to
prevent bloodshed. I asked myself whether an editor has the right not to
publish. It's not just, 'Do you have the right to publish?' It's, 'Do you have
the right not to publish?' ''

Many Israeli journalists feel comfortable with military censorship because it
removes a burden from them. ''In a way,'' Miss Semer said, ''military censorship
is very convenient. I feel I'm doing my professional job, and I'm not giving
away any military secrets.'' And the censors, she noted, ''have not touched any
letter by any soldier, any reservist, saying that he's against the war.''

''They do not touch criticism, even by soldiers,'' she said.

Stricter Controls for Television

However, stricter controls are applied to Israeli television, which operates on
only one channel. No ''political'' remarks may be made on camera by anyone in
uniform, and reserve officers called up for duty in the army spokesman's office
are stationed in the studios to make sure the rule is observed. They also edit
out sections of foreign television film considered damaging to national morale;
it is as if the Pentagon's public relations office had been able to tell news
executives at CBS, NBC and ABC what could be broadcast about the Vietnam War.

Hirsh Goodman, the military correspondent of the English-language Jerusalem
Post, argued that a combination of heavy censorship and misinformation by the
army spokesman had allowed the war to expand without the country's realizing it.
In addition, he charged, the untruths dispensed by the army undermined the
commanders' credibility among the troops.

Aim of Censorship Questioned

''I'm not in a position to weigh what's sensible or not sensible to cover up
because I'm not in a position to know what's useful to the enemy,'' he said.
''So I accept military censorship. But it seemed to me that information was
being withheld not to confuse the enemy but to confuse the nation. I found I
wasn't being allowed to report on the escalating nature of the war. I couldn't
report that the troops were at a certain point, even though the Syrians and the
P.L.O. knew they were.''

One result, he said, was that Israeli troops were relying entirely on Lebanese
radio for their information on the war, and they found these reports more
accurate than their own army's announcements.  Often, when the Israelis were
ordered to break a cease-fire and begin firing, they would then hear the army's
statement that the Syrians or the P.L.O. had started it, Mr. Goodman said.

''There was a total breakdown in trust,'' he said. ''People in the field began
not to identify with the official rationale for what they were doing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AGREES 'IN PRINCIPLE' TO TROOPS FOR P.L.O. ESCORT; ARAFAT SPURNS
'PROTECTION'

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 6


President Reagan said today that he had ''agreed in principle to contribute a
small contingent'' of United States troops as part of a multinational force for
''temporary peacekeeping'' in Beirut if a settlement was reached there.

Israeli officials in Jerusalem, where the American offer was reported a few
hours before Mr. Reagan spoke, said the plan included French participation in
the proposed force.

France said it was considering participation in a peacekeeping force, but only
if there was a formal request by the Lebanese Government and acceptance by the
Palestine Liberation Organization.  (Page A6.)

The Israeli officials said the combined strength of the proposed force would be
about 1,600 United States marines and French soldiers whose function would be to
separate Palestinian from Israeli forces in west Beirut, let the Palestine
Liberation Army leave and allow the Lebanese Army to take over after about a
month.

Proposal Made by Lebanon

Mr. Reagan said that he was responding to an informal request relayed to him by
his special Middle East envoy, Philip C. Habib, and that formation of the
multinational force would depend on further agreement by Lebanon, Israel and the
Palestinian leaders.

''The situation is too sensitive for detailed discussion,'' Mr.  Reagan said at
a meeting of state and local officials here. ''I can report to you that this
weekend in discussions with Mr. Habib the Government of Lebanon told us that a
multinational force might be essential for a temporary peacekeeping in Beirut
and informally proposed that the United States consider making a contribution to
that force.''

''The Lebanese Government,'' he continued, ''has not made a formal proposal, but
I have agreed in principle to contribute a small contingent of U.S. personnel
subject to certain conditions.''

'We Must Keep Pledge'

''The United States has pledged to do all that it can to bring peace and
stability to the Middle East and we must keep that pledge,'' the President
added.

Before Mr. Reagan spoke, Larry Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary,
responding to the reports from Israel, suggested here that ships of the United
States Sixth Fleet, stationed in the Mediterannean off Lebanon, might be
involved in an evacuation of Palestinian guerrillas. He said the peacekeeping
force, should it become a reality, would participate not only in the evacuation
of Palestinians but also in the removal of foreign troops.

Commenting on a broadcast report of Mr. Speakes's remarks, the P.L.O.'s
chairman, Yasir Arafat, said in an interview in Beirut today that he would
"definitely" not accept evacuation of the P.L.O.  under Sixth Fleet protection
and declined to discuss reports that the P.L.O. had offered to transfer its
headquarters and fighters out of Lebanon. He said, however, that he was in favor
of "an international effort for disengagement" of the combatant forces.

While Mr. Speakes did not explain exactly what role the Sixth Fleet might play,
he said the mission of the peacekeeping force would be the "orderly and safe
evacuation" of Palestinian fighters and the removal of all foreign troops from
Lebanon - a move intended to avert a climactic battle between the Isareli Army
and the P.L.O. in West Beirut.

And, for the moment, Israeli officials appear willing to see how the the
negotiations go now that the United States has agreed to the idea of being part
of the peacekeeping force.

Mr. Speakes said the peacekeeping force would also assure "the restoration of
control by the Lebanese Government throughout the country" - a mission that
suggested the possibility of a prolonged American presence in Lebanon.

President Must Notify Congress

In that regard, Mr. Speakes said Mr. Reagan would observe the reporting
requirements of the War Powers Act. That measure, adopted during the Vietnam
War, requires the President to inform Congress when sending troops into combat
areas. It also gives congress 60 days to limit American involvement.

Mr. Speakes would not say whether or not the P.L.O. guerrillas, who are thought
by American officials to number about 6,000, would be required to give up their
weapons before coming into contact with American forces or boarding Navy ships.

A senior Administration official added that a battalion-size American force, of
about 800 to 1,000 troops, would be in Lebanon for about 30 days as part of a
"multinational peacekeeping force."

Mr. Speakes said the troops, who could be expected to be drawn from the force of
1,800 marines aboard Navy ships in the area, would be armed for combat.

Decision Made on Friday

Mr. Speakes said Mr. Reagan decided at 9 P.M., Pacific daylight time, last
Friday to agree to the United States participation in a peacekeeping force. But
the White House staff kept the decision by the vacationing President a secret
until broadcasts in Israel this morning forced Mr. Speakes to confirm the
Israeli reports.

He did so in a hastily arranged briefing for reporters at the Century Plaza
Hotel, where Mr. Reagan is spending two days before returning Wednesday to his
mountain ranch near Santa Barbara. At the same time this morning, William P.
Clark, the national security adviser, and other Administration officials were
telephoning Congressional leaders with news of Mr. Reagan's decision.

"We would make absolutely certain, as near as we can, that the safety of U.S.
troops would be protected," Mr. Speakes told reporters. But he declined to
discuss how such protection could be assured in the streets of Beirut or how the
cooperation of all factions of the P.L.O. could be obtained.

"We will just have to wait and see," Mr. Speakes said. "Those fine points really
have not been worked out yet, and they would be before we went in."

Mr. Speakes told reporters this afternoon, in elaborating on the President's
thinking, that Mr. Reagan regarded United States participation in a peacekeeping
force as "an essential linchpin" of any Middle East settlement.

He quoted Mr. Reagan as saying, "If a brief, limited involvement of U. S.
personnel is what it takes, I believe we must do it."

An Administration official, speaking on condition that he not be named, added
that Mr. Reagan's conditional pledge to provide troops "was one of bargaining
chips that Mr. Habib asked for, and the President gave Habib approval if it
meant breaking an impasse."

It was understood that Mr. Habib felt that the Palestinians, in particular,
needed assurance that the United States would stabilize any agreement.

Administration officials stressed that the commitment of American forces would
not take place until there was a general agreement on a detailed disengagement
plan by Israel, Lebanon, Syria and the Palestinian leaders. As the day
progressed, the officials placed increasing emphasis on the assertion that no
American troops would go ashore in Lebanon until all parties had signaled
acceptance of such a plan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WAR IN EL SALVADOR THREATENS TO SPREAD

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, July 6


A joint Honduran-Salvadoran operation against guerrillas in this country has
raised fears that the civil war may spread throughout the region.

The entry of Honduras into the war has led to threats from the Salvadoran
guerrillas to conduct raids inside Honduras. At the same time, Nicaragua is
talking about going to the aid of the Salvadoran rebels and Honduran Army
officers appear eager for a justification to attack Nicaragua.

''It's the regionalization of the war,'' a moderate Honduran businessman said in
an assessment supported by others in the region.  A Salvadoran rebel leader,
Eduardo Solorzano, said in Mexico Saturday that Honduran participation in the
war might oblige the guerrillas ''to act in Honduran territory, not only in the
frontier but in all of Honduras.

Leader Warns of 'Blazing Fire'

''This may even lead us to accept international brigades to fight Honduran
troops inside Honduras.'' said Mr. Solorzano, a senior commander of the Armed
Forces of National Resistance, one of the five guerrilla organizations united
under the banner of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.

And Salvador Cayetano Carpio, one of the five senior Salvadoran guerrilla
commanders, said in an interview, ''The sparks of revolution are being converted
into a blazing fire.''

''In spite of the the training, the helicopters, the jets and everything else
from the United States, they have to bring in large numbers of Honduran
soldiers,'' said the 62-year-old Mr. Carpio, a legendary figure who is
frequently called El Salvador's Ho Chi Minh.  ''Soon they will have to bring in
American soldiers.''

According to a senior Honduran military officer, his country entered the war
against the Salvadoran rebels at the request of the Salvadorans. The Hondurans
have deployed three battalions, involving some 3,000 soldiers, in the northern
mountainous reaches of the Salvadoran province of Morazan.

3 Battalions Bogged Down

El Salvador's Minister of Defense, Gen. Jose Guillermo Garcia, has repeatedly
declared the army is in control of the entire country.  But the three
battalions, including the Ramon Bellosa, which recently returned from training
in the United States, are now bogged down.

Faced with heavy losses and apparently unable to drive the guerrillas out of
their strongholds, the Salvadorans appealed to the Hondurans for assistance.

In Nicaragua, a high Sandinist official said ''we can't ignore'' the Honduran
intervention ''because we feel threatened.'' ''We will respond politically,
diplomatically and possibly militarily,'' he said.

He added that if the Honduran troops remained in the war ''we will respond with
the same level of action.'' ''If they go in and out, if they stay and if they
act, each will bring a different response.''

A first action, he said, could be to strengthen the ability of the Faramundo
Marti National Liberation Front to respond.

Border Is an Armed Camp

The Honduran-Nicaraguan border is already an armed camp waiting for a war. On
the Honduran side, there are several mountain camps where anti-Sandinist forces
are training; on the other side, the Nicaraguans have greatly increased their
military strength.

''We can't have a socialist government there,'' a senior Honduran military
officer said of Nicaragua. ''It's them or us.'' He added that the Honduran Air
Force, reputed to be the best in the region, had been prepared to bomb a
Nicaraguan port when tanks were being unloaded recently, but that the United
States had cautioned against the raid.

Some senior Honduran military commanders who had urged accommodation with
Nicaragua have recently been exiled to diplomatic posts, thus increasing the
power of the hard-liners, according to military and diplomatic officials in
Honduras.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Banner to Honor P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 6


President Reagan has ordered that a special banner be flown over the White House
and the Pentagon on Friday in recognition of all American prisoners of war and
those still missing, aides said today. Mr. Reagan signed a proclamation
designating Friday as ''National P.O.W.-M.I.A. Recognition Day, 1982.'' The
banner has a white silhouette of a prisoner and a guard tower inside a circle on
a black background.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Trial Scheduled in Draft Case

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, July 6


Benjamin H. Sasway, 21 years old, was ordered today to stand trial on Aug. 21 on
charges of failing to register for a possible draft. Mr. Sasway, who is a
student at Humboldt State College, surrendered to the Federal authorities last
week after he became the first man since the Vietnam War to be indicted for not
registering with the Selective Service System.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BISHOP REUBEN MUELLER DIES; EX-HEAD OF CHURCH COUNCIL

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section D; Page 21, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


Bishop Reuben H. Mueller, former president of the National Council of Churches
who was a leading United Methodist ecumenist, died of a heart attack yesterday
in Franklin, Ind. He was 85 years old.

At the time of his retirement in 1972, Bishop Mueller was head of the Indiana
area of the United Methodist Church. He was considered among the nation's
leading proponents of interfaith unity.

Bishop James Armstrong, the president of the National Council of Churches, paid
tribute to him as ''an ecumenical statesman,'' adding, ''His voice will be
sorely missed though his influence will continue.''

Bishop Mueller began his ministry as a member of the Evangelical Church that in
1946 merged with the Church of the United Brethren.  In 1968 that denomination,
the Evangelical United Brethren, united with the Methodist Church. Bishop
Mueller was also a leader in steps leading to the formation of the United
Methodist Church.

Outspoken on Issues

As an organizer of the National Council of Churches in 1950, Bishop Mueller held
a variety of council offices. He was elected the council's president in 1963. As
president, he was an outspoken advocate of racial justice and peaceful
settlement of the Vietnam war.

Known primarily as a fence-mender, Bishop Mueller also defended causes with
sharp words. He defended the national council against attacks from conservatives
by referring to ''men and organizations whose religion is pugnacious and
narrow,'' who circulated ''malicious falsehoods.''

He was also prominent in an important era of ecumenical history.  He responded
enthusiastically, for example, to the interfaith implications of the Second
Vatican Council and also pressed for unity among Protestant churches in America.

Bishop Mueller was born in St. Paul, Minn., on June 2, 1897. He was a son and
grandson of ministers. His education at North Central College, Naperville, Ill.,
was interrupted by two years in the U.S.  Army. He completed theological studies
at the Evangelical Theological Seminary, also in Naperville.

Before accepting a series of church administrative posts, he was a pastor in
South Bend, Ind., and Indianapolis. He was elected bishop in 1954.

Magdalene Stauffacher Mueller, the bishop's wife, died in 1975.  He is survived
by a daughter, Margaret M. Hoesch of Naperville, Ill.; a brother, Benjamin of
Lombard, Ill.; a sister, Lydia I.  Mueller of St. Paul, and a grandson, Charles,
of Chicago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bishop Reuben Mueller

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM TO PULL MORE TROOPS FROM CAMBODIA

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 518 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, July 7


Vietnam's Foreign Minister said today that a ''significant'' number of
Vietnamese soldiers would be withdrawn from Cambodia this month.

''I cannot disclose the number involved, but it will be a significant
withdrawal,'' the minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said here at the end of a two-day
conference with the foreign ministers of Cambodia and Laos.

He made his statement as Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian head of
state and currently the president of a coalition of Cambodian rebels that calls
itself a government in exile, was paying a brief visit from Thailand to western
Cambodia. The area the Prince visited is held by rebels.

It was Prince Sihanouk's first return to his country since he left more than
three years ago to appeal for help for Cambodia as invading Vietnamese soldiers
were approaching Phnom Penh, the capital.

Coalition Called 'a Farce'

The Vietnamese Foreign Minister denied that he had made his withdrawal statement
in the hope of offsetting the Prince's visit.  ''The formation of this so-called
coalition is a farce and had no effect on our decision,'' Mr. Thach said.The
Vietnamese troop withdrawal would be the second since some 200,000 soldiers
invaded Cambodia in December 1978, overthrowing the Chinese-s@upported Communist
Government of Pol Pot and installing the pro-Vietnamese Communist regime of Heng
Samrin. Last September, Vietnam was said to have withdrawn 24,000 soldiers,
leaving about 176,000 still in Cambodia.

Vietnam had insisted subsequently that it would make no further withdrawals
until Cambodia's western neighbor, Thailand, disarmed the rebel forces of Pol
Pot who still operate along the Thai-Cambodian border, and until China stopped
arming the guerrillas.

Vietnamese Trade Curbed

But Vietnam is facing severe economic and diplomatic pressure, and the
withdrawal that Mr. Thach pledged appeared aimed at placating Southeast Asian
and Western nations that have cut off trade with the Vietnamese.

(In Washington, the State Department commented on Mr. Thach's statement by
reiterating its demand that all Vietnamese troops be withdrawn from Cambodia.)

In a communique at the close of the foreign ministers' conference in Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly known as Saigon, Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos again demanded that
the Pol Pot faction's representative be removed from Cambodia's seat in the
United Nations. The communique also said the three countries would be willing to
allow the Cambodian seat to remain vacant for the ''immediate future.''

Mr. Thach said that if Cambodia's seat were unoccupied, Vietnam would be willing
to discuss the stationing of a United Nations force in Cambodia.

----
  Symbolic Visit by Sihanouk

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 7 (AP) -Prince Norodom Sihanouk slipped across the
border into Cambodia today for a symbolic visit to his homeland, and then
returned to Bangkok.

The Prince reviewed rebel troops and delivered an emotional 90-minute speech to
a crowd of cheering Cambodians in their camp at Srok Srang, a rebel-held area.
The camp is occupied by guerrillas led by former Prime Minister Sonn Sann.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-Vietcong Reports Seeing P.O.W.'s Alive

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 7


A former Vietcong official now living in Switzerland was said to have seen 30 to
40 American pilots alive in North Vietnam in 1973, two months after the Hanoi
Government declared that it had freed all American P.O.W.'s.

The former official, Nguyen Duc Yen, was quoted in an article to be published
Sunday by Parade magazine as saying the Americans were doing ''hard labor'' in
the North Vietnamese highlands.

He said they were to be used as bargaining chips to help Hanoi establish
diplomatic ties with Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE FISHERMEN STIR BITTERNESS ON COAST

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: MOSS LANDING, Calif., July 3


Henry McMasters climbed aboard his salmon boat, the Soko, and glared at the two
Vietnamese fishermen sewing their nets in a boat in an adjoining berth at this
fishing hamlet on Monterey Bay.

''Look at 'em,'' he said. ''First they cleaned out the fish in their own country
and now they come here and try to wipe out what we've got. We can't compete with
them; they have a lower life style.''

''I say, send 'em home,'' said Mike Bliesener, skipper of the Charlie 1, who had
stopped by for a visit.  The anger runs deep in this northern California fishing
port, and state officials say it appears to reflect a growing resentment in
California toward the state's population of more than 150,000 Indochinese
refugees that, they say, is related at least in part to the national economic
slump.

This week Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. signed a bill outlawing in waters less than
60 feet deep a type of net used by most Vietnamese fishermen along the northern
California coast that state officials contend has been responsible for the
deaths of more than 20,000 migratory birds and possibly dozens of sea lions,
seals, otters and other sea mammals.

Rising Number of Complaints

In Los Angeles, representatives of the State Employment Development Division say
they are receiving increasing numbers of complaints from unemployed Californians
about the jobs held by Southeast Asians, while some county social workers say
they are hearing complaints that many of the unemployed refugees are receiving
welfare assistance.

In Sacramento, an organization of homeowners recently asked a local grand jury
to investigate the possibility of establishing internment camps for Vietnamese
refugees.

The organization asserted that the refugees were stealing and eating pets in
their neighborhood, that they were living off public welfare and driving
uninsured automobiles and that ''almost every female refugee 14 years of age or
older is either pregnant or has been pregnant.''

There are indications that the welcome mat accorded Southeast Asian refugees is
wearing thin elsewhere, too. Sister Ann Wisda, head of the United States
Catholic Conference of Oklahoma, which has aided about 5,000 Vietnamese refugees
since North Vietnam overran Saigon in 1975, told an Oklahoma newspaper last week
that many had become ''parasites'' and that some newly arrived refugees asked
''when they'll receive their first welfare check and food stamps as soon as they
leave the plane.''

Additional Assistance Promised

On April 1, the Reagan Administration reduced to 18 months, from 36 months, the
length of time that the Federal Government grants cash assistance, of up to $248
a month, and free medical care to refugees. The state has been promised
additional stopgap assistance to continue limited help to its large population
of refugees, but social welfare agencies have been warning in recent weeks that
the refugees are likely to be an increasingly heavy financial burden for some
counties at a time when local government in California is already experiencing a
serious financial squeeze.

Spokesmen for the Vietnamese in California say they are growing concerned by
what some regard as the emergence of racial bias toward the refugees.

''I personally feel that it's mostly become of economic factors,'' said Duong
Bui, an instructor at the Defense Language Institute at nearby Fort Ord. But he
said another factor was the changing nature of Vietnamese immigrants.

''In the past, we had well-to-do, educated people,'' he said. ''We have a new
group now who are not as educated, and they are competing for blue-collar
jobs.''

Mai Dao, who teaches a class at San Jose State University designed to acquaint
public officials, social workers and others with Vietnamese culture and
language, said tensions between refugees and non-Vietnamese were growing
principally because ''these are just rough times.''

'Have Drive to Survive'

''Remember, these are people who had to escape,'' she said. ''They have nothing
left. They are starting a new life. They have to have drive to survive. They are
not sitting back. They are working hard for their children.

''That makes for envy,'' she said. ''People say that the Vietnamese will do
anything. Well, they will, they are rough competitors because they are trying to
survive.''

At Moss Landing, there seems to be an invisible barrier between American
fishermen and the Vietnamese who operate 22 small pleasure boats that have been
outfitted with tall masts that they have used to lay down gill nets, made of
thin filaments of nylon a mile or more in length.

Mr. Bui, who has served as a spokesman for the Vietnamese fishermen, said that
they did not understand and were ''stunned'' by the new legislation.

As aliens, they were already forbidden to use large commercal fishing boats, and
now they will be unable to fish for kingfish. The shallow-water fish was long
considered unappealing to American fishermen, but the Vietnamese have caught and
sold it, mostly to the state's Oriental population, for about 25 cents a pound.

Speak With Intensity

Unlike a confrontation between Vietnamese and American fishermen in Galveston
Bay in Texas, there has not been any violence between the two groups here.

But at Teri's, the coffeeshop where they congregate, and along the wharf, a
dozen American fishermen interviewed at random all spoke with the same intensity
about the Vietnamese.

''They're so damn greedy,'' said one, Larry Clark. ''They get all that help from
the Government that comes from our taxes. With this depression, the price of
fish is down. I'll tell you one thing: This thing between us and the Vietnamese
is going to get a lot worse.''

''They fish for anything,'' said Don Dorr, skipper of the Meridian. ''They use
these nets that get sea lions and salmon and when they lose the nets, it sours
the area for years. The nylon doesn't deteriorate, and for years they stay there
and trap fish and kill 'em.''

Invested Everything They Had

Nearby, Xa Van Nguyen, who came from Vietnam two years ago and invested
everything his family had in a small pleasure craft now outfitted with a $5,000
gill net, worked silently on the rigging of his boat, trying to ignore a group
of American fishermen looking over at him.

Several of the Americans were shouting their disapproval of the Vietnamese so
loudly that it seemed impossible for him to ignore their voices. But he kept his
head down and continued to work.

A few minutes later they were gone, and a visitor to his boat asked what he
planned to do now that use of gill nets had been restricted.  He looked up and
smiled and said, ''I don't know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map photo of a fishing boat

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST KOCH-CUOMO DEBATE STRESSES RECORDS

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 980 words


Mayor Koch and Lieut. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo challenged each other's credentials
yesterday in the first debate of their campaign for the Democratic nomination
for Governor of New York.

''I have a record of achievement as Mayor that can be duplicated as Governor,''
Mr. Koch told an audience of 600 after a breakfast of scrambled eggs in a
midtown hotel.

''In a nutshell, Mr. Mayor,'' responded Mr. Cuomo, turning toward his opponent,
''you take much too much credit and not nearly enough responsibility.''

A bit later, the Mayor said Mr. Cuomo had ''no record of achievement.'' A
panelist asked the Mayor what he respected most about Mr. Cuomo.  Mr. Koch
paused. ''Nice guy,'' he said with a shrug, to a burst of laughter.  On
substantive issues, the two candidates hardly disagreed. Both urged a tough
anticrime stance; both declined to promise state tax cuts.

Each criticized the other, with Mr. Cuomo's comments the sharper.  He accused
Mr. Koch of ''confusion'' and ''misunderstanding'' of how the Lieutenant
Governor's office worked.

But, during a one-hour meeting sponsored by The New York Post and watched by
political and civic leaders, each also stated his basic campaign argument.

Mr. Cuomo, more consistently on the attack, tried to tie the Mayor to President
Reagan. Mr. Koch, more subdued than is his custom, sought to show that Mr. Cuomo
had feuded with Governor Carey.

A coin flip gave Mr. Cuomo the opening statement, and he stressed three points.
''I know about crime,'' he said, and he urged that career criminals be ''caught,
convicted and canned.'' Further, he said, ''We must have a Governor who knows
the whole state, as I do, who can bring the state together.'' Finally, he said,
party principles matter and he ''opposed Reaganomics, when others would not, in
1980.''

Mr. Koch had entertained Mr. Reagan, then the Republican Presidential candidate,
at Gracie Mansion.  Mr. Koch began by saying he had produced three straight
balanced city budgets and brought jobs to the city. ''I believe I brought a new
spirit to the city, that people feel better about themselves,'' he said.

He would not be in the race if Governor Carey had sought reelection, he said.
But he said he wanted to be Governor because the power to make things happen had
been shifted from City Hall to Albany by the proposed ''New Federalism.''.

Then the candidates answered questions.  Speaking of crime, Mr. Koch said his
choice of judges had been praised as ''terrific.'' Mr. Cuomo demurred. ''I
remember the fellow who flipped a coin and took a defendant home,'' he said.

Mr. Koch said that, as a United States Representative, he had readily taken
positions unpopular in his district - for tuition tax credits, for capital
punishment, for amnesty for Vietnam draft resisters - that were ''common sense''
positions.

''It amazes me,'' Mr. Cuomo retorted, ''how your sense of the common sense
changed.'' Mr. Cuomo indicated he thought Lewis E. Lehrman would defeat Paul J.
Curran for the Republican gubernatorial nomination. In the general election
campaign, he said, Mr. Lehrman would carry ''two albatrosses'' - the record of
the late Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller in New York State and Reaganomics.

Many in the audience, in which the Cuomo adherents were noisier, if not more
numerous, laughed derisively when Mr. Koch rebuked Mr. Cuomo for what he said
was criticism of the City Council President, Carol Bellamy. Mr. Koch had once
described Miss Bellamy as a ''pain.''

The Mayor rolled his eyes at a challenge to his statement that Mr.  Cuomo had
planned to run against Mr. Carey. Just about everyone in New York politics had
expected that to happen.

Although speaking now of the ''Carey-Cuomo record,'' the Mayor said, Mr. Cuomo
had told people for a year that he would run against the Governor.

''When?'' Mr. Cuomo interrupted.  ''You conveyed it on a number of occasions,''
Mr. Koch said.''To you?'' Mr. Cuomo persisted.  ''On a number of occasions,''
Mr. Koch said.

Won't Comment on Carey

Later, while accepting the plaudits of supporters, Mr. Cuomo declined to say
what he had planned to do with respect to Mr. Carey.  It is ''academic,'' he
said.

Mr. Koch paused only for a brief broadcast interview before hurrying out of the
Sheraton Centre ballroom.  Former Mayors John V. Lindsay and Abraham D. Beame,
who sat at the center front table, resisted reporters' efforts to have them pick
a winner.

Mr. Cuomo drew applause by arriving a minute before the starting time. Mr. Koch
got there early.  There was long applause for Mr. Cuomo's opening statement. The
applause ended when Mr. Koch said, ''May I speak?'' The meeting ended with each
candidate underlining his main points.  Mr. Cuomo renewed his call for a tandem
campaign - better, he said, than television commercials ''without benefit of
cross-examination.'' He criticized those who had ''acquiesced'' in President
Reagan's candidacy, ''because acquiescence was acceptance, and acceptance was
wrong.''

Mr. Koch said he was running ''against an individual with no record of executive
leadership.'' He resented misrepresentations of his record, he said. For
instance, he said, he had invited Mr. Reagan to Gracie Mansion during the 1980
campaign to ''share my problems.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mayor Koch photo of Mario Cuomo

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 9, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

3 UNLIKELY CAMBODIAN ALLIES MAP WAR ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, July 3


The three exiled Cambodian leaders who last month formed a coalition opposed to
the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh are as different as they can
possibly be, yet they are apparently still acting in unison.

The three are Prince Norodom Sihanouk, a former chief of state; his former Prime
Minister, Son Sann, and Khieu Samphan, the longtime Communist who was a
theoretician for Pol Pot's Communist regime and helped develop the policy under
which millions of Cambodians were expelled from Phnom Penh early in 1979.

Recent interviews with all three made clear how deep their differences were
despite their decision in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, on June 22 to form a new
coalition government of ''Democratic Kampuchea,'' which is the name the now
exiled Pol Pot Government gave to Cambodia.

Prince Sihanouk, the President of the new government, seems as energetic as
ever. Cambodia's King after 1941 and then its Prime Minister and head of state
until his overthrow by the military in 1970, he is voluble, gracious, shrewd and
given to high-pitched laughter. Prince Sihanouk led Cambodia's neutral course
into the latter stages of the Vietnam War. He lost control of his country as
North Vietnam and the United States both pushed the war into Cambodia. From his
subsequent exile in Peking he lent his support to the Communist faction that
ruled Cambodia under the leadership of Pol Pot.

In Command of Insurgents

As Prince Sihanouk commands one piece of Cambodia's past - especially the
loyalty of some older country folk -his new cohorts command its most powerful
anti-Vietnamese insurgents, Communist and Nationalist.

Khieu Samphan, Vice President in charge of foreign affairs, was one of a little
group of Paris-educated men and women whose influence over Pol Pot's version of
Communism caused Prince Sihanouk years ago to label them the Khmer Rouge, or Red
Cambodian. Khieu Samphan is pale and grayer haired than in his photographs of
just a few years ago. He speaks haltingly, moves awkwardly, smiles unexpectedly
and often breaks into a dry chuckle for no apparent reason.

Son Sann, Prince Sihanouk's former Prime Minister and the new Prime Minister of
the coalition government, is the oldest - 72 - and surely the gravest of the
three. He sat in a straight-backed chair with his hands folded in his lap as he
told a visitor in Kuala Lumpur recently how much he wanted guns and, more
importantly, ammunition and mine detectors.

The three men run a government in exile that is supposed to operate by consensus
and on several matters they do agree. They want to fight the Vietnamese, get
more international aid, and persuade the United Nations next September to vote
again to seat the deposed Pol Pot regime, which has kept the Cambodian seat in
the United Nations despite the fact that it was ousted from the country by the
Vietnamese.

A Long War Is Predicted

They agree also that their insurgency could grow more deadly.  ''It's like an
accordion,'' said the new President, referring to the guerrillas' wet-season
offensive and Vietnam's dry-season offensive.  ''So it will last many years,
unfortunately for my people.''

Yet in separate interviews they revealed not only the extent of their
estrangement but also the depth of Cambodia's political disorder.

Prince Sihanouk said in an interview at his beach-front hotel in Penang,
Malaysia, that he thought the future of Cambodia looked ''somewhat desperate.''
He said he did not think that the Vietnamese could be defeated militarily
despite his coalition's brave plans or that Vietnam would ever withdraw its
troops as the United Nations has resolved it should. He still hoped, he said,
for a Geneva conference on Cambodia.

Son Sann said that the size of his guerrilla force might be greatly increased if
the coalition got enough aid. And perhaps, he said, the insurgency might exact
such a cost from Vietnam that the Soviet Union would finally choose to withdraw
its support for the Government and allow the supervised elections that the
United Nations has urged.

Pol Pot's Group Despised

He made clear how much he despised Pol Pot's group. Indeed, explaining why he
had become a guerrilla leader, he said he had once, ''in 1972 or 1973,'' tried
to persuade the United States ''to close their eyes'' to a coup d'etat that he
and some others wanted to make against President Lon Nol, then backed by
Washington.

''But I was not able to make myself understood,'' Mr. Son Sann said, and, by
1975, Pol Pot had come to power. ''That's the reason why I feel myself a little
responsible for the killing of half of my countrymen.''

Khieu Samphan, once President of Cambodia under Pol Pot, expressed no doubt that
the Cambodians would eventually force the Vietnamese to flee. Meeting with
several reporters in Kuala Lumpur he insisted, as he has before, that his
faction would abide by the results of a free election regardless of the outcome.
He also said that he did not think it would lose.

'' He asserted that Pol Pot's group was ''on the side of the West,'' saying that
it had not only abandoned Communism but was no longer even a political party.

'A Collective Decision'

And he acknowledged that millions of Cambodians had been sent out of Phnom Penh
and into the countryside, as a result of ''a collective decision.'' Had he
joined in the decision? Mr. Khieu Samphan chuckled dryly and replied in French,
''Yes, evidently.''

Prince Sihanouk, when asked later what he thought of Khieu Samphan, said: ''It
is not a pleasure for me to deal with the Khmer Rouge, not only as killers but
as human beings. They are not like us.'' Five of his children and 14 of his
grandchildren, he said, died under them.

Mr. Khieu Samphan's manner did not change when asked about atrocities committed
by Pol Pot's forces. Mr. Son Sann and Prince Sihanouk were visibly saddened and
sometimes angry. But what could a ''patriot'' do, they asked, except to join
them?

''You vote each year for the Khmer Rouge,'' Prince Sihanouk said, referring to
American votes in the United Nations. ''No, you are in the same situation as
Sihanouk. We will have to do something to compel the Vietnamese to respect the
independence of Cambodia.''

Not Much Help From China

Prince Sihanouk said he had 5,000 armed men, a figure most military experts
would dispute. He said they were armed with weapons from Lon Nol's army and from
China.

Mr. Son Sann said he had 9,000 guerrillas, a higher figure than intelligence
sources estimate. He said that China had given him ''not much'' lately in arms
and ammunition and that Thailand had hampered his operations along the
Thai-Cambodian border.

Prince Sihanouk, too, has had his troubles with Thailand and although the Thai
Government was intimately involved in the coalition's birth, the Prince has
changed his plans to fly straight from Penang to Bangkok, the Thai capital. He
said he would visit Singapore, Manila and Jakarta first. He did not explain what
the problem was.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and former Prime
Minister Son Sann Photo of Khieu Samphan, former Cambodian President

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 9, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMARY OF MAJOR ACTIONS TAKEN BY NEW YORK LEGISLATURE IN 1982 SESSION

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4992 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 8


Following are some of the major actions of the State Legislature in its 1982
session, which recessed Saturday. Many of the bills approved in its closing days
still await action by Governor Carey.

Finance

Governor Carey and the Legislature fought over the size of the budget for most
of the session. Mr. Carey argued that the Legislature was spending beyond the
state's means and called for tax increases. But the legislative leaders said
that Mr. Carey was underestimating state revenues and that tax increases were
unnecessary.

After negotiations between Mr. Carey and the leaders broke down, the Legislature
passed a budget of its own, and Mr. Carey vetoed more than $900 million in
appropriations. The Legislature did not override those vetoes, but restored most
of the spending later in a series of separate bills. Mr. Carey vetoed most of
this spending, but the Legislature, in its closing days, overrode the Governor's
vetoes.

The state's $27 billion budget includes money from state sources and from such
outside sources as Federal aid. It was the first full budget to be enacted under
a new law requiring the Legislature to approve the way the state disburses
Federal funds.

The budget contained $4.4 billion in aid to the state's elementary and secondary
schools, $310 million more than last year. The Legislature rejected Mr. Carey's
proposal to raise the sales tax a penny to provide $2.7 billion in new aid over
the next five years as a way of equalizing spending between rich and poor school
districts.

The Legislature approved a one-year partial state takeover of the local costs of
Medicaid. The measure, which takes effect next year, will provide $359 million
in local aid, with New York City getting two-thirds of the money. The
Legislature rejected Mr. Carey's broader Medicaid takeover proposal. Over the
Governor's objections, the Legislature passed an $80 million aid program for
upstate localities.

The new state budget includes substantial sums for criminaljustice programs,
including $70 million for prison construction, $12 million for a program to deal
with career criminals, $3 million for parole programs and $3.5 million for a
subway crime strike force.

The state completed its $3.5 billion sale of short-term notes at an interest
rate of 8.385 percent, the lowest rate since 1979.

Reapportionment

The Legislature enacted new boundaries for the state's Congressional, State
Senate and Assembly districts after more than nine months of acrimonious
bargaining.

The Legislature's initial redistricting plan was rejected by the Justice
Department, which ruled that the proposal discriminated against minorities in
Brooklyn, Manhattan and the Bronx. But the Legislature's subsequent plan was
accepted. Because of the delay, the Legislature moved the state's primary date
to Sept. 23 from Sept. 14.

The new plan reduces the state Congressional delegation from 39 members to 34.
It was drawn to strengthen Democratic control in the Assembly and Republican
control in the State Senate.

Taxes and Fees

Legislation Signed

Authorizes New York City to levy a surcharge on the income tax paid by city
residents for two years.

Allows the city to increase its mortgage recording and property transfer taxes.
Breaks the link between Federal and state tax laws, to stop certain Federal
business tax cuts from automatically being passed along on state tax returns for
a period of two years.

Increases the fees for various corporate filings, including certificates of
incorporation.  Allows the city to stop these business tax cuts from being
passed along on city returns as well.  Increases fees for hunting and trapping
licenses from $6 each to $8 and for fishing licenses from $6 each to $9.
Repeals 10 percent tax on profits from the sale of buildings in New York City
worth $1 million or more.  Increases mortgage recording and property transfer
levies on business property valued at $500,000 or more to replace repealed
profits tax; one- , two-and three-family homes and condominiums are excluded.

Bill Enacted Over a Veto

Shifts collection point of sales tax on gasoline from distributors to
wholesalers to improve collections.

Legislation Killed

Would have reduced size of the state's Job Incentive Board and made it more
difficult for some companies to get tax credits.  Would have permitted persons
who volunteered their services to nonprofit, charitable organizations to deduct
up to $500 in state taxes.

Would have permitted New York City to continue tax benefits developers under the
J-51 program.  Would have matched state inheritance tax laws with new Federal
statutes.  Would have increased taxes on insurance companies.  Would have
increased the proportion of the estimated payment of personal income taxes
self-employed people would have to pay before April 15.

Would have replaced tax on oil companies' worldwide profits and a complex tax
measure on tranportation and communications companies that are part of a program
to aid mass transit.

Criminal Justice

Legislation Signed

Imposes a series of surcharges ranging from $15 to $75 on the penalties for
those convicted of crimes, to raise money for anticrime programs.

Allows a defendant at a pretrial hearing to ask a judge to exclude an
involuntary confession from the trial.  Makes it a felony to fix horse races by
drugging horses, switching them to run under false names or tamper with a
betting system.  Allows juries in civil trials to view premises or places that
could be helpful to a jury in determining material facts.  Defines ''good
Samaritan'' and allows such persons to receive up to $5,000 from the state's
Crime Victims Compensation Board for property losses and injuries without regard
to need.

Extends for another year prison work-release leave and furlough programs for
inmates who are within one year of parole date.  Exempts practicing physical
therapists from jury duty.  Limits access to probation reports for offenders
released from prison to the offender, his lawyer or the District Attorney.
Allows persons with state firearms permits from a county outside New York City
to buy a handgun within city limits as long as it is immediately taken out of
the city in a locked container.

Increases penalty for knowingly using another person's vehicle without
permission to commit a felony.  Allows a judge to impose a combined felony
sentence of probation and incarceration, if the sentence is six months or less.

Legislation Passed

Would create 98 new judgeships - 52 to be elected, 34 appointed by the Governor
and 12 appointed by the Mayor of New York City. At least 37 would sit in the
city.

Would eliminate the requirement that a rape victim must convince the court that
she engaged in ''earnest resistance'' before an alleged assailant can be
convicted of rape.

PICK UP FIRST ADD BILLS

Would prohibit the transfer of property from one state agency to another without
prior approval of the Legislature. This is designed to block the transfer of
Pilgrim Psychiatric Center on Long Island from the Department of Mental Hygiene
to the Department of Corrections.

Would extend from three to six days after an arrest the time a suspect can be
held without a hearing.  Would require judges to impose consecutive sentences in
most cases for a violent crime committed while a suspect is out on bail on a
felony charge.

Would create a new procedure to eliminate unnecessary pretrial motions in
criminal trials by allowing prosecutors and defense lawyers to exchange
information without requiring motions before the court.

Would make it illegal to manufacture, sell or possess with intent to sell an
imitation of a controlled substance such as heroin, marijuana or LSD.

Would permit the Crime Victims Compensation Board to pay eligible victims up to
$3,000 for job retraining needed as a result of a crime-related injury.

Would create new crime of tampering with a witness. In effect, this would
increases the penalty for assault when committed to prevent a witness from
testifying or in retaliation for testimony.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have restored the death penalty in certain cases of murder.

Legislation Killed

Would have allowed television cameras into the state's courtrooms on an
experimental basis for 18 months.  Would have allowed persons serving life
sentences to marry.  Would have set up a state witness relocation assistance
program, similar to Federal witness protection programs.

Banking and Insurance

Legislation Signed

Allows the New York Insurance Exchange to do business in other states, provided
that members of the exchange meet those states' regulatory requirements.

Permits out-of-state banks to open or purchase branches in New York State,
provided that the states in which the out-of-state banks are situated permit New
York banks to do the same.

Allows the New York Insurance Exchange to underwrite all kinds of risk-type
insurance in other states.  Makes loans on insurance policies subject to
adjustable interest rates.  Increases to $20,000 from $10,000 the size of
home-improvement loans that commercial banks may issue.  Eases slightly the
restrictions on investments that savings banks and insurance companies can make.


Legislation Passed

Would permit the transfer of shares of stock through the issuing of computerized
statements, instead of stock certificates.  Would prohibit the denial of
performance or surety bonds because of an applicant's race, creed, color, sex,
national origin, age or marital status.

Legislation Killed

Would have reduced taxes on savings banks.

Business and Tourism

Legislation Signed

Provides tax and other benefits to Madison Square Garden to keep the New York
Knickerbockers and the Rangers in the city.  Eliminates requirement that
businesses with quarterly sales of $300,000 or more prepay the local portion of
their March sales taxes each March 20. This will enable many small businesses to
save money.

Removes the limitation on the amount a county can spend for publicity to promote
tourism and economic development.

Legislation Passed

Would provide $30 million to build a high technology research and development
center at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  Would permit beer wholesalers
to acquire, store or sell nonalcoholic snack food.  Would require public
authorities to buy steel made in the United States in contracts involving more
than $50,000.  Would create a temporary state commission to commemorate the
100th anniversary of the dedication of the Statue of Liberty.  Would establish
minority bonding authority program from surplus funds of the Job Development
Authority.  Would authorize the establishment of centers for advanced technology
by the Science and Technology Foundation.  Would make it a felony to engage
intentionally in fraudulent activities in the sale, exchange or purchase of
securities or commodities.

Would revise state bankruptcy law, making it more difficult to declare
bankruptcy.

Legislation Killed

Would have Provided a variety of tax exemptions and regulatory incentives for
businesses to set up in blighted areas designated by the Federal Government as
''enterprise zones.''

Would have allowed casino gambling.  Would have deregulated cable television.

Labor

Legislation Signed

Permits aliens who entered the United States leglly to be licensed as
physicians, engineers, chiropractors, real estate brokers, manufacturers and
distributors of alcoholic beverages and as members of various other professions.

Extends for one year a pension plan for 300,000 state employees that requires a
3 percent employee contribution and links pensions to Social Security benefits.

Approves a series of new three-year contracts for most state employees,
generally raising salaries by 9 percent in the first year and 8 percent in the
next two years. The contracts contain a ''lag'' under which an employee forgoes
2 weeks' salary in the first year, to be paid back when the employee leaves
state service.

Increases to $1,500 from $1,250 the amount that can be paid for funeral expenses
under state Worker's Compensation Law.  Exempts permanent public employees who
have been laid off from residency requirements for re-employment.

Legislation Passed

Would allow transit and housing police officers to credit maternity leave toward
time needed for retirement.  Would allow police unions to contribute money to
political campaigns.  Would eliminate various obsolete restrictions for
investment of money from public pensions.

Legislation Killed

Would have protected employees who disclosed wrongdoing by their employers, or
refused to participate in illegal acts, from dismissals, demotions or other
retaliatory actions.

Would have raised maximum unemployment compensation to $180 a week from $125.

Education

Legislation Signed

Prohibits discrimination on basis of sex or marital status in admissions for
post-secondary institutions, business or trade schools. Private schools that
traditionally accept only men or women as students are excluded.

Authorizes the New York City Board of Education to continue the community school
district boundaries existing on July 1, 1973, until Jan. 1, 1986, without
change.

Legislation Passed

Would make tuition-free courses available for Vietnam War veterans in New York
City and state universities and community colleges.  Would set up an advisory
board to establish standards for a course in automotive mechanics.  Would
appropriate $250,000 for the State University of New York at Stony Brook to
process and publish papers of former Senator Jacob K.  Javits.

Would authorize the Tax Commissioner to withhold city and state tax refunds of
people who have defaulted on guaranteed students loans.

Consumer Affairs

Legislation Signed

Requires sellers of life insurance to provide detailed information on the cost
and benefits of policies.  Stops owners and operators of sports facilities from
charging more for entrance to popular events than the price stated on the
ticket.

Allows schools in New York City to accept competitive bids from milk
distributors and adds milk consumers and retailers to the state's Milk Marketing
Advisory Council.

Broadens the definition of prohibited pyramid investment schemes.

Legislation Passed

Provides that any seller who fails to honor a guarantee,such as a promise of
repair, would be guilty of false advertising.  Would allow licensing authorities
to revoke or suspend licenses if a licensee has an outstanding small-claims
judgment.  Would require used-car dealers to give details in writing to a
prospective buyer on the prior use of a car when the dealer knows it was
previously used as a taxicab or a police or driver-education vehicle.

Legislation Killed

Would have established a citizens' utility board to represent the interests of
residential utility customers in New York in rate proceedings before the Public
Service Commission and other regulatory agencies.

Would have prohibited cable television companies from disclosing any information
kept on file without a subscriber's consent.  Would have reorganized the Public
Service Commission by dividing it into three independent agencies - a unit to
represent consumers, a compliance and enforcement unit and a commission that
would only rule on rate increases and establish policy.

Welfare and the Family

Legislation Signed

Raises New York's legal drinking age from 18 to 19.  Allows the state to deduct
delinquent child-support payments from unemployment benefits.  Allows the
children of police officers and firemen to collect full pensions when both
parents are deceased.  Requires stronger proof before the state can can put up
for adoption children abandoned or neglected by their parents.  Increases
Supplemental Security Income benefits by the amount of the 7.4 percent increase
in the basic Federal payment and eases eligibility requirements for Medicaid.

Requires fathers who have been ordered by the courts to pay child support to
give immediate notification of an address change to Family Court.

Requires the reporting of patient abuse, criminal conduct or the death of a
patient in mental health facilities within three days.  Limits the ability of
the elderly to transfer their assets to family members or others to become
eligible for Medicaid.

Legislation Passed

Would allow judges to withhold a final judgment of divorce when an Orthodox
Jewish wife complains that her husband is withholding a religious divorce that
she needs in order to remarry. The bill is carefully worded to avoid any
religious reference.

Would authorize the state to intercept a state income tax refund from a parent
delinquent in child support when the child is receiving public assistance.

Would require the State Department of Social Services to keep records of reports
of child abuse by employees and volunteers in state-run homes and institutions.

Would require courts to award interest on alimony payments willfully withheld.
Would revise Family Court treatment of delinquent youths by adopting many adult
criminal procedures and rights, and sets timetables to speed up proceedings.

Would require employers to disclose health insurance information on employees
when children or spouses of employees are seeking Medicaid.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have required judges to consider joint custody of children in divorce
cases if one or both of the parents requested such an arrangement.

Legislation Killed

Would have allowed one person to process public assistance payments and manage
supportive social services.

Housing

Legislation Signed

Legalizes the status of thousands of tenants living in converted industrial
lofts in New York City and requires landlords to bring residential loft
buildings into compliance with housing, building and fire safety codes, but
allows the costs to be passed along to tenants.

Provides $4 million in state financing to nonprofit groups and local governments
to acquire and upgrade single-room-occupancy dwellings.

Extends to 35 years from 30 years the terms of bonds issued by the State of New
York Mortgage Agency to approve retroactively a 31-year bond that was issued in
error.

Requires public and publicly aided housing projects to conduct energy audits and
implement energy-conservation measures.

Legislation Passed

Would increase from 35 percent to 51 percent the number of a building's tenants
in New York City needed to approve a cooperative or condominium conversion under
an eviction plan; allows nonpurchasing tenants to remain for three years; gives
tenants the right to go to court to block conversions where harassment is
charged, and protects elderly tenants from eviction, regardless of income.

Would add condominiums to the law that permits public pension funds to purchase
packages of mortages.  Would raise debt ceiling of New York City Housing
Development Corporation by $350 million to $1.6 billion.

Health and Environment

Legislation Signed

Requires a 5-cent deposit on all soda and beer containers as of July 1, 1983.

Extends from March 29, 1973, to May 7, 1975, the period of service under which
veterans who served in Vietnam may file for damages regarding exposure to Agent
Orange.

Legislation Passed

Would create a $430 million fund to help hospitals pay for the care of the
uninsured working poor; reduces the disparity in rates hospitals may charge to
patients with different kinds of insurance, or no insurance at all; permits
state to set its own Medicare rates with Federal permission.

Would establish a hazardous waste ''superfund'' to clean up abandoned waste
sites, with $10 million in annual fees charged to businesses engaged in the
production or disposal of toxic wastes.

Would require operators of hazardous waste sites to post financial assurance to
guarantee that the sites will be cleaned up.  Would set up an emergency
nutrition aid program in the Health Department for pregnant women and
adolescents who are considered likely to deliver infants with a low weight.

Would make it a felony knowingly to charge services provided to Medicaid
patients at rates in excess of state-set rates or to soliciting or receive
money, donations or gifts above state-set rates.

Would prohibit convicted felons from obtaining permits to handle hazardous
wastes.

Legislation Vetoed

An industry-supported alternative to the bottle bill that would have raised $20
million for cleanup and recycling purposes through a tax of 5 cents a case on
beer and soda.

Legislation Killed

Would have guaranteed patients access to their medical and mental health
records.  Would have enabled registered nurses who receive special training to
diagnose and treat illnesses and to prescribe certain medications without the
direct supervision of a physician.

Would have increased New York City's dog license fee from $8.50 to $12.50 to
provide additional funds for the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals to reopen three dog shelters.

Would have created a state fund of between $250,000 and $1 million to pay 90
percent of the costs of malpractice awards.  Would have tightened proceedings
for disciplining physicians.  Would have eliminated Medicaid funds for abortions
for poor women in most cases.  Would have allowed smoking only in marked smoking
areas in such places as auditoriums, classrooms, banks, hospitals, large
restaurants and work places.

Would have established a State Water Finance Authority with the power to issue
$4 billion in bonds on behalf of local governments and private water companies
to improve water and sewer systems.

Transportation

Legislation Signed

Provides for binding arbitration in talks between the New York City Transit
Authority and the Transport Workers Union, representing 30,000 bus and subway
workers.

Transfers control of Stewart Airport in Newburgh, N.Y., and Republic Airport in
Babylon, L.I., from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to the state.

Amends state law requiring special automobile safety seats for all children
under the age of 5 so that it applies only to children under 4.

Allows Staten Island Ferry to take advantage of Federal tax advantages to
individuals and save the ferry money on borrowings.

Legislation Passed

Would require public authorities to submit annual reports to the Legislature and
the state's budget director; requires the M.T.A. to submit quarterly plans for
service on all of its bus, subway and commuter rail lines, with standards for
cleanliness, maintenance and air-conditioning.

Would establish a State Public Transportation Safety Board empowered to
investigate all accidents on public transporation systems.  Would authorize
police officers to arrest drunken drivers, or to question drivers suspected of
drunken driving, in commercial and business parking lots and on private roads
open to public traffic.

Would continue M.T.A.'s authority to sign contracts for new subway cars using a
leaseback arrangement through the end of year.  Would require the New York City
Transit Authority to undertake a noise-abatement study, and to develop
strategies to reduce noise.  Would authorize the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey to manage road-rehabilitation projects near airports on behalf of
other government agencies; requires approval of New Jersey and allows borough
presidents to block projects in their boroughs.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have restricted spending by the state on the Westway project.

Energy

Legislation Signed

Establishes a statewide minimum daytime temperature of 68 for all
multiple-dwelling apartment buildings between Oct. 1 and May 31, and a nighttime
minimum of 55.

Extends state authority to set aside emergency fuel supplies in the event of
energy shortages.

Legislation Passed

Would require the Public Service Commission to have an audit conducted of its
own management and operations by an independent auditor once every five years
with the first audit to start by Jan.  1, 1983.

Would eliminate the summer surcharge for residential customers for the first 250
kilowatt hours of usage.

Elderly

Legislation Signed

Allows homeowners 65 years or older to take out mortgages to pay their property
taxes. The loans would not have to be repaid until the property is sold.

Legislation Passed

Would allow elderly residents of city-owned buildings to obtain rent exemptions
when the city sells the buildings.  Would allow local governments to give
limited property tax exemptions to elderly homeowners who do not meet income
requirements for regular exemption program.

Would raise from $9,200 to $10,500 the annual income limit for homeowners 65 and
older to qualify for a 50 percent property tax exemption.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have allowed city court judges outside New York City to serve for not more
than one year past the mandatory retirement age of 70.

Legislation Killed

Would have prohibited mandatory retirement because of age.

Miscellaneous

Legislation Signed

Protects public and private libraries from having to disclose information on
borrowers and the books they read.

Makes defacing religious property worth $50 or more a crime that could be
punished by up to a year in jail if the intent was to assault an individual's
race, color, creed or national origin.

Raises the number of signatures needed to bring an issue to a vote in a
countywide referendum from 5 percent to 10 percent of regislatered voters.

Allows absentee ballots in village elections to be received until the polls
close.  Allows persons in n institutions for mental illness to vote as long as
they have not been declared incompetent.  Names State Office Building at 270
Broadway in Manhattan, the Arthur Levitt State Office Building.  Exempts
candidates for office in municipalities with a population of less than 10,000
from disclosure requirements under the Election Law.

Legislation Passed

Would require local election boards to notify registered voters of upcoming
primary elections in their annual mail surveys of registered voters.
Notifications must be made 40 to 45 days before the first day of voter
registration, rather than the current 15 to 30 days in advance.

Would require that lists of polling places and notifications to voters of
polling places identify those places not accessible to the handicapped.

Would establishe a permanent State Office of Advocate for the Disabled .  Would
change state's civil rights law to prohibit discrimination based on sex, marital
status or disability, making that law conform to the state's human rights law.

Would require city zoning appeals boards to be open to the public, except during
executive sessions.  Would require that absentee ballots postmarked at least a
day before election be counted even if they are received up to seven days after
an election.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have prohibited the use of a candidate's name or the words ''Independent''
or ''Independence'' in the name of a political party.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of state leaders

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 9, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARTS FESTIVAL OPENS TODAY IN PURCHASE

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1511 words


HEAT bubbles up from the pavement. Ice cream vendors are on every corner.
Rooftop ''tar beaches'' and tenement fire escapes are dotted with determined
sunbathers. Those are the signs of summer in the city, but at the State
University in Purchase, N.Y., you can tell it's summer by the Pepsico
Summerfare. The 1982 edition of this outdoor arts extravaganza opens tonight on
the rustic Westchester campus, where it will spread out over 500 acres of
meadows, plazas and glistening new facilities through Aug. 8.

Now in its third summer of presenting the new and old in drama, dance, art and
music, the festival is well on its way to becoming a tradition.

This year the accent of the festival is international. ''Pepsico Summerfare '82
will be characterized by a world overlook,'' said Brooks Jones, director of the
festival. ''In post-'70's America, we all have a more sophisticated interest in
what the world is like, and I think the festival presumes a general audience
interest in much more of the world and its cultures. Take Ugo Betti's 'The Queen
and the Rebels,' which stars Colleen Dewhurst and which will open July 29 for 11
performances. It's about a revolution in a third-world country. We aren't doing
it for political reasons. But we now have a post-Chile-Guatemala-Vietnam
population that understands third-world conflicts and finds them examinable.''

Tonight, for example, the Melbourne Theater Company of Australia will present
''Einstein,'' a new play by Ron Elisha, in its 750-seat, blue-painted Theater B
at the college's spacious Center for the Arts. In the three-man show, one of
many offerings in the festival's theater series, the Nobel Prize-winning
physicist looks back with wonder and regret at a life of public triumphs and
personal failures. ''Einstein'' will be performed tonight and tomorrow at 8;
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.. Tickets are $9 and $11. Next door in Theater A, the
center's big, purple auditorium, Les Grands Ballets Canadiens will be dancing a
typically lively and eclectic program that ranges from classical ballet to folk
fun. The company, one of five groups appearing in the festival's dance series,
will perform a highly praised staging of George Balanchine's haunting
''Serenade,'' Brian Macdonald's ''Tam Di Delam,'' Linda Rabin's ''Tellurian,''
which one critic saw as a well-crafted abstract retelling of Genesis in modern
dance to electronic music, and John Butler's ''Othello.'' Les Grands Ballets
Canadiens will perform tonight at 8:30, tomorrow at 3 and 8:30 P.M. and Sunday
at 8 P.M. Tickets are $10 and $12.

Geographic and Artistic Sprawl

What makes Pepsico Summerfare different from most arts festivals in and around
New York is its geographic and artistic sprawl. Armed with a picnic basket or
pocketful of food money, the summer theatergoer can spend a day there
comfortably, wandering among peripatetic entertainers or covering a few miles
worth of widely varying events.

Outdoor festivities get off to a rousing start today at 4 P.@M.  across Anderson
Hill Road, which divides the campus and Pepsico headquarters, with a free
''gathering at the garden'' in the Pepsico Sculpture Garden. There the
Metropolitan Brass Quartet, the Lam Street Band and a gaggle of buskers, mimes
and musicians will perform amid statues by such 20th-century sculptors as Henry
Moore, Alberto Giacometti, Alexander Calder, Louise Nevelson, Isamu Noguchi and
Aristide Maillol.

Then follow the crowd out of the garden and across the fields to the Center for
the Arts at 5 P.@M. in a free ''gathering-storm parade'' that will deposit
members of the audience at just the spot to view a free outdoor performance at 6
P.M. of Benjamin Britten's opera ''Noah's Flood.'' Those who feel unable to
complete the threequarter-mile walk will be able to ride in a haywagon or a
bandwagon that will join the parade, along with bagpipers, a calliope,
firetrucks and a 25-foot purple rooster.

Rain Date for Noah

A Summerfare standard, ''Noah's Flood'' will star Cleavon Little, the actor, as
God, John Cunningham and June Gable as Mr. and Mrs.  Noah, and hundreds of
performers from the area in a spectacle that will come to its climax with a
''storm'' provided by the Purchase Fire Department and the launching of a
rainbow of 2,000 balloons.  The rain date for the opera performance will be July
11.

Rain or shine, Cayenne will be providing ''peppery jazz'' indoors in the upper
lobby of the center at 7 and 10 P.@M. And Larry Coryell, the guitarist, will be
inducted into Herbie Mann's Family of Mann at 10:30 P.M. at Theater A, with some
surprise guests doing the honors, in one of the festival's extensive jazz
concerts. ''It should be fascinating to see what they come up with,'' Mr. Jones
said of Mr. Coryell and Mr. Mann, the jazz flutist. ''Coryell is playing his
best in a decade, and this will be their first time together.'' (Tickets are $9
and $11.)

Sunday brings the Habimah National Theater of Tel Aviv in ''The Journey,'' a
one-woman show about the Holocaust, starring Miriam Zohar. ''The accent here is
on perseverance and hope,'' Mr. Jones said. The company, founded in 1917 by
Konstantin Stanislavsky, will present ''The Journey'' once, at 3 P.M., in the
center's green Theater C. Tickets are $11.

Just outside, Ralph Lee's Mettawee River Company, a Vermont-based street-theater
group that uses giant puppets and masks, will perform in free shows at 3 and 5.
''They're kind of a tradition at Summerfare,'' Mr. Jones explained. ''They do a
new piece for us every year.''

The Mettawee River Company is one of many festival events that are intended for
the whole family. Another will be provided by Michael Parent, a storyteller from
Virginia, whose dramatized tales are derived from sources as varied as Aesop's
Fables and Haitian folk legends. Mr. Parent will perform at 4 P.M. on Sunday at
the center's Music Pavilion, drawing parents and children into his tales by
encouraging them to sing and help him act the parts.

And few will be able to resist rocking to the West Indian rhythms that will flow
from the Johnston Symphony Steel Drum Orchestra at a free outdoor concert at 6
P.M. in the mall just beyond the center complex.

Nostalgic Songs

Each day will come to an end this weekend with performances by Norman Rollings
at the piano, singing nostalgic songs of the 1930's and 40's at the center's
Followspot Cabaret from 11 tonight and tomorrow and 10:30 P.M. on Sunday. (The
cabaret has a cover charge of $3 to $7; no drink minimum.) Moreover, the
Neuberger Museum, a short walk from the Center for the Arts, will be open from 1
to 8 P.M.  tonight through Sunday for a free look at such exhibitions as ''Ben
Shahn and the Theater'' and James Grashow's ''The City,'' a walk-through
cityscape of more than 30 buildings from 4 to 14 feet tall. Just beyond the
museum lies a nearly hidden, picturesque old cemetery, part of the old Chisholm
estate - rumored to have been a station on the pre-Civil War Underground
Railroad - on which the campus was built and one of many tranquil spots to be
discovered by the solitary walker.

Picnics are the order of the day at the festival, but those who are all thumbs
when it comes to boiling eggs or spreading peanut butter will be able to buy
anything from hot dogs to ''Continental'' fare at the Followspot and bars,
foodstands and deli counters scattered around the center, all in operation
around mealtimes. Picnic boxes are available at $7.95, but must be reserved by
calling the box office. Reservations are recommended for dinner at the
Followspot.

The international theme will be carried through future performances at Pepsico
Summerfare '82. The Habimah will perform Euripides' ''Medea'' in Hebrew from
July 16 to 18. Italy's Dario Fo and Franca Rame have contributed ''Female
Parts,'' three one-act plays to be performed by Estelle Parsons from July 21
through Aug. 8.

Pepsico Summerfare '82 is sponsored by Pepsico Inc., which has contributed
$500,000 for this year's festival, and the State University of New York's
College at Purchase.

By car, take the Hutchinson River Parkway, the Cross Westchester Expressway or
Routes 287, 684 or 95 to the campus in Purchase, approximately 25 miles north of
Manhattan and on the border of White Plains and Greenwich, Conn. Take the train
from Grand Central Terminal to the White Plains or Rye stations, from which
buses depart for the campus every hour on the half-hour. For information about
tickets, performances and travel, call the box office at (914) 253-5900, or
write the festival at M.P.O. Box 140, Purchase, N.Y.10577.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Calls Hanoi Move On Cambodia a Trick

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 151 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 9


The Chinese Foreign Ministry, responding to Vietnam's announcement that it would
withdraw a ''significant'' number of troops from Cambodia, said tonight that if
Vietnam was really sincere in wanting to resolve the Cambodian question it
should withdraw all of its troops and comply with United Nations resolutions.

The Foreign Ministry said Hanoi's announcement Wednesday was a trick to mislead
public opinion just as a new Cambodian united front had been formed against
Hanoi.

The aim of the Vietnamese move, China said, was to keep Cambodia ''under their
continued occupation, maintain their control over Indochina and further extend
into Southeast Asia.''

----

MOSCOW, July 9 (Reuters) - The Soviet Union today applauded Vietnam's
announcement of a partial troop withdrawal from Cambodia as a peace initiative
and called on the Association of South East Asian Nations to respond favorably.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Justice Dept. Is Cleared In Suit

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 282 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


A Federal district judge today dismissed a $29 million damage suit filed by L.
Patrick Gray 3d, former Acting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
against top Justice Department officials who he charged maliciously prosecuted
him on a conspiracy charge in 1978.

The charges against Mr. Gray, which stemmed from break-ins at the homes of
friends and relatives of some political radicals opposing the Vietnam War, were
dropped nearly three years later by the Government, which said there was
''insufficient evidence to warrant a criminal trial.''

Judge John Lewis Smith ruled that two former Attorney Generals and 14 current
and former Justice Department lawyers named as defendants in Mr. Gray's suit
were immune from civil suits as a result of their duties in presenting cases to
a grand jury.

Quoting from a previous court ruling on the issue, Judge Smith said, ''Never has
a prosecutorial official been held liable for causing a prosecution to be
brought.''

Mr. Gray and two former top bureau officials, W. Mark Felt and Edward S. Miller,
were indicted on a single conspiracy charge on April 10, 1978. They were accused
of authorizing warrantless breakins at the homes of friends and relatives of
fugitives from the Weather Underground, a radical antiwar organization.

Mr. Gray's case was separated from those of Mr. Felt and Mr.  Miller, who were
tried and convicted in November 1980. They were pardoned on April 15, 1981, by
President Reagan, who said they had ''acted on high principle to bring an end to
the terrorism that was threatening our nation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Hearts, Minds and Cambodia

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


Vietnam says it is withdrawing a ''significant'' number of its troops from
Cambodia and offers to pull out more if Thailand will stop giving asylum to
hostile Cambodian guerrillas. Those guerrillas, meanwhile, have come under the
nominal control of a coalition led by Cambodia's former chief of state, Prince
Sihanouk. It would be gratifying to believe that these developments will benefit
the illused people of Cambodia - and premature.

There is an Indochina war for hearts and minds every year at about this time.
But it is mostly for the benefit of the United Nations. In a cynical annual
ritual, the U.N. decides each September whether Cambodia's seat shall continue
to be held by the murderous Pol Pot Communists or the pro-Vietnamese Communists
installed by the invaders.

The Reagan Administration, like the Carter Administration, has given its vote to
Pol Pot, mainly as a favor to China, his patron. To make this support more
palatable, a different look has been given to the Pol Pot group. Purportedly, it
is now a partner in Prince Sihanouk's insurgent coalition and recently
entertained him inside rebel-controlled Cambodia.

But Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge retain firm control of the main guerrilla armies.
Prince Sihanouk's function is to prettify them in his best flamboyant style at
the General Assembly this fall.

Hanoi, too, is playing games. It hopes to end its regional isolation by playing
upon the differences among its non-Communist neighbors, and to cut down Pol
Pot's U.N. majority. Any Vietnamese withdrawals from Cambodia are welcome. But a
truly significant withdrawal would have to promise a new political order, a
genuinely autonomous and neutral Cambodian regime.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BAD LUCK IN A COMPLEX WORLD HAS CAUSED ONE-TERM PRESIDENTS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 525 words


To the Editor:

Henry Graff raises an important issue (Op-Ed article June 20) on the possibility
of five successive failures in the White House and the resulting message sent to
the world - and us.

If President Reagan runs again in 1984, continuity for the sake of continuity
could be a reason for re-electing him, but it is hardly compelling. The message
of fickleness that some might perceive is a small price to pay for saving
America from disastrous policies.

But is there any truth to the notion of fickleness? Do we really denigrate the
Presidency and lack faith in leadership, as Professor Graff charges? In the TV
age, are we now a nation of bored channelchangers?

At least two alternative explanations for shortened Presidencies should be
considered.  First, we have suffered from a run of bad luck. Lyndon B. Johnson
made a stupid decision in pursuing U.S. involvement in Vietnam.  Richard Nixon
made an equally fatal mistake in allowing Watergate to engulf him. Gerald R.
Ford, our only unelected President, was a caretaker of a discredited regime.
Jimmy Carter, an outsider, suffered the fatal humiliation of the hostage crisis
in Iran. (Had a helicopter not malfunctioned, and had the hostage rescue mission
proved successful, might Carter still be President?)

Ronald Reagan has pursued a narrow ideology, trying to apply the domestic
policies of the 1920's and the foreign policies of the 1950's to the massive
problems of the 1980's.

The second and more disturbing explanation is that this bad luck will probably
continue because we live in a complex and dangerous world that no one
understands very well.

A President is no better than his advisers. If they are unable to fully grasp
world and domestic problems -what the Club of Rome calls the ''world
problematique'' - the President is certain to fail.  Despite all of our
technology and seeming sophistication - indeed, perhaps because of it - we live
in an age of ignorance.

The real message of the age of TV is not boredom, but intellectual sloth. From
this viewpoint, we should stop blaming the visible targets of the President and
the public, and look at what may be the real, but less visible, problem: our
obsolete intellectual infrastructure.

It is readily acknowledged that our physical infrastructure is crumbling:
deterioration of bridges, water and sewer lines and transport systems. Could
there be an analogous problem with our intellectual institutions that continue
to propagate the Balkanization of knowledge? Rather than trivia and obfuscation,
our times require research and training devoted to a broad, systemic grasp of
overlapping problem complexes.

Without an intellectual infrastructure capable of developing and disseminating
world views relevant to our times and suited to the needs of the majority of
Americans, we may continue to bounce from regime to regime and policy to policy,
with little resulting progress.

If, and when, we can get America to seriously think about the problems of a
sustainable society, we might then see a sustainable Presidency.
MICHAEL MARIEN, Bethesda, Md., June 30, 1982

The writer is editor of Future Survey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV Notebook;
NBC IS SAID TO OFFER BEST PRIME-TIME SHOWS FOR FALL

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 45, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


Which television network has the most promising new prime-time shows for the
fall? If you believe a couple of advertising agencies that annually handicap the
race, the answer is underdog NBC-TV.

Indeed, while the agencies -Ketchum Communications and Ted Bates - agree that
NBC will remain in third place in the prime-time ratings, both also say that NBC
will improve its standing at the expense of both CBS-TV and ABC-TV. As usual,
the agencies predict that the overwhelming majority of the network's two dozen
new series for the fall will fail.

Perhaps the most surprising prediction is the share of audience that will
constitute a hit in 1982. A 30 share was considered the minimum for survival
just three years ago, but Ketchum says that this fall a 25 share will be
adequate, while Ted Bates puts the figure at 26 or 27. Overall, Ketchum expects
the three networks to command just 77 percent of all viewers -a drop of 4 points
since last season. Ted Bates predicts an 80 share, but either way the drift of
audience away from the networks seems inexorable.

By the new standards for survival, the two agencies agree that more of NBC's new
shows have a chance at catching on than either ABC's or CBS's. The NBC shows
given the best chance of success are two of its most ambitious - ''Cheers,'' a
half-hour comedy set in a Boston bar from the creators of ''Taxi,'' and ''Family
Ties,'' a comedy about two counterculture parents with three conservative kids.
Five other NBC shows are rated by at least one of the agencies as possible
successes: ''St. Elsewhere,'' ''Gavilan,'' ''Mama's Family,'' ''Silver Spoons''
and ''Remington Steele.''

Among ABC's new shows, only three are given a reasonable chance at survival -
''Brass Monkey,'' ''For Better or Worse'' and ''Matt Houston'' - and none are
considered likely to become substantial hits. The agencies concurred that only
two CBS shows had serious potential, but they were also rated as the season's
most likely hits. ''The Bob Newhart Show,'' will recast Mr. Newhart as a
writer-innkeeper, and 'Gloria,'' will feature former ''All in the Family'' star
Sally Struthers as a veterinarian's assistant. The shows are expected to be
helped by the recognizability of their stars and the fact that they are
favorably scheduled. ''Gloria'' will follow ''Archie Bunker's Place,'' and
''Newhart'' will follow ''M*A*S*H.''

If the agency predictions hold up, CBS and ABC will finish the season in a
virtual tie for prime-time dominance, but NBC will have closed the gap for the
first time in several years.
CBS Awaits Report

Following a six-week internal investigation, CBS News is expected to receive a
report it commissioned in response to charges leveled last month by TV Guide
against a documentary that was shown on the network last January.

Van Gordon Sauter, the president of CBS News, confirmed this week that the
network would make ''public accounting'' of its inquiry into the making of ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' TV Guide had concluded, following its
own investigation, that accounts of events in the documentary had been distorted
to support the program's conclusion; that an interview with a sympathetic
witness was rehearsed, contrary to network policy; and that portions of
interviews with people who contradicted the film's conclusions had beem
excluded.

In an unusual reaction, CBS declined to issue a statement of support for the
documentary, and said instead that it would conduct its own investigation into
the charges. Burton Benjamin, a senior producer for CBS and a former executive
producer of the ''CBS Evening News,'' was selected to conduct the investigation.
The documentary was produced by George Crile and narrated by Mike Wallace.

''It's been a laborious time-consuming project,'' said Mr. Sauter.  ''The TV
Guide, article contained 18 specific allegations of improper journalistic
procedure, either in violation of CBS News standards or of the normal way we do
our journalism. Given the specifity of the charges, they required a thorough
response.''

Mr. Sauter said that the investigation had included reviewing transcripts and
related documents, as well as interviewing all of the people who had any
signficiant role in the documentary.

Mr. Benjamin is expected to deliver the report to Mr. Sauter this weekend.
''There will ultimately be a public accounting, and we will release our
findings,'' Mr. Sauter said, ''but we don't decide when until we've sat down and
looked at what we've got.''
'Dukes' Stars Dropped

The producers of ''The Dukes of Hazzard,'' one of the most popular shows on
CBS's schedule, have decided to resume production without the service of two of
its stars, John Schneider and Tom Wopat, who play the Duke Boys.

Last month the two actors filed suit against Warner Bros., producer of the show,
charging that Warners had intentionally deprived them of their fair share of
revenues from the licensing of products connected with the show. The actors also
refused to report back to work. The studio has since filed a countersuit.

This week, Warner Bros. announced that production would be resumed for fall
episodes of ''The Dukes of Hazzard'' on July 26, several weeks later than
originally planned. To replace Mr. Schneider and Mr. Wopat, Warners and CBS have
been conducting a nationwide open audition. The choice has been narrowed to six
finalists.

Warner Bros. has declined to say what roles the new actors will play. The show
has been immensely profitable both for Warners and for CBS, and what remains to
be seen is whether it can survive the loss of two characters who had proved
highly popular among its mostly youthful audience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THEY HELP PEOPLE LOOKING FOR SELF-HELP

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words


There are self-help groups to assist people with overwhelming tragedies. There
are self-help groups that address irritating little problems. There are
self-help groups for atheists, artists and arthritics, for stutterers and
schizophrenics, for parents of Vietnam veterans and parents of dwarfs, for
American Indians and Soviet immigrants, for therapists and feminist vegetarians.

''You name the problem and there is a group for it,'' said Prof.  Frank
Reissman, co-director of the National Self-Help Clearing House of the Graduate
Center of the City University of New York. ''And there are plenty of self-help
groups for people who don't necessarily have problems at all.''

Self-help groups, which consist of people who share a common experience and wish
to assist each other without the use of a social worker, psychiatrist or other
trained professional, have proliferated across the country since the mid-1970's.
Fifteen million Americans, Professor Reissman estimates, are involved in 500,000
such groups.

21 Tiny Blue Flags

Evidence of the self-help movement's success is taped to a wall of the cramped
clearing house offices at 33 West 42d Street - a map of the United States with
21 tiny blue flags denoting self-help clearing houses, all established since
1976. Each clearing house collects information on local groups and helps people
organize new ones. One flag, stuck in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean,
represents a clearing house in Britain.

''Self-help groups are informal, loose, very concrete and sometimes
unorganized,'' Professor Reissman said. ''A self-help group takes no direction
or leadership from the outside. Their knowledge comes from their own experience.
They may know more about how to deal with certain problems than trained
professionals. And by helping others, people help themselves.''

Central to a self-help group is the idea of sharing feelings, perceptions and
problems with others who have had the same experience. The group can pass on
very practical advice to new members, such as what life is like after a
mastectomy or how to cope with the birthday of a child who has died.

''People want to have control over their own lives,'' Professor Reissman said.
''I don't see self-help groups as antiprofessional.  They complement the
professions.''

But the clearing houses do not judge the quality or the effectiveness of any
particular group. It is up the consumer to decide whether it is worthwhile.
People who are suffering from serious psychological problems should know that if
they rely solely on self-help groups, they will not receive professional
diagnoses, referrals or treatment.

''In terms of mental illness, a self-help group can provide practical
down-to-earth advice that you might get from a Dutch uncle,'' said Dr. Robert J.
Campbell, the director of Gracie Square Hospital and former vice president of
the American Psychiatric Association. ''A group can be a helpful accessory
service. But you don't want a group that will delude you into believing you are
being helped, while your underlying disease progresses along its downward
course. I think you should go to a professional first.''

Certain self-help groups, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, established in the
1930's, have a solid reputation among professional groups.  Some are organized
at or by professional institutions, such as Forward Face, a group for
craniofacial disease patients and their families at the Institute for
Reconstructive Plastic Surgery in Manhattan.

Two years ago the Victims Service Agency in New York City, a nonprofit
organization that helps victims of crimes, brought together clients whose
children had been killed in homicides. Without much planning, a self-help group
was born.

''The moment they all sat around together they found it enormously satisfying,''
said Lucy Friedman, the agency's director. ''Most people found that after a year
professionals, friends and even family wouldn't listen anymore. They learned
that it was O.K. to be angry, that rage was appropriate.''

The group, called Parents of Murdered Children, meets on a regular basis. It is
one of seven self-help groups listed by the New York Clearing House that deal
with the death of children, parents or spouses.

Huntington Patients Aided

''Self-help groups are the most important things we do for people on a
day-to-day basis,'' said Donald Jones, a spokesman for the Huntington Disease
Association. Also known as Huntington's chorea, the hereditary neurological
disorder usually appears at about age 35 and is eventually fatal.

Mr. Jones said that after being diagnosed as having the disease, victims and
their spouses often suffer severe feelings of guilt for having had children, who
may develop the disease later in life.

''People have feelings they can't express in a doctor's office,'' Mr. Jones
said. ''They need peers to talk to, support from people who are going through
the same thing.''

The New York Clearing House lists self-help groups for people who have been
affected by blindness, burns, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, epilepsy,
colostomies, ileostomiesy, laryngectomies, hemophilia, neurofibromatosis,
strokes and many other health problems. Still other groups have been formed by
people who feel they share a common situation rather than an illness, such as
female film makers, nurses, Soviet Jewish immigrants, single parents, divorced
Roman Catholics and homosexual men and women.

Area Phone Numbers

The telephone numbers of self-help clearing houses in the metropolitan area are:
National/New York City - 212-840-7606.

New Jersey: 800-452-9790 toll free in state, or 201-625-6395.  Long Island -
516-499-8800.

Westchester - 914-347-3620.

Connecticut - 800-842-1501 toll free in state, or 203-789-7645.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAELIS CHARGE PALESTINIAN USE OF MERCENARIES

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1325 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 10


Israel has given United States intelligence officials documents and other
information obtained in Lebanon indicating that mercenaries from India,
Pakistan, Bangladesh and various African nations were fighting with the
Palestine Liberation Organization.

At the same time, the Israelis also gave American officials an account of what
they considered the surprisingly large stores of weapons seized by Israeli
troops in Lebanon. Among those weapons, the Israelis said, were American M-16
rifles that had been sold to Saudi Arabia.

Copies of the documents, most of which were given to President Reagan late last
month by Prime Minister Menachem Begin, were made available here by Israeli
officials.

Links to Terrorism Cited

The documents seem clearly designed to underline the Israeli contention that the
P.L.O. has emerged as an increasingly powerful military force with links to
terrorist organizations and Eastern-bloc nations. The documents offer a glimpse
into some of the P.L.O.'s relationships abroad.

A diary found in Tyre, for example, concerning visitors from foreign countries,
said: ''The comrades from Malawi started their studies (23 June).  ''The
comrades from South Africa have departed (16 May).  ''Final exam for the El
Salvador course (26 February).  ''The comrades from Haiti started their studies
(6 April).  ''A five-member group arrived from Turkey (4 June).''

Many Said to Train Overseas

One battalion list, seized in Sidon, lists the names, rank and military
identification numbers of various Palestinian officers and the overseas training
they received. Many attended military schools in the Soviet Union, China, Cuba
and Algeria. Other lists showed that numerous Palestinian troops took
''sabotage'' and antiaircraft training in Pakistan, armor and engineering
courses in India and airdefense studies in Vietnam and Austria.

One of the more unusual documents is described as a summary of talks between
P.L.O. officials and Soviet diplomats in Moscow, including Foreign Minister
Andrei A. Gromyko. On the Palestinian side, the talks, which took place on Nov.
13, 1979, were led by an official named Abu Amar. In the course of the talks the
P.L.O.  official said that ''no country, except for Syria and Iraq, helps us''
and that the Palestinians faced a ''shortage of everything.''

Mr. Amar also brings up the name of Ramsey Clark several times, noting at one
point that the former United States Attorney General had visited an area
previoulsy attacked by the Israelis.

'Was a Crime'

''Ramsey Clark had determined, after a visit to our area, that what was done
here was a crime,'' Mr. Amar was quoted as telling the Soviet diplomats. ''He
visited al-Nabatiye camp. Only 11 houses remained.''

A State Department official, discussing the apparent use of foreign troops by
the P.L.O., said the United States had already received ''various reports'' of
this but had no direct confirmation. The official said the captured documents
provided by the Israelis seemed ''perfectly authentic.''

One theme that emerges from the documents is the P.L.O.'s preoccupation with
recruitment. One document found in Sidon - dated June 4, 1982, shortly before
the Israeli attack, and signed by Maj.  Abu Atman, staff officer, commander,
September Fallen Regiment - says:

''In keeping with the discussion at the meeting of the military council on 27
May 1982, it was decided to draft the sons of soldiers, as of 1 June 1982 until
30 September 1982, according to the following:

''A. The sons of the military forces' soldiers will be drafted.  ''B. Those
under 12 years of age will not be accepted.  ''C. The monthly pay will be 400
Lebanese pounds.'' That figure is the equivalent of about $76.

Half Said to Be 'Foreigners'

A ranking Israeli military official in Washington voiced ''surprise'' at the
number of ''foreigners'' seized by the Israelis in Lebanon in recent weeks. Of
the 6,000 captured, the officer said, about half were Palestinian.

Although many of the ''foreigners'' held Lebanese passports, there were said to
be at least 400 men from Bangladesh, 60 from Pakistan, 50 from India and troops
from such countries as Mauritania, the Sudan, Niger, Mali, Somalia, Turkey, Sri
Lanka, Algiera, Syria, Jordan and Iraq.

In Washington, Ambassador K.R. Narayanan of India said his Government had seen
reports that there were Indian mercenaries fighting with the P.L.O. but denied
it. ''We have no mercenaries working there, according to our information,'' he
said.

A senior official with the Pakistani Embassy said, ''We don't know whether this
is accurate.'' He added that there were two million Pakistanis in the Middle
East and ''it's quite possible that these Pakistanis were looking for jobs in
Lebanon.''

''To claim that they are mercenaries may not be true,'' he said.  A spokesman
for the Bangladesh Embassy said his Government had ''no knowledge'' of Bengalis
fighting with the P.L.O.

Money Is Said to Be Motive

Israeli officials said that the troops from other countries were paid monthly
wages - the exact amounts are unknown - and that, although some of them were
teen-agers, most were in their 20's.  Israeli officials speculated that
economic, as opposed to ideological, motives spurred the troops to join the
Palestinian forces.

''We can only assume that the motivation was economic difficulties,'' one
Israeli official said. ''The P.L.O. has a great deal of money to spend. These
people came mostly from poor countries. Here they received a salary, food and
clothes.''

Israeli officials denied newspaper reports that Germans and Italians linked to
terrorist groups had been seized, although documents picked up at some base
camps near Beirut indicated some Europeans had been trained there. There was no
evidence of Americans working with the P.L.O., the Israelis said.

In one document, regarding the training in Bulgaria of platoon commanders with
the ''Palestine Liberation Army,'' a soldier identified as Mahmud Muhamed Alrua
criticized some ''unpleasant incidents and unbecoming behavior'' of nine fellow
Palestinians.

''The undersigned is worried and condemns the trainees' behavior - the bad
feeling that will remain with their hosts and the bad impressions that they made
when they complained and blamed the socialist Eastern camp and its 'so-called'
assistance to the Arab Liberation forces,'' the signer said. Precisely what he
was complaining about remained unclear.

Sidon Called 'Excellent Area'

Several documents focused in detail on attacks against Israeli towns, and others
cited the Palestinian strategy of placing troops in populated areas. One report,
dated May 28, 1981, from the ''Palestine National Liberation Front,'' said:

''The built-up areas in the town of Sidon and surrounding villages are excellent
areas for shelter. The trees enable complete camouflage and concealment for
vehicles and personnel.

''Positions should be taken up in the built-up areas in Sidon, the refugee camps
and villages.'' Another message, stamped ''Top Secret/Urgent,'' and sent from
''Artillery Corps Commander, Joint Forces, South,'' was dated July 21, 1981. It
listed targets in Israel, the units that would perform their artillery mission
and how many rounds - in all cases, 20 - were to be expended. Among the targets
near the border was ''public place,'' Kiriat Shmoneh, Metullah and Nahariya.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SCHOLARS IN THE MIDDLE OF BATTLES OVER INFORMATION

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2491 words


IT may have failed to persuade Congress that the Freedom of Information Act is
too free, but that hasn't stopped the Reagan Adminstration from attempting to
correct what it regards as the excesses of open government spawned by the law.
An Executive Order on Classification promulgated this spring, for example, gives
officials broader authority to withhold information on the ground of national
security. Budget cuts are restricting the compilation and dispersal of
Government statistics and slowing declassification of documents at the National
Archives. And last month, Mr. Reagan signed a measure making it a crime to
disclose the identity of covert agents. These moves have troubled press and
public affairs groups, but they are especially vexing to Federal historians, who
must mediate between the often conflicting demands of the agencies they work
for, outsiders who come to them for information and, of course, history itself.
At a recent meeting of The Society for History in the Federal Government, Allen
Weinstein, a historian and professor at Georgetown University and executive
editor of The Washington Quarterly, Alfred Goldberg, chief historian in the
office of the Secretary of Defense, and Quinlan J. Shea Jr., former director of
the Office of Privacy and Information Appeal and currently director and counsel
for the Justice Department's Executive Office for United States Trustees,
discussed the dilemmas confronting Federal historians. Excerpts follow.

Allen Weinstein

Life was once much simpler for Federal historians. Classification laws were
tighter, there was a long-standing disinterest on the part of the American
public in their work, even among their academic brethren. There was also a sense
of bureaucratic detachment from the broader flow of historians. At one point,
for better or worse, obscurity was its own reward, at least morally, in the
sense that 10, 15, 20 years ago, Federal historians knew where their allegiance
lay. They knew the ground rules, the preconceptions, the assumptions governing
their behavior with archives, with colleagues in Government or with researchers
from the outside. And there was, for some, a certain holistic attractiveness to
this process. But, in W.B. Yeats's words, 'all has changed utterly.'

Suddenly, Federal historians are being thrust into the middle of public debate
on various issues, ranging from Watergate to the Vietnam War to spy cases to
business machinations at the highest international level. And the effects of
this change have been rather heavy.

The question of whether or not to tell and what to tell in any given record has
become an acute dilemma, and leads me to a phenomenon I refer to as the
'greening' of Government historians, and of archivists as well.

At a time when Federal historians are as likely to see a Bob Woodward or a
Seymour Hersh as an academic colleague racing for first use, or first strike, at
any records, the archives are proving to be a gold mine. At a time when this
person arrives who shares your concerns and wants to find out what is happening,
you find yourself walking a fine line between the concern for history from the
inside and the growing obsession with historical records on the outside.

What has the model for many Government historians become? One model is the
investigative reportorial model, which stresses the expose, pursues the question
of falsification, wrongful destruction or obfuscation of a reasonably factual
record.

Now, honoring the integrity of the historical record is the primary obligation
for all of us. Therefore, maximizing the measure of openness of information is
also an obligation. But no Federal historian would be a Federal historian
without recognizing an obligation to examine the legitimate concerns and
purposes of one's employers in either the release or the non-release of records.
Unlike other historians, Government historians are often both researcher and
administrator of the records being researched.

In Washington today, however, within the ranks of many younger Government
historians - and some not so young - antinomianism is widespread. By this, I
refer to a change from a presumption held by many through the late 1960's and
early 1970's that one's primary responsibility was to the agency or to the
department with which one was identified, and through that to the Government at
large.

There exists now a great question regarding the Government historian's
relationship to any given set of individuals in power and the degree to which
that relationship is defined in a negative context. The importance of this
question has been enhanced in part because over the last 10 years, there has
evolved in this country a struggle for control of the American past. It is a
contest that over the last generation has turned the past itself and the
understanding of the past into a battleground for debate over policy and
personnel.

If you picked up The Washington Post recently, for example, you would have seen
a piece on the role of former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Alexander
M. Haig Jr., then his associate, in wiretapping journalists during the Nixon
years. In his memoirs, Mr.  Kissinger has offered his own interpretation of
those events. Who among us could argue that what is at issue in these pieces is
dead and buried and has no immediate implications for the current
Administration?

What I'm suggesting is that our statesmen must write like politicians, with two
eyes cocked for the posse of critical scholars and journalists at their backs,
which creates a problem. For to some extent, these memoirs dilute the historical
record in the name of providing effective apologias, which leaves the Federal
historian trying to play umpire. And this goes to the heart of one's historical
judgment of an episode. I see no way out of the dilemma.

Quinlan J. Shea Jr.

What I call the 'cooking of records' inside the Government has gone on as long
as there has been any government anywhere. By cooking, I'm talking about
falsifying the records in one way or another.

Let us agree that an important distinction between the outside historian and the
inside historian is that the outside historian must deal with the records as
they are, while the inside historian should be concerned with the records as
they ought to be; namely, with a truthful and accurate record of the history
those records purport to reflect. Now, let's talk about that historical record.

It is axiomatic that there really are very few honest-to-God historical smoking
guns, by which I mean a nice, tidy, single document that has the whole truth,
nothing but the truth, and tells you everything there is to know about whatever
it is you want to know. But the falsification of the historical record makes the
searching, the weighing and confronting, the piecing together of evidence in
search of the truth, more difficult.

A little story I like to tell about this concerns the initials on documents
inside the F.B.I. under Mr. Hoover. Proposed action papers came from the bowels
and worked their way up through a complex hierarchy of approval and review and
finally would get to the director's desk. On the way up, everyone who looked at
it put his initials on the document.

If it then came back from the director approved, fine, a historian could look at
that document today and have a decent chance of knowing who saw it and initialed
or commented on it. But if some Jovian thunderbolt came back from the director's
office, the historian today runs into an interesting problem - disappearing
initials. For as that paper came back down the chain, all the initials would
disappear - except for the poor folks who started it.

What about the real substance of the document? Let's talk about the F.B.I.
again, and about the secret, sensitive internal records that affected the
important decisions of the Hoover era. At the time they were created, no one
outside the F.B.I. dreamed those documents would be seen outside the family, the
F.B.I. family that is. And even then, these documents weren't subjectively
honest. God knows they weren't objectively honest, but they weren't even
subjectively honest, principally because of the posturing, toadying and
posterior protecting that went on inside the bureau under Mr. Hoover.

Times change, you say? No they don't. The problem has gotten worse and for
reasons that are rightly or wrongly tied to the Freedom of Information and
Privacy Acts - the access statutes.

Government records can also be destroyed. In 1976, for example, it was
recommended that the Justice Department records on antiwar activists be
destroyed, that their continued preservation and maintenance was too dangerous,
that they could harm the people who had been involved - most of whom were
engaged in legitimate legal activities. What was not in any of those documents
was the existence of a very strong desire to protect Federal, state and local
agencies and personnel from the lawsuits that could have followed had this stuff
gotten into the hands of the people whose activities had been surveilled.

We wanted very much to preserve the programmatic record, the bottom line. And
Harold Tyler, who was then a Deputy Attorney General, went along with this.
True, we decided to get rid of the individually identifiable stuff so that it
isn't sitting around rotting to do damage to people. But we kept all the program
materials, so in the future, people can see just how paranoid the Government
became during that period, and how pervasive was the surveillance of people
engaged in lawful activities.

So, those who wanted to unwrite history in that case lost. But if you believe
this isn't happening today, that valuable records aren't getting trashed and
that ignoble motives aren't involved, you must also believe in the Tooth Fairy
and Santa Claus.

Alfred Goldberg

Let me venture here a few observations and propositions about ethics in the
historial profession generally, and among Government historians in particular.

First, ethics concerns standards of conduct among people and social groups. It
therefore concerns social structures. We are concerned with two such structures:
Government and the historical profession.  Second, we're not talking about a
single systematic code of moral principles. We're talking about a body of
beliefs, about right and wrong, and about standards of behavior in which
integrity is the central issue.

Third, we're not dealing in what is absolutely right and absolutely wrong. New
problems arise and ethical standards must be redefined to keep them relevant to
contemporary situations. Many professional associations have formal codes of
ethics. For the most part they've had little effect on members' behavior.
Enforcement is by selfdiscipline and cooperation, not by law.

The historical profession, through its association, has not adopted ethics
codes. We're therefore entering the domain of obedience to the unenforceable,
where persons are responsible for their own right doing. Finally, Government
historians are divided into three parts: permanent staff, consultants and
contractors.

Let me now mention several dilemmas that Government historians may encounter.
The foremost concerns the role of the Government historian. Can he function as
freely and independently as his academic colleague? In general, the answer must
be no. There are, of course, legitimate questions about the extent to which many
academic historians are free and independent to do their work. Still, Government
historians are subject to more constraints than their colleagues in academia.
And this has caused them to be viewed with more than a modicum of distrust and
suspicion.

The Government historian is sometimes confronted by what can best be described
as conflict-of-interest. It is conflict among loyalty to the Government, loyalty
to the public and loyalty to the profession; between the narrow interests of the
institution and wider interests of society and scholarship.

We're all aware of the chief indictment against Government historians: that
they're subject to constraints and censorship, which prevent them from telling
the truth, or the whole truth; that they're subject to bias and special
pleading; that they're court historians.  Occasionally, there is substance in
these charges.

But let us consider another aspect of conflict of interest that is more subtle,
and perhaps more insidious - autocensorship. It derives from the unconscious
absorption through the pores, so to speak, of the ideas, attitudes,
predelictions, biases, loyalties of the institutional environment.

The British historian Herbert Butterfield spoke from close observation of the
British experience. He said it is essential for everybody to be aware that the
problem of censorship today has been transformed into the phenomenon of
autocensorship, a matter to be borne in mind even when the people involved are
only indirectly the servants of government or are attached by no further tie
than the enjoyment of privileges that might be taken away.

The dilemma now is how to guard against the silken cord, how to remain aware of
the danger and minimize its effect on one's thoughts and work. It is a dilemma
that requires an unusual degree of introspection, the questioning of one's
motives at almost every step of the historical process. Few are capable of it,
even fewer can sustain it. The closer to the throne, the greater the danger.
Witness the experience of the White House historians in residence in the 1960's.

Another dilemma involves access to Government records. Government historians
often benefit from first access, especially to classified documents, which they
can publish and also use to enhance their positions in the profession. Then,
there are Government historians who consider themselves the guardians of
documents and who sometimes oppose or hinder granting access to outside
scholars.

In cases such as these, most of us can distinguish right from wrong, but not all
of us have the courage to do what is right. We must confront our own consciences
and weigh our integrity and professionalism in the balance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF visitors to archives listen to Watergate tapes
PHOTO OF Alfred Goldberg PHOTO OF Allen Weinstein PHOTO OF Quinlan J. Shea Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANATOMY OF THE NUCLEAR PROTEST

BYLINE: By Fox Butterfield

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5156 words


Fox Butterfield is chief of The New York Times bureau in Boston.
Randall Forsberg was born in Alabama with ''a few Georgia plantations ravaged by
Sherman's troops floating around in my past.'' She graduated from Barnard
College in the mid-1960's and became an English teacher at the proper Baldwin
School in Bryn Mawr, Pa. There was little in her background to suggest that one
day she would produce the idea that has turned the esoteric art of nuclear-arms
control into an explosive popular issue.

Alan F. Kay graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, served in
Army intelligence during World War II and got a Ph.D. in math at Harvard. He
founded and eventually sold two highly profitable electronics companies, one of
which worked for the Pentagon, before retiring to his home in Weston, a
green-carpeted expanse of multiacre houses that is Boston's wealthiest suburb.
There was little in his biography to suggest that he would provide the first key
infusion of cash that enabled Miss Forsberg to translate her potent idea into
action.

It was in 1980 that the retired businessman heard the former schoolteacher, now
a student of the arms race, make her proposal. She was calling for a freeze - a
mutual and verifiable freeze by the United States and the Soviet Union -on the
testing, production and deployment of all nuclear weapons. It was a very simple
idea - too simple, some critics contended, since it did not allow for the
staggering complexities of the arms race. But Mr. Kay recognized that its
simplicity could also be a strength: It sidestepped the old hardto-understand
arguments about MIRV's, megatonnage, throw weight and inspection that had long
baffled the public. So Mr. Kay contributed the money that set the freeze
campaign in motion - $5,000, to help organize the first national conference of
peace groups in Washington in March 1981, where it was decided to concentrate on
promoting the freeze as a common strategy. He would eventually add a quarter of
a million dollars, spread among several antinuclear-war groups.

In the year since that first meeting, the freeze idea has reached what some
activists like to call critical mass, borrowing from the lexicon of atomic
physics. A poll last spring by The New York Times and CBS News found that 72
percent of Americans favor a nuclear freeze. It has been endorsed by hundreds of
town meetings, dozens of city councils and nine state legislatures. Last month,
it was approved by the House Foreign Affairs Committee in a nonbinding
resolution.

The freeze idea has provided a spark, but it is only part of a larger story, an
extraordinary grass-roots, nationwide movement to stop the nuclear arms race.
The movement has even influenced President Reagan, leading him to soften his
longtime opposition to arms-control talks and inspiring him to offer several
sweeping proposals to negotiate sharp reductions in nuclear arsenals with the
Soviet Union.

The movement's scope was dramatically illustrated by last month's disarmament
rally in New York City, in which an estimated 700,000 people participated,
making it the largest political demonstration in the history of the United
States. And there are a growing number of politicians in Washington who believe
the antinuclear arms issue may play an important role in this November's
Congressional elections and the 1984 Presidential contest. Two weeks after the
New York rally, the Democratic Party, at its midterm convention in Philadelphia,
endorsed a carefully worded freeze resolution that had been drafted by aides to
the party's leading Presidential contenders.

The profile of this latest of protests is a far cry from that of the powerful
antiwar demonstrations of the late 1960's. The leaders are not bearded radicals
but middle-aged and middle-class men and women, many accustomed to positions of
responsibility and prestige.  They include doctors, lawyers, nurses, scientists,
teachers and priests. Their chief battles have been fought, not in street
confrontations, but at sermons and lectures, in books and pamphlets.

The history of the new movement offers special insights into the American
political process and the state of the public mind and character. It also
suggests how disparate ideas and people can be successfully joined, given good
timing, a willingness to learn the hard lessons of modern political organizing
and the presence of a powerful catalyst. In this case, the catalyst was a
President whose continuous preaching about the need for a massive buildup of
American nuclear forces aroused the fears of an already anxious nation.

The anxiety began with the scientists who built the bomb and then sought to
place it under international controls. It surfaced publicly in the late 1950's
and early 60's with the controversy over fallout from nuclear testing in the
atmosphere. And it reappeared in the late 60's with public worry over the
Pentagon's plans to build an antiballistic missile system in heavily populated
areas.

These movements faded once they seemed to achieve their objectives, but they
left a heritage of fear about nuclear peril. In 1978, a small peace group, the
Institute for World Order, commissioned Yankelovich, Skelly and White, the
polling organization, to study why more people don't join peace groups.
Yankelovich's conclusion was that there was both widespread ignorance about what
nuclear weapons do and deep latent concern about them.

''They became very interested in the problem and began talking about where can
we sign up to stop this madness,'' recalled Greg Martire, a vice president of
the Yankelovich organization. ''They were not unaware of the dangers of nuclear
war, but they had felt it was beyond their control.''

Based on this study and another Yankelovich did in 1980 for a second peace
group, the polling organization predicted that many people would join up if the
issue was explained to them in understandable terms and if they could be shown
how they could be effective. Today, speaking of the sudden growth of the
antinuclear-arms movement, Mr. Martire says, ''It doesn't surprise me. When we
wrote those reports two years ago, it was clear the potential was there.''
Bernard T. Feld is a 62-year-old professor of physics at M.I.T. His gentle
manner, broad head and shoulder-length graying hair give him a resemblance to
Einstein.  Sitting in his sunlit office, he recalled his early career as an
assistant to both Enrico Fermi and Leo Szilard; he took part in producing the
initial chain reaction at the University of Chicago in 1942. ''I was involved in
the original sin,'' he said, ''and I have spent a large part of the rest of my
life atoning.''

Soon after the United States dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in
August l945, Mr. Feld left his Government research job to push for the creation
in Washington of a civilian nuclear agency. He also helped establish the
Federation of American Scientists, originally named the Federation of Atomic
Scientists, the first group dedicated to controlling nuclear weapons.

Another M.I.T. scientist who participated in both the development of military
hardware and arms control is Jerome B. Wiesner, who was president of the
Cambridge school from 1971 to 1980. A pioneer in radar, he began his efforts to
slow down the arms race in 1957 after President Eisenhower asked him to start
work on civil defense and then design a system to measure Soviet compliance with
a nuclear-test moratorium. ''I became convinced we were running an arms race
with ourselves,'' the craggy-faced, gray-haired Mr. Wiesner said. ''The big
inventions of the arms race have all been ours: the A-bomb, the H-bomb,
intercontinental missiles, solid fuel rockets, high-accuracy guidance systems
for missiles, MIRV's (multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicles),
cruise missiles.''

In 1961, Mr. Wiesner was named President Kennedy's science adviser and proceeded
to urge the President to negotiate a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty with
the Russians. ''There was a lot of public pressure at the time, with women's
groups picketing in front of the White House every day,'' Mr. Wiesner
remembered. ''People were very upset about strontium 90 in their milk; it was
something tangible, not just some vague fear about what might happen in the
future. Occasionally, when I'd go into the President's office, he'd say, 'Your
women are out there again.' ''

But President Kennedy's talks with the Russians on a comprehensive treaty that
would have barred testing underground as well as in the atmosphere foundered on
the number of annual on-site inspections each side would accept. The United
States demanded seven, the Russians would permit only three. In the end, at
Nikita Khrushchev's initiative, Mr. Wiesner said, the two sides agreed to settle
for an accord prohibiting tests in the atmosphere, dropping the stickier issue
of underground experiments.

Mr. Wiesner now feels ''there was a great opportunity lost in 1963. If a
comprehensive test ban treaty had been signed, it would have been more
significant than SALT in arresting things. At the time, we knew our weapons were
considerably better than those of the Russians.''

Henry W. Kendall, yet another M.I.T. physicist and one-time consultant to the
Defense Department, helped found the Union of Concerned Scientists in 1969 to
lead the battle against the ABM. He was elated when he won that struggle, but
increasingly frustrated as he watched public interest in disarmament decline
while the weapons race intensified. As Professor Kendall, a soft-spoken man
dressed in an old dark gray wool suit and moccasins, analyzed the situation, the
average citizen was put off by the ''forbidding complexity of nuclear arms. They
have been hidden behind the combined shroud of technology and national
security.''

During the 1970's, his organization, with headquarters in Harvard Square,
switched its focus to the then more popular issue of nuclear power. The Union of
Concerned Scientists grew rapidly, and by the time of the serious accident at
the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in 1979, the group had 100,000
contributors. But Professor Kendall was dissatisfied. ''The dangers of nuclear
power are so small compared with nuclear war,'' he explained, ''it seemed to me
like a tangential issue.'' So in 1980 he pushed to return the organization to
its original purpose, nuclear-arms control.

His timing was excellent. ''The real hard-line voice about nuclear weapons had
emerged and started to really scare people,'' he said.  ''There was Reagan
talking about fighting and winning a limited nuclear war and handing out his
laundry list of building up every conceivable nuclear weapon because he claimed
we were behind the Russians. It brought out the latent anxiety.''

Basing its strategy on one of the Yankelovich studies, the Union of Concerned
Scientists set about organizing a series of teach-ins at what the group thought
would be two dozen colleges last Nov. 11, Veterans Day. Eventually, 150 schools
participated. ''We hit a nerve,'' a professor at the University of Texas said
afterward. ''And this is Texas, not the Northeast.'' The Veterans Day events
proved an important turning point, attracting widespread attention in the press
and from television, focusing still more public interest on the issue.

While Professor Kendall in Cambridge was trying to reorient the Union of
Concerned Scientists back to nuclear war, Dr. Bernard Lown was part of a similar
attempt across the Charles River in Boston - with a group he had started in his
living room in 1961, Physicians flr Social Responsibility. One of the world's
most distinguished cardiologists and a professor at the Harvard School of Public
Health, Dr. Lown had pioneered the use of coronary-care units and much of the
technology to help prevent sudden death from heart attack. An intense,
articulate and precise man, he became concerned about the arms race after
hearing a lecture on nuclear holocaust in 1959. He proceeded to organize a group
of fellow physicians and to publish a series of papers on the medical
consequences of thermonuclear war in the New England Journal of Medicine, one of
the country's leading medical bulletins, in 1962. It remains the classic work on
the total inadequacy of any medical response in an American city hit by a
nuclear bomb.

After the partial Test Ban Treaty in 1963, however, the physicians' group
atrophied. Seated in the wood-panneled Harvard Club in Boston's Back Bay
section, Dr. Lown recalled that the organization was not really revived until
1980, when Mr. Reagan's campaign rhetoric rekindled the old fears. Dr. Lown
calculated that doctors might accomplish what the physicists had never been able
to do - arouse the public. ''After all,'' he said, ''if you have a serious
problem, where do you go? In a secular age, the doctor has become priest, rabbi,
counselor. Then, too, the doctor brings all the credentials of a scientist.''

One of the key new activists in the Physicians for Social Responsibility was Dr.
Helen M. Caldicott, an outspoken Australianborn pediatrician. She had been
passionately involved in the antinuclear movement since she read the novel ''On
the Beach'' as a teen-ager in Melbourne. The book, set in Australia, describes
the end of the world in a nuclear war. She became president of the group in 1979
and resigned her practice and a teaching job at the Harvard Medical School.

Since then, Dr. Caldicott, who is 43 years old, has toured the country showing
the film ''The Last Epidemic,'' which describes in chilling detail exactly what
would happen to San Francisco in a nuclear attack. She sees her work as a
logical extension of the practice of medicine: ''It is the ultimate form of
preventive medicine. If you have a disease and there is no cure for it, you work
on prevention.''

The Physicians for Social Responsibility has increased its membership from 3,000
a year ago to 16,000 today. Thomas A. Halsted, the group's director, who once
worked for the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency under the Carter
Administration, says that it is now gaining more than 300 new adherents a week.
The doctors' main organizational tactic until recently has been their careful
field work, conducting day-long educational symposiums for groups of 1,500 to
3,000 doctors in a dozen cities around the country. But P.S.R., as it is called,
has also begun adopting direct-mail appeals.

This year, the physicians' group will only send out about one million letters,
Mr. Halsted said (as many as a million at a time are sent out by some of the
more sophisticated political action committees in Washington). The organization
has been getting back about $4 for every $1 it spends on its new mailings, he
added. And its own budget has increased from $400,000 last year to about $1.6
million this year. Its staff of 24 full-time employees has just moved to new
quarters above a Woolworth's store in Cambridge and has opened another small
office in Washington. To aid its work, the group has acquired its own computer
and also rents time on a bigger computer system at Harvard.  The success of the
scientists and doctors groups has been shared by dozens of other such
organizations, including High Technology Professionals for Peace, Communicators
for Nuclear Disarmament, Educators for Social Responsibility and Musicians
Against Nuclear Arms. Alan Sherr, who is president of the Lawyers Alliance for
Nuclear Arms Control, believes that organizing by guild has been essential to
the movement's success.

Mr. Sherr quit his job as general counsel to the Massachusetts Office of Human
Services last January to open a full-time office for the lawyers' group; his new
office looks out over Boston's Granary Burial Ground, where Paul Revere and Sam
Adams are among those interred. The guild approach, he said, ''avoids the
divisiveness of the Vietnam War protests'' -a key factor in convincing older,
conservative professionals to join the movement. During the 1960's, such men and
women had no desire to be associated with the hippies and the flag-burning that
were so prominent in the peace movement of that day. Their feelings are
different toward telephone calls or letters from their peers.

Another important factor in convincing middle-class and middle-aged citizens to
join the movement have been American churches - particularly the Roman Catholic
Church, which has experienced a critical transformation.

According to Bishop Thomas J. Gumbleton, Roman Catholic auxiliary Bishop of
Detroit, the change began during the Vietnam War, ''though not many Bishops
publicly identified with it at the time.'' In 1968, he recalled, the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops had written a pastoral letter outlining the
possibility ''of a conflict between a person's conscience and what the
Government asks you to do.'' This, Bishop Gumbleton said, ''highlighted a
problem that had been there for many Catholics. We had a heritage as an
immigrant church. We tended to overcompensate for this by our patriotism. As
Francis Cardinal Spellman used to say, 'My country, right or wrong.' ''

But as the Vietnam War continued, the bishops began to re-examine the old
arguments concerning a just war. And, as Bishop Gumbleton pointed out, the
church's re-evaluation of the relationship between the individual and the state
intensified with the Supreme Court decision allowing abortion in 1973.

In November 1980, with the collapse of the SALT II treaty and Mr.  Reagan's
campaign rhetoric about the need to increase America's nuclear arsenal, the
Catholic bishops conference began work on a pastoral letter on the arms race. It
is due to be issued this fall.  Bishop Gumbleton, who is head of the American
branch of Pax Christi, a Roman Catholic peace group, would not comment on its
contents. But he referred to a statement made last year by Archbishop John R.
Roach, president of the bishops conference, in which he proclaimed that ''the
most dangerous moral issue in the public order confronting us is the arms
race.'' The nuclear freeze has been endorsed by 133 of the nation's 280 active
Roman Catholic bishops.  An important facet of the peace movement has been the
degree to which Boston and Cambridge have been its breeding ground.  With the
exception of Ground Zero, in Washington, and the church organizations, most of
the major antinuclear-war groups have their headquarters in the Boston area or
started there, including the freeze campaign itself. That is a traditional role
for an area that has long been a center of liberal political thought and
activity. And Bernard Feld of M.I.T. offers another explanation. He talks about
''the critical-mass effect'': ''We have so many universities around here that
people don't feel isolated and can talk to each other without feeling strange.''

For Randall Forsberg, though, the transformation from privateschool teacher to
peace activist began elsewhere. It was in 1967, at the height of the Vietnam
War, that Miss Forsberg married a young Swedish student and moved to Stockholm.
The Swedish Government had decided one contribution it could make to world peace
would be to monitor the arms race. So, in 1966, it had established the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute. Because the organizers wanted an
international staff, Miss Forsberg was able to walk in off the street and get a
job as a typist. (The institute was organized with the stated goal of providing
independent analysis of the United States-Soviet balance of power. Within the
last year, it has become a target of criticism, accused of issuing findings that
tend to favor the Soviet point of view.)

Miss Forsberg's introduction to the complexity of the nuclearweapons race came
when she began reading what she was typing.  She couldn't believe that the 1963
talks on a comprehensive test ban treaty had broken down over the dispute
between Washington's demand for seven on-site inspections a year and the
Russians' limit of three. Why not compromise on five, she wondered. Soon she was
writing her own research papers on the arms race.

In 1974, divorced and the mother of a 5-year-old daughter, Miss Forsberg moved
to Boston where she started graduate work in arms control at M.I.T. A few years
later, she set up her own small agency, the Institute for Defense and
Disarmament Studies, in suburban Brookline.

Miss Forsberg describes how she arrived at her freeze proposal: ''I came to the
conclusion that after the failure of the comprehensive test ban talks in 1963,
the arms-conrol experts gave up on complete disarmament, even on substantial
reductions in nuclear and conventional forces. What replaced it was the idea of
managing a permanent arms race, the goal being to keep things relatively equal.
The buzz word was stability, to avoid destabilizing weapons.'' Then when
President Reagan began talking about a $240 billion buildup in MX missiles,
cruise missiles and Trident submarines, she became convinced that ''the United
States was giving up even this limited goal.'' The answer, Miss Forsberg felt,
was an idea that would be simple enough to involve the public and that would
actually lead to reductions in nuclear stockpiles and stop the introduction of
ever newer, more lethal weapons - the mutual and verifiable freeze. And that
would be equitable, she felt, because she was convinced, as are many supporters
of the freeze today, that the United States nuclear arsenal is at least the
equal of the Soviet arsenal, notwithstanding President Reagan's claims to the
contrary.

Miss Forsberg herself believes the freeze idea has been ''the single most
important factor'' in the sudden growth of the movement over the past year. She
and other activists cite several additional key factors that have stimulated the
movement: the Senate's failure to ratify the 1979 SALT II Treaty limiting
strategic offensive nuclear weapons, President Reagan's talk about fighting and
surviving a limited nuclear war and the Reagan Administration's push for a
vastly increased Pentagon budget at a time when the economy is in recession.
Each of these increased anxiety to the point where, for many people, Miss
Forsberg feels, curbing the arms race no longer seemed a partisan political
issue.

She does not, however, believe the explosion of the peace movement in Europe
over the last two years has been important for its American counterpart. ''The
Europeans are reacting to a very specific problem,'' she said. ''They don't want
new American nuclear weapons deployed in their backyards, making them a target
for the Russians.  But this is not the issue for Americans; they aren't
particularly concerned about what the Western Europeans are feeling.''

Yet, as the American public has awakened to the antinuclear-weapons question,
each new event has added to the movement's momentum, like the publication in The
New Yorker of Jonathan Schell's series which has now become a best-selling book,
''The Fate of the Earth.'' In California, Harold Willens, a Los Angeles
millionaire, has led a drive which got more than 700,000 signatures, far more
than needed, to put the freeze on the state's November ballot. And during one
week in April, Ground Zero got a million Americans to watch films, listen to
debates or circulate petitions in 650 towns and cities, 350 colleges and more
than 1,200 high schools.  Where is the movement headed? Democratic and
Republican politicians agree that the antinuclear campaign is becoming far more
partisan and political. They disagree about how significant a role it will play
this fall and in the 1984 elections.

Patrick H. Caddell, the Carter Administration's pollster, said the mammoth rally
in New York tended to confirm his conviction that ''the antinuclear-arms
movement is the most significant movement since the environmental movement in
the late 1960's.'' In Mr.  Caddell's view, the disarmament issue may not come to
a head until after November, but he sees it as a long-term movement that is
bound to have a strong political impact.

On the other hand, Lance Tarrance Jr., a pollster in Houston who works mainly
for Republicans, discounts the surveys, which indicate that three-quarters of
the American people favor a freeze. When his interviewers go on to ask people if
they want a freeze that would leave the United States militarily behind the
Soviet Union, ''many people fall off the bandwagon,'' he said. ''Support for the
freeze is not firm; it won't hold up under stress.''

But the movement has clearly had an impact on President Reagan, affecting his
policy if not his personal thinking. The first significant change took place
back in November, not long after the widespread teach-ins on Veterans Day, when
he proposed to the Soviet leader Leonid I. Brezhnev that Washington would forgo
placing its new Pershing 2 and cruise missiles on European soil if Moscow would
scrap its SS-20 missiles, already targeted on Western Europe.

Mr. Reagan appeared to be trying to outflank the burgeoning antinuclear-arms
movement by being conciliatory instead of combative. Then last month he signaled
a major switch away from his hard-line policy of linking arms control talks with
Soviet aggression around the world. In a commencement speech at Eureka College
in Illinois, he proposed a two-step plan in which the United States and the
Soviet Union would initially reduce by one-third their inventories of nuclear
warheads on land- and sea-based ballistic missiles.

Yet many peace activists remain skeptical about Mr. Reagan's sincerity in
wanting nuclear-arms control. At the same time he was making his latest offer to
Moscow, the Pentagon, under Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, was
drafting a five-year plan for fighting nuclear war against the Soviet Union
''over a prolonged period.'' It has also not gone unnoticed that Mr. Reagan's
choice to head the United States delegation to the new talks on reducing
strategic arms, which began in Geneva on June 29, is a conservative, retired
Army lieutenant general, Edward L. Rowny. General Rowny, who resigned from the
American SALT II negotiating team to protest what he felt were too great
concessions by the Carter Administration to the Soviet Union, has charged that a
freeze would lock the United States into an inferior position.

Despite the rapid spread of the antinuclear-arms movement, there is still far
from a consensus about how the United States should proceed or whether the
freeze proposal itself is a good plan. More than 25 different resolutions to end
the arms race have been introduced in Congress, and a freeze resolution was
rejected by the Republicancontrolled Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

Even some of the most active members of the movement worry that the freeze is
too simplistic and impractical. Roger C. Molander, the founder of Ground Zero
and a former National Security Council staff member, asks: ''Freeze what? Does
it mean freezing every last vehicle that is rigged up to deliver nuclear
weapons, like the A-6's on aircraft carriers?''

''The freeze campaign is a good way for people to express their concern about
the dangers of nuclear war,'' he continues, ''but the lesson we can learn from
the last 20 years is that focusing exclusively on arms-control agreements or the
development of new weapons is not enough. The hard thing to face up to is that
you can't get real arms control without improving relations with the Soviet
Union.''

Mr. Molander is concerned that Americans are deceiving themselves by
concentrating only on affecting United States Government policy.  ''There is a
little too much of the feeling that the whole problem is in this country and
that if we can just get our act together, the Russians will go along.''

But many of the activists are heartened by their sudden success, particularly as
seen in the huge New York rally. Joan Baez, the folk singer and a leader of
civil-rights and anti-Vietnam War protests of the 1960's, remarked in New York:
''I have been on peace marches since I was probably 14 years old. But never in
all those years did I feel the kind of encouragement I do now.'' Dr. James
Muller, secretary of the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear
War and an assistant professor of cardiology at the Harvard Medical School, was
euphoric after the big rally. ''It was far more people than we expected,'' he
said.

Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, one of the original
sponsors of the freeze resolution in the House, is also optimistic. A tall,
lanky, youthful-looking man of 36, with modishly long brown hair and clear blue
eyes, Mr. Markey believes that ''freeze workers are going to be the replacements
this fall for the Moral Majority in the 1980 election. They may provide the
margin in close contests and make them flip-flop, perhaps 20 to 30 seats.''

''My belief,'' Mr. Markey added, ''is that Reagan was not put on earth by God to
bring us supply-side economics. His role is to sit down with Brezhnev and end
the arms race, to do for nuclear arms what Nixon did for China. My role is to
create the atmospherics, the public and Congressional support, that will make
Reagan the greatest man who ever lived.'' Mr. Markey paused, then went on with a
smile.  ''He can reject it, of course, but we will have tried.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of anti-nuclear advocates Feld and Sherr (Page 38)
photo of Randall Forsberg (Page 17) photo of anti-nuclear rally in New York
(Page 16) Photo of residents of Leyden, Mass.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION WEEK

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 262 words


Soldiers of Misfortune
On Thursday at 10 P.M., ABC will present ''Vietnam Requiem.'' A couple of weeks
before broadcast time, the title of the documentary was more informative: ''VIPs
- Vets in Prison.'' The rechristened hour-long film tells of five first
offenders who were among some of our military's best fighting men during the
Vietnam War. Most of the five are multiple-medal winners, heroes of America's
longest war, and young - the average Vietnam combat soldier was 19, compared
with 26 for the G.I. of World War II.

One of the five is Albert Alan Dobbs, who was 18 when he was in Vietnam. Mr.
Dobbs was awarded three Bronze Stars, three commendation medals, the Vietnam
Cross of Gallantry and the Purple Heart. He is, in addition, one of nearly a
fourth of all those American soldiers and marines who saw ''heavy'' combat
overseas and were, after discharge, arrested for a criminal offense. He is now
in prison in Louisiana for attempted armed robbery.

In a departure from customary network practice, ''Vietnam Requiem'' was not
produced by ABC News but by an independent filmmaking organization, John Korty
Films. Richard Richter, senior producer for the ABC News Closeup documentary
division, says it is hoped that the film will serve as ''a sort of consciousness
raising, making people aware of an aspect of the Vietnam War that I imagine a
lot of them hadn't thought about in this way -the extremity of effect and the
extremity of reaction.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: DRAWING

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPIES AND LOVERS AND ACTION

BYLINE: By ALAN CHEUSE; Alan Cheuse is the author of ''Candace & Other Stories''
and a recently published novel, ''The Bohemians.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words


THE BRINK By N.J. Crisp.  296 pp. New York: The Viking Press. $14.95.
FAMILY TRADE By James Carroll.  417 pp. Boston: Little, Brown. $14.95.

UNTIL the Aristotle of the contemporary thriller comes along with his or her
''Poetics'' for an age of spies, we'll do well to stick with the old philosopher
himself on the question of the relationship between plot and character. Despite
a few notable exceptions (some from the hand of Graham Greene, some from that of
John le Carre), espionage novels seem to do best when the former takes
precedence over the latter. British novelist N.J. Crisp has abided by this
ancient code in ''The Brink,'' a highly successful new spy story set in England
and Europe in a not-so-distant future beset by oil shortages and the threat of
nuclear war.

In Goss, the brutal, extremely vulgar chief of British secret intelligence;
Richard Conroy, one of his top male agents; and Karen Dewar, Conroy's female
equal and sometime lover, Mr. Crisp has created a trio of characters far above
the level of mere ciphers.  It's the plot, however, that carries the reader
along, mystified, hypnotized.

''The Brink'' opens with what appears to be a conventional exchange of political
prisoners on the banks of a small river that separates Western Europe from
Eastern Europe. The British hand over the convicted spy Garnett, a civil servant
who apparently passed along to the Russians the hidden locations of England's
nuclear submarines (although Goss remains unsure as to the agent's method for
doing this). In return Goss gets back Conroy, who has been worked over in a
Moscow prison after someone - someone in his own outfit, he's convinced -
revealed his identity and whereabouts to the K.G.B. A vicious round robin of
accusations occurs during the debriefing period that follows at ''Home,'' the
British intelligence training (and torture) center in the tranquil countryside
near London. Conroy believes that Dewar has betrayed him; she thinks he's turned
himself in to the Russians and returned as a double agent. Goss trusts neither
of them, and the pair turn on him as a possible suspect as well.

Goss's brusque and disgusting manner (''I told you she'd be a good screw, didn't
I?'' he says to Conroy after encouraging the two agents under suspicion to bunk
together in the dungeons of Home), Conroy's persistent high-level rationality
and Dewar's inventive seductiveness contribute enormously to the fascinations of
the novel's first half. But during this time, with only the vaguest suspicion on
Goss's part, a complicated scheme that will blow the second part of the novel
wide open has been unwinding. Mr. Crisp's trio of characters (along with a
courtly widower named Spencer, the country's top computer expert who himself
becomes a suspect for a time) has, since Goss sent the treasonous Garnett over
to the Russians, been caught up in a Soviet plot to obtain the unconditional
surrender of Western Europe without ever firing a single rifle, let alone a
nuclear missile.

Up until the very end, it seems as though the Russians will succeed - but then
Conroy and Dewar go to work on them, just as N.J. Crisp has gone to work on us,
with a telling combination of swift action and deft intelligence.

* James Carroll in recent years produced two long ''mainstream'' novels,
''Mortal Friends'' and ''Fault Lines.'' In these books he attempted with some
success to give us nothing less than, in the former, the character of the city
of Boston and, in the latter, a view of love and art and family ties in post-
Vietnam War America.  ''Family Trade,'' his new book, shows him struggling
courageously, with mixed results, to combine his taste for spy fiction with the
desire to create more serious contemporary types.  Jake McKay, his hero, is the
sensitive son of a closemouthed, seemingly genteel deputy C.I.A. chief. Jake,
maimed in the blitz while his father was skulking about the Continent for the
O.S.S., is a protagonist fit for the Kennedy years, the period in which the
novel opens. We see him traversing the streets of Washington, D.C., and the
halls of Georgetown University (where he begins his freshman year by bucking the
then traditional hazing rituals) aided by an elegant cane; Jake's dapper Uncle
Giles, a British diplomat who was once his father's comrade during the war,
calls it a ''stick.'' Jake's outward disability also reflects an inner wound,
the confusion and turmoil of the onset of manhood. This condition is exacerbated
when he sees his father in an apparent tryst at a local museum and begins to
wonder whether the C.I.A. chief has become a double agent in his marriage. As if
all this weren't enough to make even the dullest boy break out in bright
crimson, young Jake soon has added to his adolescent burdens the embarrassing
news that Uncle Giles has defected to the Russians.

THE prose as well as the psychology of this opening section is far from
compelling (not at all Crisp, one wants to say after a reading of the far more
engaging ''The Brink''); there are too many flaccid passages given over to
Jake's teen-age crises and not enough attention to the pace of the book. Not
until the middle of the novel, in the section entitled ''London/Berlin 1945,''
do we get a smartly composed set piece that shows us what Daddy did during the
war - and what Mr. Carroll can do with the spy genre when he puts his mind to
it. If the third and final section - set in Boston and Berlin in 1980 - were as
tightly written and well paced, the reader might care a great deal more when
Jake, having become a mediocre English teacher with an unresolved past, finally
undergoes what Mr. Carroll calls ''the great passage rite he should have
accomplished years ago.'' By playing spy for a day, the handicapped Georgetown
graduate comes ''to learn what he was made of'' and redeems the memory of his by
now long-dead C.I.A. father. But ''Family Trade'' itself lacks a similar
resolution. Is it a thriller? Is it ''mainstream''? Mr. Carroll's emphasis on
Jake's emotional crises makes it tilt now one way, now the other, and the result
is not entirely satisfying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IS SAID TO LACK MONEY TO PAY ITS DEBTS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The International Monetary Fund has produced a report on Vietnam's economy that,
while pointing to recent improvements in some sectors, nonetheless casts doubt
on whether the country can possibly meet this year's scheduled payments on its
external debt.

A copy of the confidential 20-page report, dated April 29, was made available
here by non-Vietnamese sources.  Although citing improved performances last year
in the production of food, cash crops and light industrial goods, the report
expresses disbelief at the predictions of Vietnamese officials that increased
exports and foreign aid this year will suffice to retire a 1982 debt service
obligation estimated at $237 million to Vietnam's non-Communist creditors alone.

The nation's debt in ''nonconvertible currencies'' - mostly to the Soviet Union
- was said to stand at $2.2 billion of the total $3.5 billion. The report said
the debt rose by $500 million last year.

Reserves Said to Be Exhausted

Vietnam's reserves of foreign exchange, which were $98 million at the end of
1980, had sunk to $16 million at the end of last year and had been ''completely
exhausted'' by February of this year, the report said.

The study is based largely on statistics provided by high-level Vietnamese
officials in the Ministries of Finance, Trade, Industry, Banking and Planning,
who consulted with a team of monetary fund economists in Hanoi in February. The
consultations were occasioned, in effect, both by Vietnam's $70 million
indebtedness to the I.M.F.  and by the country's expressed interest in borrowing
more money from non-Communist sources.

The Hanoi Government assumed South Vietnam's membership in the fund in 1976.
The report say that last year Vietnam slipped $38 million behind in paying its
external debts. ''An early elimination of outstanding payments,'' the report
says, ''is essential for avoiding further erosion of confidence and the
disruption of trade and payments relations.''

The report proposes that the fund's executive board urge Vietnam to end its
system of offering better-than-official exchange rates to Vietnamese citizens
and tourists who bring in hard currencies from abroad. The board is also asked
to urge Vietnam ''to terminate the bilateral payments arrangements that are
maintained with Fund members.''

Premium Is Now Offered

Technical and innocuous as these recommendations sound, they could require
Vietnam to offer, for example, the holders of private dollars remitted from
relatives abroad only 9 or 10 dong to the dollar, the official rate.

Vietnam, the report says, offers a premium of 30 to 40 percent on such
exchanges. Although the report does not say so, this premium is an implicit
acknowledgment that a dollar on the black market brings 60 to 80 dong. If the
Vietnamese Government should offer even less than it does now for privately
remitted dollars, it would presumably be offered even fewer of them.

As of the end of last year, the report says, Vietnam's outstanding debt to
non-Communist nations included $311 million to Iraq, $172 million to Algeria,
$133 million to Japan, $121 million to France, and lesser amounts to the World
Bank, Denmark, India, Italy, Libya, the Netherlands and Britain. Vietnam also
owed $251 million to private creditors, mostly banks in Europe and Japan.

After Vietnamese forces invaded Cambodia in December 1978, Japan announced that
it would withhold a promised $56 million in aid. The World Bank, Britain and
other lenders declared a similar freeze.

Changes in Policy Recommended

The fund, which advanced Vietnam $43 million last year, now suggests in its
report that Vietnam may be incapable of repaying its debts, or of acquiring the
hard currency it needs to import machinery, raw materials and other necessities,
unless it rapidly alters its economy in ways that the Vietnamese Government may
resist.

The report strongly recommends that Vietnam reduce its food, fuel and other
subsidies for civil servants and employees of state enterprises. These subsidies
were maintained last year despite a devaluation of the dong, a 100 percent pay
raise for Government workers and the introcuction of measures that allowed
previously controlled rice prices to go up by 400 percent and those of other
agricultural prices by as much as 600 percent. Consumer subsidies, as a result,
quadrupled last year, leaping from 3 to 7 percent of Vietnam's gross domestic
product.

Vietnamese planners told the study team that income from exports, which has
declined for three years in a row and which fell sharply last year, had been
expected to rise by 22 percent last year and that it is now expected to rise 38
percent in 1982.

Currency Devalued Last Year

The report notes, with approval, several measures taken by the Government that
might help achieve such progress, including production bonuses, the granting of
authority to selected exporters to use their foreign exchange income to import
their own needed materials, ''the granting of greater autonomy to certain
trading firms in Ho Chi Minh City,'' and, particularly, the devaluation of the
dong in July 1981, which may have made exports more competitive.

The report also notes that Vietnam's economy grew by nearly 3 percent last year
- a ''modest recovery'' from the declines of the previous two years -and that
agricultural output continued to grow.  Taxes, moreover, were said to have been
collected more efficiently than before, and from incomes that reflected last
year's inflation, estimated at 100 percent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW VACATION POLICY: KEEPING BUSY

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: SANTA BARBARA, Calif., July 11


It is an axiom among President Reagan's advisers that, given his choice, Mr.
Reagan will head for California every time. And in his favorite state, Mr.
Reagan's favorite spot is his ranch, tucked away in the tree-scented mountains
that surround this coastal town.

But since he left Washington July 1, Mr. Reagan's rest period has been
punctuated by hectic side trips to Los Angeles for parties and speech-making and
to Edwards Air Force Base for the landing of the space shuttle. Of 11 days in
California, fewer than half have been spent entirely at Rancho Del Cielo. Even
on those days, White House officials estimate, about a third of the President's
time is devoted to briefings, telephone calls or meetings.

Mr. Reagan's bumpy schedule and his advisers' effort to depict him as busy with
the affairs of state bespeak a change of attitude at the White House toward
Presidential vacations.

Last summer, Mr. Reagan was in California for almost a month, and he spent 10
days at a stretch on the ranch, his seclusion broken only by a brief appearance
in his front yard to sign a tax bill. The President originally planned on
another month in California this summer, but he has settled for two 10-day trips
punctuated by public appearances. The turning point in this move toward busier
vacations, it now seems clear, came during the Easter trip to Barbados.

Toll of Barbados Trip

Up until then, Reagan aides contended that the American people understood the
President's need to rest. They said the Reagan team would call a vacation a
vacation and let it go at that. But on the Barbados trip, perhaps because of
criticism that it was inappropriate for the President to loll on a Caribbean
island in hard economic times, Mr. Reagan's schedule was belatedly altered to
include a tiring official visit to Jamaica. The result was that Mr. Reagan did
not get much rest on a trip to a place he did not really want to be, since it
was not California.

The Reagan White House is not the first to succumb to the public relations
pressures that militate against extended vacations. The Nixon Administration
adopted the ''working vacation'' ruse to provide a cover for Mr. Nixon's long
stays at San Clemente, Calif., and Key Biscayne, Fla.

The Iranian crisis effectively ended vacationing for President Carter. In fact,
he never had a real vacation after he canceled a visit to Hawaii for the July 4
weekend in 1979.

The new Reagan pattern is to give the President three or four relatively
peaceful days at the ranch before bringing him down for some event that is
certain to make the evening news. Question and answer sessions with citizens'
groups were a favorite activity, but these events are not without peril for Mr.
Reagan.

The reason is that he did not prepare for them rigorously and his answers tended
toward the rambling or arguable statements for which he has become known.

'Directly Involved'

For instance, in Los Angeles on this trip, Mr. Reagan asserted that with ''the
decline of inflation for the last year, the increase in purchasing power for
people at the poverty level is greater than all the benefits that were ever
prescribed through Government social programs.''

The favorite phrase of White House spokesmen in the past week was ''directly
involved.'' It was used to describe Mr. Reagan's role in the negotiations to end
the fighting between Israel and Palestinian guerrillas in Lebanon. But it was
the President's national security adviser, William P. Clark, who seemed in
closest touch with the foreign policy process throughout the week. With the
State Department in transition from one secretary to another, and with lesser
officials separated from the President by 3,000 miles, Mr. Clark appeared
strongly entrenched as the Administration's most influential foreign policy
adviser.

One reason seems to be that while Mr. Clark may lack deep experience in foreign
affairs, he knows Mr. Reagan's instincts and inclinations extremely well. Mr.
Clark seems naturally attuned, in a way that former Secretary of State Alexander
M. Haig Jr., was not, with the blunter, more muscular approach that Mr. Reagan
favors.

In this regard, the matter-of-fact announcement of the President's potentially
momentous decision on the possible use of American troops in Lebanon was typical
of both Mr. Reagan's and Mr. Clark's style.  But the decision also bore another
trademark of the Reagan team. That is, there was apparently little deep concern
about the impact of the decision among potential critics and on the public mood.

The failure to consider these factors damaged the Administration politically in
such ill-fated domestic adventures as the attempt to give tax breaks to
segregated private schools. This time, the Administration seemed to
underestimate the degree to which any suggestion of using American troops to
settle other nations' wars evokes memories of Vietnam.

Fitting the Pieces Together

The Reagan advisers also seemed surprised that the White House press regarded as
naive the Administration's argument that it could protect the lives of American
troops in Beirut by careful negotiations with the combatants. ''All it is, is
something that the President said he would do if all the pieces fit together,''
a senior Administration official said in a remark typical of those used to play
down the danger to American forces. ''If all the pieces fit together,'' he
concluded, ''you won't have a dangerous situation.''

At the junior levels, the White House staff is pretty sharply divided into the
friends and foes of John Rogers, a protege of James A. Baker, 3d, the White
House chief of staff. Mr. Rogers has what one associate called ''the Cousin
Cheap job.'' That is, he inherited the role of Hugh Carter, a relative of former
President Carter, as the official White House penny pincher.

Mr. Rogers's quest for cost-effectiveness led him to audit the account from
which the White House travel office pays airlines for Presidential trips.

According to a senior Administration official, Mr. Rogers found no evidence of
corruption, but he did uncover casual accounting procedures that were an affront
to businesslike Reagan aides.  Journalistic organizations, for example, pay
large amounts to the travel office to cover the air fares of traveling reporters
and technicians. An official said: ''There's no bonding on that account.  There
are no books kept. It's just 'Here's what you owe.' We want a paper trail for
the money that goes in there.''

White House officials and Bob Manning, the director of the travel office, insist
that Mr. Rogers's reforms are not responsible for Mr.  Manning's decision to
retire after 22 years. An official close to the situation also said there was no
hint of wrongdoing by Mr. Manning, who is a popular figure with the press and
with many Reagan aides.  Even so, Mr. Manning's leave-taking has not enhanced
Mr. Rogers's popularity. As a consequence, Mr. Baker sent word to junior
staffers that he wants to hear no more in-house criticism of Cousin Cheap's
successor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Bring the Dust Children Home

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 494 words


The cause of the pitiful bui doi, the dust children of Southeast Asia, has just
been advanced by a surprising benefactor, the Foreign Minister of Vietnam. It's
an opening that Congress, as it returns to work today, has a duty to seize.

The dust children of Vietnam, like the offspring of G.I.'s and other Americans
elsewhere, are blond, or black, or blue-eyed, or round-eyed: visibly Western.
Many are harassed. Many are left to run the streets. Even those whose mothers
struggle to get them into the United States, cannot come. Vietnam won't let them
out. America won't let them in.

Now, however, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach says his country is ready to let
out the 8,000 Amerasian children in Vietnam. He no longer insists that their
fathers first admit to paternity, a condition that barred most. He says only
that Congress must pass the pending legislation permitting the children's entry.

Perhaps it is a mistake to take all this at face value. Perhaps Mr. Thach has
other purposes in mind. Vietnam needs no license from the United States
Congress. It could simply let the children go, and force American officials to
scramble to admit them as refugees.

But it is more likely that Mr. Thach means what he says. Refugees are, by
definition, fleeing persecution; for the children to be labeled refugees would
paint Vietnam as a persecutor in world opinion.

Legislation would provide a neutral remedy, extending to Amerasians the priority
status to which children of Americans are entitled.

Some argue that, so long as Vietnam says no, the legislation is meaningless
piety. If Mr. Thach is sincere, that argument collapses.  But even if he is not,
the case for action remains compelling. To eliminate the obstacle at this end
would put the onus squarely on Vietnam.

And there's a still-more important argument for the bill. There are Amerasian
children also in Korea, Thailand, Laos, even Cambodia.  Whatever happens in
Vietnam, legislation would be required for them to come to America.

Representative Romano Mazzoli, Chairman of the House Immigration Subcommittee,
understands that. He pressed for an Amerasian provision in the pending
immigration reform bill. Senator Alan Simpson understands that. He promises
prompt action on the Amerasian bill proposed by Representative Stewart McKinney
of Connecticut and Senator Jeremiah Denton of Alabama.

The enemy now is time. Though it is still steamy July, there aren't many
legislative days left in the 97th Congress. Before adjourning to campaign, it
must still act on tax increases, spending cuts, clean air, bankruptcy - not to
mention the big immigration bill. In other words, time is running out for
America to claim its children.

They will always, indelibly, be American. They will not long remain children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 14, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SYRIANS DENOUNCE ISRAELIS AND U.S.

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 405 words

DATELINE: DAMASCUS, Syria, July 13


A rally presided over by Prime Minister Abdel-Raouf al-Kassem today condemned
Israeli military action in Lebanon, but the brunt of the protest was directed at
the United States for its support of Israel.

After the rally, an orderly group of several hundred Syrians marched to the
United States Embassy to submit a petition calling on the American people, who,
the Syrians said, ''rejected the Vietnam massacre,'' to take a similar stand and
oppose Washington's policy in Lebanon.

Ambassador Robert P. Paganelli, receiving a delegation of five demonstrators -
members of the Syrian Union of Journalists and Union of Writers - in the hall of
the embassy, said that the United States' objective was to put an end to the
fighting and bloodshed in Lebanon.

Envoy Meets Foreign Minister

The Ambassador also stressed that he had met with the Syrian Foreign Minister,
Abdel Halim Khaddam, in the morning as part of continuing attempts to find a
solution to the crisis.

Mr. Khaddam is expected to go to Washington at the end of the week with the
Saudi Foreign Minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, as part of Arab diplomatic
endeavors for a political solution.

The Syrian position, which seems to be supported by Saudi Arabia and other Arab
countries, is that the United States must take the present opportunity to
address itself to the basic Palestinian problem.

In an open letter addressed to President Reagan, the Syrian journalists and
writers warned that the United States ''is committing suicide politically,
culturally and morally'' in the Arab region, and perhaps in the third world as a
whole, because of what they said were its military, financial and political
support for the Israeli assault in Lebanon.

Begin Called a ''New Hitler''

The Syrian letter described the Israeli Prime Minister, Menachem Begin, as ''a
new Hitler'' and stressed that ''his war of extermination constitutes the
greatest danger to peace and international security.''

The letter said that the United States' support of Israel's war in Lebanon was
''against the American people's call for liberty, justice and human rights.''

Like the Syrian writers' letter, the mood of the demonstration was more of
sorrow than anger. There were no dramatic threats but rather appeals for
understanding, particularly by American public opinion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

INDONESIAN SEES SHIFT IN HANOI'S CAMBODIA POLICY

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 14


Indonesia's Foreign Minister said today that Vietnam's offer last week to
withdraw some troops from Cambodia was not simply propaganda but should be
looked on as an indication of some change in Vietnamese attitude.

At the same time, the minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, declared that Vietnam's
invasion of Cambodia had ''shattered'' the region's hopes of living peacefully
with the Communist regime in Hanoi and that Indonesia would stand with the four
other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in urging Vietnam to
deal more forthrightly with the Cambodian question. The other members are
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

The Indonesian official spoke in an interview two days before Foreign Minister
Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam was scheduled to leave Hanoi on a tour of three
countries that belong to the association - Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand -
and Burma. Mr. Thach is expected to try to demonstrate during his tour that
Vietnam sincerely wants friends.

Mr. Mochtar said the proposed Vietnamese troop withdrawal should be viewed not
as ''a proposal as such'' but rather as ''a symptom, in a context,'' that
indicated that the Vietnamese were changing their attitude.

Divergence of Views Shown

The Indonesian minister's guarded expression of sympathy for Vietnam pointed up
a continuing divergence of perspective among the five members of the Southeast
Asian association.

Referring, for example, to a recently formed coalition of anti-Vietnamese
Cambodian leaders, Mr. Mochtar said that some Western diplomats ''are right to
be skeptical'' about it. But the joint effort ''is a thing worth trying,'' he
said, adding, ''not that we have much choice.''

He also said that Vietnam had valid reasons for fearing China.  Noting that Mr.
Thach planned to visit Indonesia and the Philippines in October, Mr. Mochtar
said that in talking with him he would stick to the association's common
strategy. But, he said, he will also state that ''Indonesia is looking forward
to the future possibility of peacefully coexisting with Vietnam despite our
differences in political, economic and social systems.''

The Indonesian minister's comments in the interview focused on the intensified
diplomatic maneuvering over Cambodia that took place in the region last week.

The three leaders of the new anti-Vietnamese Cambodian coalition reportedly met
inside Cambodia, not far from the border with Thailand, to set up an exile
government whose formation they had announced June 22 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.


Antipathy Put Aside

The two non-Communist members of the coalition - Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
former head of state, and Son Sann, a former Prime Minister - had put aside
their antipathy for the third member, Khieu Samphan, to create a group that
might have a better chance than otherwise of retaining the Pol Pot regime's seat
in the United Nations and also of battling the Vietnamese on the ground. Mr.
Khieu Samphan is a longtime lieutenent of Pol Pot, whose Communist Government
was overthrown soon after the Vietnamese invasion of December 1978 and replaced
with the Vietnamese-backed Communist Government of Heng Samrin.

Also last week, the Foreign Ministers of Vietnam, Laos and Vietnamese-controlled
Cambodia announced from Ho Chi Minh City that a ''significant'' number of
Vietnamese troops would be withdrawn if Thailand ended its aid to the
anti-Vietnamese insurgents. The foreign ministers also proposed a ''security
zone'' along the border and an international conference on Indochina. Today Mr.
Mochtar echoed the views of several of his colleagues in the five-member
association in saying that the Vietnamese proposal failed to satisfy their
objections. But he made plain that he did not agree with the coalition's
dismissal of the proposal as ''propaganda.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TWO SETS OF ARMS TALKS GAIN CIVILITY FROM GENEVA'S GRACE AND;
CORDIAL AIR

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


Flame and ash: metaphors that don't work here. The Alps rise up, sharks' teeth
in the distance. The lake glistens, a sapphire of a million carats. Looking out
of the eighth-floor window of the offices where the Americans and Russians talk
of banishing thousands of nuclear weapons, the world is so green, blue and
white, so perfect, that words like fear and destruction shrivel into irrelevance
in the brilliant light.

On the walls of the conference room at the American headquarters are lithographs
of hockey and basketball scenes, the only visible link to striving and haste.
Neutral and rich, Geneva calms and reassures. The people who talk about
strategic missiles here, riding back and forth on Avenue de la Paix in black
limousines, a morning at the Americans' office, an afternoon at the Russians'
mission, do it as if the landscape must not be betrayed. Partly willed and
partly instinctive, there is a kind of community of caution among the delegates.
In John Calvin's city, they seem predestined to negotiate man's fate - or what
passes as it - in quiet.

For anyone who remembers the public side of the Vietnam peace negotiations in
Paris when they began more than 13 years ago, the current talks in Geneva are
their antithesis. The conference center on the Avenue Kleber near the Arc de
Triomphe had a continual clangor: shrill statements, accusation,
counteraccusation, ill will as much real as feigned. Henry Cabot Lodge, the
first chief American negotiator, did not exactly go on bateau mouche trips down
the Seine with Nguyen Thi Binh of the Vietcong.

A Different Mood Prevails

But one night not so long ago, the American and Soviet delegations here got
together at the Americans' invitation for an excursion on the lake, a kind of
grand office outing involving two rival firms, not much different from furniture
companies that know they are the only ones in business in their territory. The
boat slipped by the Aga Khan's old mansion and the villa where Lord Byron
practiced being world weary, then turned back, avoiding another house, a tiny
place with red shutters that once served as a rather plush exile for Lenin.

The mood is such that Paul H. Nitze, the American delegation chief in the talks
on intermediate-range missiles, has supper regularly with Yuli A. K@vitsinsky,
his Soviet opposite number, and Mr.  Kvitsinsky has invited Mr. Nitze to the
ballet. The corporate feeling even extends to living quarters: some of the
American staff live in an apartment-hotel, La Residence de France, where Soviet
personnel are housed as well.

Edward L. Rowny, in charge of the United States negotiating team for the talks
on strategic missile reductions that began last month, has known the Soviet
delegation head, Viktor P. Karpov, for years.  And the faces of both Mr. Nitze
and Mr. Kvitsinsky (with a fur hat) appear on T-shirts that the Americans have
had made up. Mr.  Kvitsinsky owns one; he may even wear it.

How the Negotiating Takes Place

The intimacy has a couple of explanations. One is the ground rules that are in
effect for both the strategic and intermediate-range missile talks. Both sides
have agreed to complete confidentiality, which means the negotiating teams have
undertaken not to discuss progress or details publicly in any way. The result is
that they are not directly burdened with polemics in the news media or public
statements that would make private discussions uncomfortable, embarrassing or
even impossible.

The second explanation for the intimacy is the kind of negotiating pattern that
has developed through the first two Soviet-American strategic arms agreements.
At the meetings, there are formal presentations from written briefs. These are
complemented by direct exchanges during recesses in the sessions, which
generally last between an hour and a half and four hours.

In the recesses, the delegation chiefs pair off, as do the chief military
advisers and other staff members. Their exchanges are orchestrated and depend to
a degree on a sense of nuance and knowing the capacities for extrapolation of
the person opposite. ''Tell him what I mean means this, but not too directly,''
a delegation chief might say.

Progress Is Difficult to Assess

In the most favorable analysis, the familiarity saves time. Mr.  Rowny knows the
Soviet Defense Ministry man, Maj. Gen. V.P.  Starodubov, from the earlier talks.
He knows the Foreign Ministry Representative, Aleksei A. Obukhov, from the same
period. Mr. Obukhov went to the University of Chicago and studied under Hans J.
Morgenthau. Jack W. Mendelsohn, a member of Mr. Rowny's delegation who has known
Mr. Obukhov through the earlier talks, received a graduate degree at the
University of Chicago as well. The shared jargon, the communality, the lack of a
need for particularly heavy posturing make things easier.

But the two teams will not finish the talks in a month or two.  When they recess
within a week or so, the intermediate-missile negotiators will have met more
than 40 times and the strategic arms group just enough for the United States to
have laid out its basic position. Progress is difficult to quantify: in the
strategic talks the Soviet Union rejected the American proposition out of hand
when it was first outlined by President Reagan in May. In the intermediate-range
talks, involving missiles based in Europe and aimed at European targets, the
Soviet Defense Minister, Marshal Dmitri F. Ustinov, has complained that the
Americans were seeking to create an impasse in the talks.

Perhaps the Tougher Job

Another version of the Nitze-Kvitsinsky talks is that they have been serious and
useful and have served to clear away much of the ''surrounding garbage.'' Yet
this is essentially preliminary to dealing with the basic issue -what happens to
the approximately 300 Soviet SS-20's targeted on NATO countries and to the
Pershing 2 and cruise missiles the alliance says it will deploy at the end of
1983 if the Soviet Union does not remove its missiles.

Mr. Nitze's job would appear tougher than Mr. Rowny's. While the strategic arms
talks involve roughly similar numbers of missiles on both sides, Mr. Nitze has
none at all to trade off. Rather, he must deal from a position of threatening
deployment - which is resisted by the antinuclear movement in Western Europe -
to persuade the Soviet Union to eliminate the missiles it has steadily
positioned over the last five years.

Mr. Nitze also has a wider constituency than his colleague because his talks
take in all the NATO countries where the American missiles are to be deployed.
He must also deal within a specific time framework relating to the NATO
deployment schedule. If there is a historic Soviet interest in strategic
agreements with the United States to achieve a kind of superpower livability,
the Soviet attitude toward the Nitze-Kvitsinsky talks is different - nothing has
appeared so far to indicate that the Russians have given up hope of breaking the
NATO decision apart and achieving a psychological victory of incalculable
effect.

At some point, perhaps early next year, both sets of talks will necessarily
crisscross. If compromise proposals are made - and they are expected -and they
result in some kind of NATO deployment of medium-range missiles, then the
climate of relative public caution is likely to be damaged. Any total breakdown
in the Nitze-Kvitsinsky talks will not only weigh on the mood of the strategic
negotiations but will also dismember their theoretical underpinnings because the
two procedures have been linked together by NATO.

An optimistic view of the negotiations is that the Soviet Union will not let
this happen because it is not in the Soviet interest to make the strategic
negotiations hostage to a maximum Soviet position on the intermediate-range
missiles that would exclude reductions in their arsenal to levels as low as
zero.

If this is the case, then the willful amiability, the careful restraint, the
talk of weekends in the mountains and skiing and sailing and music, rather than
holocausts and firestorms, will have meant something. Then Geneva and its
practiced tranquillity will have triumphed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Nitze

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL'S LAWFUL RIGHT AND DUTY TO PROTECT ISRAEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 220 words


To the Editor: An exchange between R. Hurwitz and G. Fellman (Op-Ed article June
26) and J. A. Hooley (letter July 8) suggests confusion as to the proper
attitude of Americans with respect to wars and the way they are waged.

hey argue whether Israeli or United States welfare should be the criterion for
U.S. Jews to follow in their attitude toward Israeli policies.

It seems to me that the main criterion toward politics, whether one is Jewish or
Gentile, American or Israeli, should be human standards of justice, decency and
compassion.

Israel's military adventure in Lebanon, presumably approved by a substantial
number of Israelis, violates those standards - an intolerable attack on
unprotected, unarmed populations. Some American voices, Jews and Gentiles, have
already been raised in protest.

As one who actively opposed the American adventure in Vietnam for the same
reasons I now protest the Israeli adventure in Lebanon, I wonder if our own
performances - atom bombs on Japan and napalm on Vietnam - haven't helped to
desensitize people to the horrors of indiscriminate warfare.  S. E. LURIA
Cambridge, Mass., July 9, 1982
The writer was a 1969 Nobel laureate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

G.O.P. SEEKS GAINS IN NORTH CAROLINA

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: DURHAM, N.C., July 14


The biggest political difference between the two Democratic candidates for the
House in North Carolina's Second Congressional District, a seat the Republicans
have high hopes of winning, is the one they do not talk about. Tim Valentine is
white and Mickey Michaux is black.

Each Democrat has approached the July 27 runoff primary with a recognition that
if this contest sounds racial, and therefore stirs bitterness, whoever wins will
have a much harder time in the November election against Jack Marin, a
Republican who is a former professional basketball player.

So the contest is really a test of get-out-the-vote efforts, with telephone
banks more important than debates. When the two lawyers and former state
legislators meet, as they did Monday before the Rotary Club in Rocky Mount, they
agree on a lot and differ on nothing substantial.

District a Key Target

But to the Republicans, the Democratic choice does make a difference. North
Carolina is a state where President Reagan's party expects net gains, perhaps as
many as four House seats in a delegation that is now 7 to 4 in favor of the
Democrats, to compensate for expected losses in recession-bound industrial areas
elsewhere. This skinny district is a key target.

Mr. Marin, citing the basketball analogy of not wanting to fire up a potential
opponent by disclosing whom you would rather play, will not say whom he would
rather face. But Tom Ellis, a leader in the Congressional Club, the political
action committee run by supporters of Senator Jesse Helms, which helped recruit
Mr. Marin, says simply, ''It would be much easier against Michaux.''

If Mr. Valentine, whose constant talk of the need for a balanced budget obscures
some of his other views, such as support of the Voting Rights Act and a freeze
on nuclear weapons, wins the nomination, and in a way that gains him the support
of Mr. Michaux in the general election, some Democrats here hope the
Congressional Club and the Republicans will turn their attention elsewhere in
the state.

Where Republican Hopes Lie

For while this is the only open seat, because of the retirement of L.H. Fountain
after the unfriendly Durham area had been added to the district, there are other
places where Republicans have mounted credible challenges to incumbent
Democrats.

They are the Third, where Representative Charles Whitley is opposed in the
southeast part of the state by Eugene McDaniel, a former Vietnam
prisoner-of-war; the Fourth, including Raleigh and Chapel Hill, where
Representative Ike Andrews is challenged by Bill Cobey, former director of
athletics at the University of North Carolina; the Fifth, where Representative
Stephen L. Neal of Winston-Salem is opposed by Anne Bagnal, a former State
Senator; and the Eighth, in the southern part of the state, where Reprsentative
Bill Hefner is challenged by Harris D. Blake, a hardware store owner.

Democrats Eye 11th District

In contrast, Democrats have serious hopes of unseating a Republican only in the
far western 11th District, where Representative Bill Hendon, a freshman, is
opposed by State Senator James L. Clark.

But only here in the Second District did the June 27 primary not settle the
nominations. Mr. Michaux, with 44 percent of the vote, was pressed to a runoff
by Mr. Valentine, who had 33 percent. James Ramsey, a former Speaker of the
North Carolina House, had 23 percent.

In that test, Mr. Michaux's percentage of the vote exceeded 36 percent, the
black Democratic registration in the district, and a professional operation to
turn out the vote is being tuned up again.  Mr. Valentine's comparable efforts
are handicapped by the tobacco harvesting season.

Black voter registration drives have been vigorous throughout the state this
year. Thus, Mr. Valentine's campaign finds itself frustrated by his opponent's
ability to appeal to black voters, while his supporters cannot ask for white
help as directly.

Painted Conservative Picture

''We're hoping to get the conservative white vote without raising the racial
issue,'' explained Bill Pully, Mr. Valentine's campaign manager. So, looking for
distinctions, Mr. Valentine has painted himself as more of a conservative than
his old friends in state politics think is accurate.

The image-making has certainly worked outside the district; the United States
Chamber of Commerce has sent poltical aides to help and the Boll Weevil
Political Action Committee, a group that supports conservative Democratic
candidates, sent $1,000.

Mr. Michaux takes a somewhat more liberal view of most issues, but at Rocky
Mount they emphasized their agreement such matters as the need to look out for
the tobacco industry and the fact that a balanced Federal budget, however
desirable, was not immediately attainable.

In addition to the mutually unspoken factor of race, an even more traditional
factor might help determine the Democratic nominee.  That factor is regional
voting. Mr. Michaux comes from Durham, an urban area that has not had a
Congressman of its own in many years.  Mr. Valentine comes from the eastern part
of the district, which Mr.  Fountain represented for 15 terms, and which does
not want to lose its influence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV: VIETNAM VETERANS, U.S. CRIME AND PRISON

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 852 words


''VIETNAM REQUIEM,'' being broadcast at 10 o'clock this evening, represents
another unusual project for the ''ABC News Closeup'' documentary unit. With
Pamela Hill as its executive producer, the division has used independent
producers in the past on an ad hoc basis. Alan and Susan Raymond, for instance,
were commissioned to produce a program on Northern Ireland. This time, Miss Hill
has gone to Else, Couturie & Korty Inc., for a film that lists as executive
producer John Korty, whose directorial credits include the television film ''The
Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman.''

The new program was produced, written and directed by Bill Couturie and Jonas
McCord. Mr. Couturie also produced the 1980 ''Closeup'' presentation entitled
''Can't It Be Anyone Else?'', which offered portraits of children with leukemia.
His style, his approach to a subject, is not objective in the traditional sense
of supposedly ''balanced'' documentaries. He clearly identifies with his
subjects and is openly sympathetic. Such is certainly the case in ''Vietnam
Requiem.''

The subject is the Vietnam War combat veteran who has since been imprisoned for
committing violent crimes. We are told that combat veterans have been arrested
at a rate that is almost twice that of nonveterans of the same age. And a
Veterans' Administration study concludes that the greater a veteran's exposure
to combat the more likely is his chance of being arrested or convicted.

The film conducts separate interviews with five men currently serving prison
terms. None had a criminal record prior to his military experience. They are not
presented in video-verite fashion, shown coping with their surroundings. They do
not discuss the crimes they committed. They simply sit before an almost rigid
camera, in medium-closeup for the most part, and talk about their war
experiences.

The profiles are constructed in chronological order. The men talk about what
made them join the Army or the Marines: part of a family tradition, liking the
uniform, simple idealism. Their talk is interspersed with film and television
clips from the period. There are the nightly news reports with the regular death
counts. There are the war protesters at home. There is the war itself coming
into the living rooms of America.

But being in the thick of combat turned out to be a horror, according to the
candid comments of these five men. The narration makes an interesting point:
''During World War II, the Sixth Marine Regiment served four years in the
Pacific but only engaged the enemy for about six weeks. In Vietnam, the combat
soldier typically served a 12-month tour of duty but was exposed to hostile fire
almost every day of his tour.''

In each of the cases on this program, there was a traumatic incident involving
the gory death of a buddy. This in turn sometimes resulted in the infuriated
friend venting his rage on innocent Vietnamese bystanders. The men are still
shaken by powerful emotions as they tell their stories. Albert (Peewee) Dobbs,
former Army sergeant, is especially articulate about his experiences: ''You're
18 years old and you're wearing somebody's brains around your shirt because they
got their head blown off right next to you, and that's not supposed to affect
you. I can never understand that.'' Mr. Dobbs is serving a seven-and-a-half-year
sentence in a Louisiana correction center for attempted armed robbery.

Returning home to a country that was not overly happy about losing the Vietnam
War, the veterans found few welcoming celebrations, and they soon found
themselves succumbing to nightmares, alcoholism and various forms of personal
violence. All five interviewed for ''Vietnam Requiem'' were decorated for
bravery. All five are understandably bitter about what happened to their lives.

Mr. Couturie and Mr. McCord have certainly created a powerful document. But
questions can be raised. The fact remains that the great majority of the
veterans who saw combat in Vietnam have never been arrested. What are the
differences between the two groups? And the phenomenon of ''post-traumatic
stress disorder,'' or shell shock, is hardly new. It also afflicted World War II
veterans, no matter how warmly they were greeted back home as heroes. It would
be perhaps illuminating to know how many of those combat veterans ended up being
arrested and convicted.

And there is some fudging on the conclusions to be drawn from ''Vietnam
Requiem.'' The ''hawks'' are given their opportunity. An Army colonel, who was
Sergeant Dobbs's battallion commander, says, ''If we have another conflict - and
we will have other conflicts in the future - I do hope we go into it with an
attitude to win.'' But the hearts and minds of the producers would seem to
endorse the comment of one of the veterans: ''I consented to do this interview
hoping that they'll keep us the hell out of another Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CBS CRITICIZES DOCUMENTARY BUT STANDS BY IT

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1396 words


CBS News said yesterday that it had violated some of its own rules of
journalistic practice in a documentary last winter about Vietnam.  Van Gordon
Sauter, president of CBS News, said the violations had not undermined the
central thesis of the program and ''CBS News stands by this broadcast.'' But he
said the organization was creating a new position, vice president for news
practices, ''to insure that our organization is fully conversant with CBS News
standards and their importance to the credibility of journalism.''

He added that CBS was ''planning a future broadcast on the issues treated in the
original broadcast.'' In a telephone interview, he said, ''We don't view this as
a corrective broadcast'' but as a normal next step to follow up on the public
interest in the Vietnam issues elicited by the initial program.

Mr. Sauter's eight-page memorandum to his staff followed a six-week internal
investigation of the program, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,''
which was shown Jan. 23. The program charged that Gen. William C. Westmoreland
and his officers had conspired to manipulate figures on enemy troop strength to
mollify criticism of the war effort in Vietnam.

In the unusually frank and critical memorandum, Mr. Sauter declared that
correspondents would be required to take a more active role than in the past in
reporting ''projects of a complex and controversial nature.''

In the case of the Vietnam documentary, Mike Wallace narrated most of the
program and conducted some of the interviews, but the bulk of the reporting and
editing was by the producer, George Crile, while Mr. Wallace was busy with other
activities such as ''60 Minutes.''

Mr. Sauter said, ''It would have been a better broadcast if it had not used the
word conspiracy; it had sought out and interviewed more persons who disagreed
with the broadcast premise; and there had been strict compliance with CBS News
standards.''

The investigation was prompted by a TV Guide article that charged that the
documentary had distorted accounts of events. The article was written by Don
Kowet, a TV Guide reporter in New York, and Sally Bedell, who has since joined
The New York Times as a television reporter.

The article said that Mr. Wallace and Mr. Crile ignored and refused to broadcast
interviews that rebutted the conspiracy theory and that they failed to interview
key figures with first-hand knowledge of how the troop estimates were handled.

It also said CBS had violated its own policies by, in one instance, allowing the
subject of an interview to see what others had said and to retape his appearance
and, in another, by interviewing as a witness Samuel A. Adams, a former Central
Intelligence Agency analyst whom it had hired as a $25,000 consultant.

Mr. Sauter's memorandum essentially acknowledged the accuracy of a majority of
the latter charges. It said, for example, that Mr. Adams should have been
identified in the broadcast as a paid consultant, that the retaping violated
standards because it was done ''to elicit a stronger interview'' rather than to
investigate new areas of inquiry and that the subject of the interview should
not have been allowed to see tapes of other interviews to make him more
forthcoming.

Mr. Sauter said no disciplinary action was planned against Mr.  Wallace, Mr.
Crile or any of the others involved in preparing the documentary. Mr. Sauter
said all were ''still at work at CBS,'' adding that in any case, ''we don't
discuss publicly'' any disciplinary steps taken or contemplated.

Objection by Westmoreland

General Westmoreland immediately attacked the CBS action as ''an incredible
piece of whitewash'' that by concentrating on procedural matters had ignored his
evidence that the figures on troop strength were not manipulated.

He said CBS was allowing its news executives freedom to make judgments about
what material to include and what to leave out of the broadcast while attacking
him for exercising exactly the same kinds of judgments on reports of troop
strength.

The difference, he said, ''is that my judgments were approved by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of Defense, the National Security Council and the
White House.''

He said he had expected CBS's investigator to contact him ''as a matter of
courtesy'' but that he never got a call.David Sendler, co-editor of TV Guide,
said, ''We're pleased and impressed at the fairness of CBS's self-examination,''
which he said substantiated the main points in his magazine's article.

The CBS memo rejected TV Guide's description of the broadcast as a ''smear'' of
General Westmoreland, but Mr. Sendler said the memo's conclusion that the word
''conspiracy'' should not have been used was itself a concession that the
program was a ''smear.''

Scope of Investigation

The internal investigation was conducted by Burton Benjamin, senior executive
producer of CBS News and former senior executive producer for documentaries.

Mr. Sauter said Mr. Benjamin had read the unedited transcripts of 20 hours of
interviews recorded for the broadcast, had reviewed General Westmoreland's
specific denials of the cover-up charges and had interviewed 32 people,
including 12 CBS News employees, before presenting his report July 8.

Mr. Sauter noted, however, that he did not intend to ask Mr.  Benjamin to take
the new vice presidency. He said the position would be like that of ombudsman or
public representative, a job that a dozen newspapers maintain to deal with
public and internal complaints about the fairness of reports.

ABC News has such a position, with George Watson, whose duties include
overseeing production of a 90-minute, four-times-a-year program, ''Viewpoint,''
in which there is discussion and analysis of the network's news programs. Mr.
Sauter said the new vice president at CBS would not be involved in the actual
creation or editing of stories but in reviewing material after it had been
broadcast.

Seeking Out Interviews

Mr. Sauter's memo noted that there were disagreements within CBS over the
procedures and fairness of the documentary's making. It said, for example:

''One can argue that the presentation of information within the broadcast was
balanced, given the interview with a person as significant as General
Westmoreland, who contended there was no deception. However, we feel there was
insufficent effort to seek out and interview more of those who contend there was
no deception, particulary given the complexity of the subject matter.''

It also noted that there were ''conflicting opinions'' over the failure to use
any material from a three-hour interview with Walt W.  Rostow in which Mr.
Rostow, a special assistant to President Lyndon B. Johnson, contested the
premise that troop-strength figures had been concealed for political reasons.

And it said there was ''honest disagreement'' over whether sympathetic witnesses
such as Mr. Adams, the former C.I.A. analyst who first suggested the story, were
questioned less intensively in front of the cameras than were hostile witnesses
such as General Westmoreland.

The memo said that Mr. Adams should have been identified as a paid consultant,
that in two cases material relating to one set of events was wrongly presented
as being linked to another set and that in four instances guidelines were
violated by combining quotations so that the answers to several questions
appeared to be the answer to a single question.

In the interview, Mr. Sauter said the incident had underlined the need for
greater collaboration between correspondents, who appear on the air, and
producers, who are both reporters and editors in many documentaries. He said CBS
would adjust the schedules of its correspondents to give them more time on such
projects.

''The greatest asset of CBS News is its credibility,'' his memo ended.
''Protecting that credibility is the most important thing we at CBS News do as
individuals and as an organization, and it is the most important aspect of our
service to the public.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hong Kong to Detain Refugees From Vietnam

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 104 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, July 15


Hong Kong officials said today that Vietnamese refugees who come to Hong Kong
would be ''detained indefinitely.''

An official indicated that the move was one that the authorities hoped would
deter flight to the British colony.  About 430 refugees who arrived after the
policy took effect July 2 are being held in prison.  Officials here estimate
that at least 5,000 of the more than 11,300 Vietnamese refugees in the colony
will never meet resettlement requirements.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
FRIDAY, JULY 16, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 885 words


International
Iran's invasion of Iraq was apparently stalled as Iraqi forces halted, and at
some points, repelled attacking Iranian troops, American officials said. In
fighting described as intense, an Iraqi counteroffensive pushed some Iranian
troops back to the border, the officials said on the basis of intelligence
reports.(Page A1, Column 6.)
George P. Shultz was confirmed by the Senate as Secretary of State.  Mr. Shultz,
in two days of Senate testimony, avoided making statements in direct
contradiction of existing Administration policy but seemed to suggest that as
Secretary of State he might try to modify some key aspects of American foreign
policy. (A1:3-4.)
The President of Honduras said that Nicaraguan troops had crossed into Honduras
and that Honduran troops might have driven into Nicaragua to repel the invasion.
The comment of President Roberto Suazo Cordova, who met with President Reagan,
seemed to go along with recent news reports from Central America suggesting that
intramural conflicts there might be widening. (A1:5-6.)
Peace negotiations in Beirut have been stalled by the question of where the
armed Palestine Liberation Organization fighters would go if they left west
Beirut. Since Israeli forces surrounded the city more than a month ago, it had
been more or less assumed that the P.L.O. fighters would go to Syria. The Syrian
Government has rejected that plan. (A4:1-3.)
Anti-Government guerrillas in Somalia said they had opened two new fronts in the
long-running territorial war between Somalia and Ethiopia over the Ogaden area.
The offensive by the anti-Govenment guerrillas, who are reportedly financed by
Libya, was apparently a response by the pro-Soviet Ethiopian Government to
recent attacks in the Ogaden by Somali-backed fighters from an organization that
seeks the Ogaden's independence from Ethiopia. (A3:5-6.)
National
Tax increases and spending cuts that would reduce the Federal budget deficit by
about $21 billion over the next three years were approved by the House Ways and
Means Committee. (A1:1.)
CBS News criticized the way that one of its own programs had been prepared
saying that some of its rules of journalistic practice had been violated in a
documentary about Vietnam. But at the same time the news organization maintained
that the violations had not undermined the central thesis of the program.
(A1:2-4.)
A compromise budget was adopted by Congress. In accepting the $5.5 billion
urgent supplemental spending bill, Congress averted the threatened disruption of
Government services and ended a three week stalemate with President Reagan. The
President is expected to sign the measure.(A10:1-3.)
Changes in nursing home inspection rules proposed by the Reagan Administration,
would weaken protection of elderly patients, state officials and members of
Congress warned members of the Senate's Special Committee on Aging. (A16:4-6.)
Some Senility can be reversed, acording to a team of brain specialists. The
report, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, said that
about 25 percent of seemingly senile behavioral problems were potentially
curable.(A16:4-6.)
Metropolitan
A tentative settlement was reached in the negotiations between the hospital
workers' unions and the association representing voluntary hospitals and nursing
homes. The tentative accord averted a strike by more than 46,000 hospital and
nursing home workers. The settlement, which depends on state approval, would
give employees 7 1/2 percent raises in each year of a two-year contract. (A1:2.)

Information on the robbery of a Brink's armored car last year in Rockland County
has come from a New York City man, described as the communications officer for
militant radicals accused or suspected in the case, law-enforcement authorties
said. According to Kenneth P.  Walton, deputy assistant director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the man has been cooperating with authorities since
April. (B1:6.)
An audit of the Transit Authority showed that lax supervision and poor work
habits cost at least $ 4 million in 1981. According to a study of two Transit
Authority repair shop by State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, maintenance and
repair workers sometimes took a day and a half to do jobs both management and
the unions agreed could be done in less than a day. (B4:1.)
An additional cleanup of the Love Canal area was announced by Federal and State
officials. The $7 million program will be financed by the Federal Government and
undertaken by New York State. The announcement of further cleanup efforts came a
day after Federal authorities deemed the area near Niagra Falls--where more than
20,000 tons of toxic waste were dumped in the 1940's and 1950's--suitable to
live in. (B2:6.)
A rupture in an aqueduct left large sections of Jersey City without water.
According to one Water Department official, a seam in a 72-inch twin aqueduct
system in nearby Secaucus broke, causing a serious drop in water pressure.
(B3:5-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS PRODUCER DEFENDS PROGRAM ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 44, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 787 words


Mike Wallace of CBS News and George Crile, a producer, yesterday defended the
accuracy and fairness of their controversial documentary charging that Gen.
William C. Westmoreland and other officers had manipulated figures on enemy
troop strength in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Wallace, however, acknowledged that the need for a procedural reform that
would require correspondents such as himself to take a more active role than
they have in the past in the reporting and editing of complicated and sensitive
programs.

The change was ordered Thursday by the president of CBS News, Van Gordon Sauter,
in a memorandum to his staff that criticized the documentary for violations of
journalistic practices. The memo said, however, that CBS News stood by the
program's central conclusion - that the figures were manipulated - a point that
Mr. Wallace and Mr.  Crile also stressed.

Letter Sent After Taping

Mr. Crile, a 37-year-old former Washington editor for Harper's magazine who
joined CBS News in 1976, acknowledged that the import of a letter General
Westmoreland sent after the taping of his interview ''went right by me and
Mike.''

In the letter, the general, the commander of United States forces in Vietnam,
provided official records of the rates at which North Vietnamese troops were
infiltrating into the south. Relying on his memory for the taped interview, he
had said the rate was 20,000 a month in the fall of 1967; his later review of
his files, he said, disclosed that records showing that that rate was not
reached until January 1968, just before the Tet offensive.

General Westmoreland said yesterday that the letter had been intended to correct
what he said on tape. ''Why would I write a letter if I didn't intend that?'' he
asked.

Mr. Crile said he did not understand that to be the intent because the letter
did not specifically say it was a correction. The documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy; A Vietnam Deception,'' broadcast in January, did not mention the letter.

'Ample Evidence of Deception'

The producer and Mr. Wallace both said they still believed it had been correct
to use the word ''conspiracy'' to describe the alleged manipulation of
troop-strength reports. Mr. Wallace noted that use of the word had been
''discussed thoroughly'' during the program's final editing.

Mr. Sauter said there was ''ample evidence of deception,'' but ''a judgmental
conclusion of conspiracy was inappropriate.'' Mr. Wallace said he had spent
about three weeks on the Vietnam project, while Mr. Crile and others were
working on it for 15 months. The correspondent noted that he had been busy with
his regular duties for ''60 Minutes'' and other specials. ''That's not the best
way to do it,'' he said.

Mr. Sauter's memorandum said procedural standards were violated when George
Allen, a former Central Intelligence Agency official, was allowed to view tapes
of interviews with others and was interviewed a second time to eliminate the
hesitancy he had shown in the first tape. Written CBS standards prohibit
interviews that ''are not spontaneous and unrehearsed.''

Report Said to Be Internal

Mr. Crile said Mr. Allen was an ''expert'' witness, and ''my effort was to make
his statements as clear as possible.'' He said that he had spoken with Mr. Allen
several times before the interview and knew at the end of the first session that
''he was not speaking with the same clarity as when the camera was not
running.'' But Mr. Crile agreed it was a violation of the guidelines and said,
''it's not something I would do again.''

In a separate interview yesterday, Mr. Sauter said he would not make public the
61-page report on the documentary written by Burton Benjamin, senior executive
producer of CBS News, who made an investigation of the show after its
journalistic practices were criticized in a TV Guide article. Mr. Sauter said
the report was prepared as an internal document and was not comparable to, for
example, the lengthy report written by the ombudsman for The Washington Post
after its Pulitzer Prize-winning story on an 8-yearold drug addict was revealed
as a hoax.

Responding to criticism by General Westmoreland that he had not been interviewed
during the internal inquiry, Mr. Benjamin said that he had read the text of an
hourlong press conference in which the general criticized the program.

''That,'' Mr. Benjamin said, ''presented his arguments pretty well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ALARM RISES OVER DECAY IN U.S. PUBLIC WORKS

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2616 words


In Pittsburgh, the United States Steel Corporation contends that it is paying at
least $1 million a year to detour its trucks 26 miles around a major bridge that
the state closed two years ago for lack of repair.

In Albuquerque, motorists are up in arms because sewer lines are crumbling under
the streets, many of which have become impassable as the city struggles to make
piece-by-piece replacements.

In Houston, the magazine Texas Monthly asserted that it had counted 1.5 million
potholes in a city that is a center of great wealth.  In New York, broken water
mains, subway failures and the deterioration of other facilities above ground
and below have become so common that the seemingly mundane subject of ''the
infrastructure'' has become a prominent issue for both the city and state
governments.

News of a neglected and decaying infrastructure - public facilities such as
water systems, sewers, streets, highways, bridges and rails, which undergird
life and commerce in every community - has taken on a new prominence on the
national scene at a time when the country is suffering from a recession, high
unemployment, decline of much of its basic industry and the reduction of public
services by governments at all levels.

The situation is similar to that of a family whose income has been cut, that is
behind on the mortgage payments and unable to buy shoes for the children, and
then learns that tree roots have plugged the drainage pipes, the furnace must be
replaced and termites have weakened the foundation of the house.

In the urban policy report the Administration made public last week, President
Reagan said he wanted to do something about the infrastructure problem but had
not decided what.

Meanwhile, a bipartisan coalition is growing in Congress to force action by the
national Government, partly on the ground that Mr.  Reagan's goal of
revitalizing American industry cannot be reached until something is done about
inqdequate public facilities. Many Democrats say that repairing public works
would provide jobs for many of the unemployed.

One difficulty is that public works projects have been so fragmented between the
various levels of governments that no one knows the extent of the decay, or how
much money would be needed for repairs and new construction necessary to support
the economy and quality of life at reasonable levels.

Only in the past year or so has the concern of policy makers about the neglect
of basic public works grown urgent. Studies by George E.  Peterson of the Urban
Institute and by Pat Choate and Susan Walter of the Council of State Planning
Agencies documented the inadequacy of public facilities, not only in older,
fiscally troubled cities such as New York and Boston but in suburban and rural
communities in every region of the nation.

Their findings have been confirmed and expanded by a number of Government
agencies and by Congressional investigations. These are some of the more serious
deficiencies cited:

- Obsolete and decaying bridges. The Transportation Department recently
classified 45 percent of the nation's 557,516 highway bridges as ''deficient or
oblolete.'' Replacement or repair could cost $47.6 billion, the department said.

- Crumbling highways. The 42,000-mile interstate system, begun in the 1950's and
not yet completed, is deteriorating at a rate that would require reconstruction
of 2,000 miles a year, in addition to a backlog of 8,000 miles in need of
rebuilding that accumulated because of cuts in financing in recent years. The
condition has contributed to costly traffic jams on the expressways of most
major urban areas.

- Deteriorated rail facilities. The condition of roadbeds and rolling stock of
Conrail and other rail systems is so poor that some officials say there are no
reliable estimates available on the cost of replacement and repair. But frequent
derailments and delays in shipments attest to the need, according to a range of
officials.

- Leaking water and sewer mains. The Urban Institute, in a survey of 28 cities,
found that 10 of them, Cleveland, St. Louis, Pittsburgh, Tulsa, Philadelphia,
Hartford, Kansas City, Mo., Cincinatti, Buffalo and Baltimore, were losing 10
percent or more of their treated water because of deteriorated pipes. And the
survey did not include New York and Boston, with two of the leading all-time
waterleaking systems. Probably a larger problem, from the standpoint of waste,
is leaky sewers, in which ground water flows into the pipes, adds to the volume
of sewage and greatly increases the cost of treatment.

- Shortage of capacity of many facilities. A survey conducted by the Economic
Development Administration in 1978 showed that half of the nation's communities
had waste-water treatment systems operating at full capacity, meaning they could
not support new economic or population growth without costly new construction.

The estimates of need tend to become astronomical. Nationally the figures run
into the trillions. Last fall, the New York State Legislature estimated that $8
billion to $10 billion a year would be needed in New York State for repairs,
replacement and construction of the infrastructure, which would double current
expenditures.

Outlook for New York City

A more precise expression of need was published by the Joint Economic Committee
of Congress, which said that New York City alone over the next few years would
have to service, repair or replace 1,000 bridges, two aqueducts, one large water
tunnel, several reservoirs, 6,200 miles of streets, 6,000 miles of sewers, 6,000
miles of water lines, 6,700 subways cars, 4,500 buses, 25,000 acres of parks, 17
hospitals, 19 city university campuses, 950 schools, 200 libraries and several
hundred fire houses and police stations.

The causes of neglect and decay are more easily documented than the extent of
need. Mr. Choate, an economist and a former Federal official who is now the
senior analyst for a giant corporation, said in a paper prepared for the House
Wednesday Group, made up of moderate Republican representatives, that
investments in capital projects had declined sharply.

''The nation's public capital investments fell from $33.7 billion in 1965 to
less than $24 billion in 1980, a 30 percent decline,'' he wrote. ''Public works
investments dropped from $174 per person in 1965 to less than $110 per person in
1980, a 36 percent decline, and shrank from 3.6 percent of the gross national
product in 1965 to less than 1.7 per cent in 1980, a 54 percent decline.''

In the 1960's and 70's, public works projects frequently were delayed so that
the Government could finance such endeavors as the Vietnam War, social programs,
education and space exploration.  Nevertheless, the Federal Government assumed a
much larger share of public works costs, which previously had been borne by
state and local governments. In 1957, the Federal Government paid 10 percent of
the costs. By 1980 its share had risen to 40 percent.

Responsibility Fragmented

The responsibility for maintaining public facilities, Mr. Choate pointed out,
was fragmented between 100 Federal agencies, 50 state governments, 3,042
counties, 35,000 general-purpose governments, 15,000 school districts, 26,000
special districts, 2,000 area-wide units of government, 200 interstate compacts
and nine multistate regional development organizations.

But the Federal Government, the dominant player, never achieved any rational
method for allocating the funds. Mr. Choate said Federeal laws favored new
construction over repairing of existing facilities.

Public works money, which often has been handed out for purposes of politics
rather than need, became increasingly subject to waste and fraud, according to
Mr. Choate and others. In 1980 alone, 219 state and local public officials were
convicted of criminal abuse of public funds, a figure three times greater than
the 1970 level.

At the same time environmental requirements enacted in the 1970's increased the
need for higher expenditures for public works.  But many authorities say they
believe that the greatest cause of inadequacy of public facilities is the spread
of the population and industry out of the central city to suburbs and remote
communities around the nation.

Retired people moved in large groups into new communities, many in rural
recreational areas; factories settled along the freeways and new urban
development sprang up near them; state governments spread their colleges over
once remote areas; people migrated from the old industrial cities to the South
and West, where urban and rural sprawl was greatest; after the 1980 census the
Federal Government designated 36 former small towns as as metropolitan areas.
All this new development required enormous amounts of capital investment for
streets, curbs, water and sewer facilities, airports and other facilities.

Demand in Cities Remained

But the new growth did not lessen the demand in the thinned-out central cities.
The infrastructures in old cities, which suffered heavy population losses, serve
many vacant lots, half-empty buildings and closed factories and warehouses. But
the facilities must usually be maintained as though they were being used at
capacity.

At a recent conference on land use sponsored by the Engineering Foundation in
Rindge, N.@H., Philip Finkelstein of the Center for Local Tax Research in New
York pointed out that when the city government suggested that it could no longer
afford to maintain basic facilities in the South Bronx, where many buildings had
been abandoned, there was a storm of protest and the suggestion was dropped.

''I don't think there is any way to do that with any degree of acceptability,''
he said, in reference to a suggestion that there be a contraction of public
facilities in the cities.

Americans in 1982 are separated as never before by great stretches of pavement,
communication and electric lines and water and sewer pipes. Many authorities are
questioning whether the nation can any longer afford to maintain what it already
has built and continue to provide for new communities.

Land Use at the Heart

Harry E. Pollard, president of the Henry George School of Social Science of Los
Angeles, said the way it is now, ''A bus driver in order to collect one acre of
people has to drive five acres to find them. And he has to drive past five miles
of sewer pipe instead of one. It is a land-use problem. If you have to finance
five miles for every one you will forever be in financial trouble.''

According to a number of authorities, no national administration has succeeded
in bringing order to the chaos of public works spending. The Carter
Administration, they said, was beginning to coordinate Federal spending so that
priorities could be established.

The Reagan Administration, according to those officials, abandoned the
coordination but to some extent has stopped the use of Federal funds for capital
projects in new areas. For example, it refused to finance water treatment plants
in new communities around Orlando, Fla. The rationale was that if people there
wanted new communities they could finance them themselves.

Future of Federal Role

Yet even high White House officials acknowledged that the Reagan Administration
had no comprehensive policy on public works, except that it intends to
drastically reduce the Federal role. Richard S.  Williamson, assistant to the
President for intergovernmental relations, said Mr. Reagan wanted to help the
cities with their infrastructure problems, and he ordered that this concern be
put in the Administration's urban policy report that went to Congress.

The report, however, sought to show that the picture was not so bleak as had
been depicted. It pointed out that demand had lessened for schools and new
highways and said many cities were moving on their own to step up capital
projects. And it pointed to local innovations.

New York, for example, was said to have switched emphasis from new buildings to
repairing streets, bridges, mass transit, water and sewage systems. Other
cities, such as Boston, were putting the authority for public works in the hands
of independent commissions for greater efficiency, while others, such as
Cleveland, were enlisting private interests for help.

The Federal Government's role, the report said, was to gather information about
more cost-effective methods of financing public works while ''other aspects of
Federal aid remain to be determined.''

Meanwhile, members of Congress have stepped into the void. Some have been
spurred by such reports as bridges being closed for long periods in Kansas City,
Mo., while motorists drive blocks out of their way and schoolchildren in
Altoona, Pa., having to leave their bus, walk across a bridge and wait for the
empty bus to follow because the bridge can no longer support the weight of both
children and bus.

Proposal by House Members

Two Pennsylvania Representatives, William S. Clinger Jr., a Republican, and
Robert W. Edgar, a Democrat, have been pushing legislation for a capital budget
that would require the Administration to take an inventory of capital needs and
assign priorities for spending on public works, as a first step toward longterm
recovery.

They were joined in their effort by such diverse leaders as Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. and Representative Jack Kemp, the conservative Republican from
Buffalo, who were among a number of Congressmen signing a letter to Mr. Reagan
asking him to consider the idea. A similar bill has been introduced in the
Senate by Christopher J.  Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut.

Meanwhile, a number of Democrats around the country have taken up the issue on
ground that rebuilding the nation's capital plant would fight unemployment.

In New York, Assembly Speaker Stanley Fink has made repairing of the
infrastructure one of his major concerns and Governor Carey, in the recent
legislative session, proposed increases in taxes and fees to help pay the costs.
The tax legislation, however, was defeated, in part because it was an election
year. Officials on the national and state levels predict the issue will become
more heated in the years ahead.

In response to questions about how the nation could let basic facilities decay
to the extent that many authorities say they have, Maury Seldin, president of
the Homer Hoyt Institute, a nonprofit foundation in land economics, and a
professor at American University, said, ''We as a nation are accustomed to
living on uppers and downers.''

He said that in recent years the nation had become accustomed to ''taking a
fix'' for whatever bothers it without much thought to the long-range
consequences, especially in response to various special interests that can
command support for narrow goals, and policy is fragmented.

He called for a maturing of the political processes so that various interests
could reach compromises for the overall good and ''be willing to settle for a
fair shake.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Broadway Viaduct in Kansas City

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DECLINE OF AMERICAN SWAY

BYLINE: By RICHARD J. BARNET; Richard J. Barnet, a senior fellow of the
Institute for Policy Studies in Washington and the author of ''The Lean Years''
and ''Real Security,'' is completing a book on America's alliances with Europe
and Japan.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1923 words


THE IMPERIOUS ECONOMY By David P. Calleo.  265 pp. Cambridge, Mass.  Harvard
University Press. $17.50.

IN his campaign, Ronald Reagan promised to use the Presidency to reverse the
stunning decline of American power that marked the 1970's. Humiliation at the
hands of the Iranian hostage-takers, helplessness to prevent the Soviet Union
from becoming a formidable military power, impotence in the face of the brutal
Soviet counterinsurgency drive into Afghanistan and chronic refusal by America's
allies to share the world view of official Washington all seemingly demonstrated
the need for a vigorous reassertion of American will. Mr. Reagan held out a
nostalgic vision of an America once more supreme, confident and effective in
projecting its might in the world. The problem was simple: The United States had
grown slack, become confused about the righteousness of its cause and let down
its guard.

The answer was equally simple: a massive increase in armaments, accompanied by
chilling statements from the White House suggesting a certain insouciance about
using them. Above all, the United States had to demonstrate that it was less
afraid of nuclear war than its adversary was and that the nation had
successfully exorcised the guilt and shame of the Vietnam War. Eighteen months
later, the Administration, having succeeded in alarming millions in the United
States and Europe, is engaged in a tactical retreat from these exposed
positions, but the official analysis of America's loss of power and the
prescription for reversing that process are the same as when Mr. Reagan took
office.

''The Imperious Economy'' offers a quite different analysis of what has eroded
American power. Prof. David Calleo, a political scientist at the Johns Hopkins
School of Advanced International Studies, in the end offers only a sketchy
prescription for what he calls ''the American disease,'' but 90 percent of his
new book is a plausible and subtle diagnosis. Mr. Calleo, who has written
extensively on the Atlantic Alliance from a politically independent perspective,
here explains in effect why the American Century proclaimed by Henry Luce in
1941 lasted about 26 years. Mr. Calleo makes the sensible but often forgotten
point that ''the slow transition from American hegemony to a more plural world
is not, in itself, a defeat for American policy. On the contrary, it is
precisely the outcome that might have been expected to follow from the policy
itself.'' At the end of World War II, the United States had a monopoly of
nuclear weapons, produced a huge share of the world's goods and exercised
virtually total control over the reconstructed world monetary system. As the
leading nuclear scientists testified at the time, the monopoly was fated to be
short-lived. There were only two strategies for keeping the bomb out of Soviet
hands. One was disarmament, a renunciation of America's temporary advantage in
the interest of her ultimate security. The other was ''preventive war'' to
destroy the Soviet Union before Stalin developed the bomb. For a variety of
reasons that demand far more careful historical analysis than they have
received, neither strategy was implemented. Thus the very moment of America's
military supremacy ushered in an era of unprecedented vulnerability and
insecurity, the true dimensions of which have only become clear in the 1980's.

AS Mr. Calleo points out, the United States' economic position declined
dramatically between the immediate postwar era and the end of the 1970's.
Between 1960 and 1970 alone, the U.S. share of world manufactured exports fell
from 22.8 percent to 18.4 percent. This predictable trend was to a considerable
extent the consequence of European and Japanese recovery, both explicit goals of
American policy. The United States could not be prosperous if it was the only
healthy market economy. Where would it sell its goods? An economically stagnant
Europe and Japan would be vulnerable to Communism and Soviet influence. In its
moment of supremacy, the United States was forced to diffuse its extraordinary
power in the hope of securing long-term stability.

It is the third source of American decline that primarily occupies Mr. Calleo's
attention -the transformation of the world monetary order. ''The Imperious
Economy'' recounts the efforts of five administrations to reconcile what Mr.
Calleo calls ''America's special domestic claims and exceptional foreign
responsibilities.'' Beginning with the Kennedy Administration, the official
panacea for managing social conflict at home was economic growth. Unemployment
would be kept at acceptably low levels, and revenues needed to ease the
integration of blacks and the unemployable poor into a national community would
be achieved by the ''fine-tuning'' of the New Economics, i.e., judiciously timed
budget deficits and tax cuts.  Kennedy's vision of a nation on the move, which
was extravagantly enlarged under Johnson, came into conflict with the global
role the foreign-policy elite had staked out since the war.

The United States was still committed to its prewar vision of a world free of
the trade barriers and beggar-thy-neighbor policies that had brought on the
Great Depression and World War II. By its sheer economic power, the United
States would dominate a worldwide free market that would, supposedly, guarantee
ever-increasing prosperity within its own borders. This accelerating economic
engine would be protected by a vast military force deployed around the world,
sufficient to keep the Russians within their newly expanded domain and to
maintain control over political and economic development in strategic regions
across the globe.

BY the time of the Kennedy Administration, however, the goals of an expansionist
domestic economy and an imperial foreign policy were already colliding. The
promotion of social peace at home by economic expansion was inflationary. The
full-employment policies of the Kennedy-Johnson era produced socially
progressive changes of historic importance, but because these were carried on in
the midst of a permanent military mobilization that heated the economy but did
little to make it productive, the dollar was weakened in the process.

At Bretton Woods in 1944, the United States had insisted on a world monetary
system that penalized nations with balance-of-payments deficits. Mr. Calleo
retells the story of how the United States, step by step, freed itself from the
rules of its own making, exporting its inflation and then increasingly losing
the power to solve its problems in this way. Having exported billions of dollars
by means of foreign aid, private investment by the multinational corporations
and enormous expenditures to maintain a military presence around the world, the
United States, by President Nixon's time, was unable to live within the system
it had created. It had the power to change the rules, but it did not have either
the vision or the power to design new rules that would produce the stable
international order needed for long-term American prosperity.

''The Imperious Economy'' is particularly useful in showing some of the
connections between military might and economic health that have transformed the
meaning of national power in our time. The costs of a worldwide military
establishment have been consistently underestimated by economists who, as Mr.
Calleo shows, are adept at spinning fashionable theories to dignify the impulses
of confused politicians. One reason the long-term effects of excessive military
spending have been minimized is that the United States has wrung economic
concessions from the other industrial nations by virtue of being accepted as
their military protector. But the concessions were never enough.

Mr. Calleo points out that Europe chose to listen to those American officials
who preached economic integration but not to those who vainly called for ''a
Europe wide open to American farm products.'' While the United States kept
building a ''nuclear umbrella'' that promised less and less real security,
Europe and Japan became formidable economic rivals. Not only were they
successful in resolving conflicts within their own societies but they were able
to use ''their growing economic power to reshape the postwar order.'' Japan and
the Common Market extended regional arrangements into the Mediterranean, Africa,
the Middle East, Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.

The liberal ideology of the early postwar years, which equated American and
world interests, was replaced by what Mr. Calleo calls ''neo-mercantilism''
during the Nixon Administration. The United States, now resenting its ''imperial
burdens and handicaps,'' gave up the pretension that it was acting in behalf of
a ''Free World'' community. It would look after its own interests.

In his detailed discussion of the gold crisis and the termination of fixed
exchange rates, which in effect legitimized the chronic weakness of the dollar,
Mr. Calleo brings into focus those critical political conflicts that are
traditionally obscured by the arcane technical language in which such matters
are usually discussed.  ''The Imperious Economy'' is really an essay in the
paradoxes of American power. We have been remarkably successful in getting our
way in the world but not in achieving what we want. Disasters have played into
our hands. When the Soviets moved militarily on Czechoslovakia or a war broke
out in the Middle East, the United States' role as protector was effectively
dramatized, but the task of protection in the nuclear age remained as
problematical as ever, and maintaining the illusions of deterrence grew ever
more expensive.

THE oil and food crises of the mid-1970's stemmed the relative decline of the
United States vis-a-vis its allies within the industrial world because in the
short run this nation was better able than they to sustain the shocks. But the
United States has been unable to translate the advantages of its ''imperious
economy'' into stable growth and prosperity at home. It can still work its will
with little fear of retaliation from its allies. The Reagan Administration's
high interest rates subvert European and Japanese economic health more than
anything the Kremlin seems willing or able to do, but the allies, divided as
they are, can do little more than protest. Similarly, the Administration's
heavy-handed pressure on the European allies to stop natural-gas pipeline deals
with the Soviet Union has dramatized anew the high cost of American protection,
even as the credibility of that protection is increasingly questioned. The
United States is still No. 1 in an increasingly pluralistic international
system, in which America's new position represents, as Mr. Calleo puts it, ''not
so much the decline of America as the revival of the world.''

But the fruits of hegemony are eluding the American people. Except for their
development of an arsenal to neutralize American military might as an effective
political weapon, the Soviets have surprisingly little to do with America's
problems. In the postimperial world in which we live, the Kremlin is more
isolated than the United States and in many ways more vulnerable. The heart of
America's problem, as this fine book shows, is the absence of a vision
appropriate to our real position in the world. We have chosen to define and test
our power with pretensions worthy of King Canute: preventing revolutionary
change in the third world and ignoring the fundamental changes that have already
occurred in our relations with Europe and Japan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTIWAR DRIVE HAS ROOTS IN SPARTA

BYLINE: By PATRICIA SQUIRES

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 20, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


SPARTA ''WHAT we're doing raises ethical questions of war-making and, at times,
we've met strong opposition,'' said Gordon R.Smith of this Sussex County
community.

Together with his wife, Frances, Mr. Smith has worked for peace for more than 15
years, a campaign that has led the couple to state, regional, national and
international peace activities.

Among these activities have been draft counseling, giving refuge to activist
fugitives in the 70's, participation in a peace mission to the Middle East in
1980 and innovative presentations in their church.

They said that they had found new encouragement among the thousands who turned
out for the disarmament rally in New York City last month.  Mr. Smith said that
some of his activities were controversial in his home area because ''many Sussex
County residents have strong military backgrounds or work in government jobs in
the defense industry, and what we're proposing could make their jobs less
secure.''

''They support peacekeeping through military strength,'' he added.  Mr. Smith, a
retired mechanical engineer, and Mrs. Smith, a former social worker, were the
parents of four young children when they began their peace efforts, and now have
two young grandchildren.

They said that their strong social consciences and religious beliefs -they are
Presbyterians - prompted their peace ventures in their Sparta church, in area
churches of the Newton Presbytery, in Riverside Presbyterian Church in New York
City and in the county's ecumenical group.

In that group several years ago, the Smiths met Paul Mayer, now of East Orange,
a former Benedictine priest at St. Paul's Abbey in Newton. Mr. Mayer is now a
leader of a national peace coalition - the Brooklyn-based Religious Task Force
for the Mobilization of Survival - and was a planner for the disarmament rally's
ecumenical service at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in Manhattan on June
11.

The Rev. Frank Rodimer, Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Paterson and
also formerly active in the Sussex County peace movement, represented the United
States Conference of Roman Catholic Bishops at that service.

In the 1970's, Mr. Mayer was coordinator of the defense committee for the
Berrigan brothers, Daniel and Philip, the Roman Catholic priests and Vietman War
resistors who went underground after being convicted of burning draft records in
Catonsville, Md., in 1968. They and members of their group were known as the
Catonsville Nine.

After imprisonment, the Berrigans returned to society. Daniel Berrigan and Mr.
Mayer were among the 1,500 demonstators arrested at United Nations missions in
New York City on June 14.

The Smiths recalled complying with a request from Mr. Mayer in April 1970 to
give weekend lodging to the Berrigans and other members of the Catonsville Nine
in their Sparta home. Mrs. Smith said that she admired their courage and found
them pleasant house guests who referred to themselves as ''Friendly Felons''
while frolicking behind Halloween masks with the Smiths' 9-year-old son.

In addition to educational programs to create understanding among church and
non-governmental community organizations, the Smiths refer individuals to a
number of peace groups in New Jersey. They said they would work with those
groups to promote a ''yes'' vote by New Jersey residents on a November
referendum calling for a freeze on the prodution of nuclear weapons.

At the Montclair office of SANE -New Jersey headquarters of the 25-year-old
National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy - Alan Swenson recalled that SANE
initially opposed nuclear tests in the atmosphere and since 1974 has proposed
safe energy alternatives to nuclear power.

''Prior to November, we will contact 21 Town Councils and other governing bodies
in New Jersey to get a 'yes' vote on the nuclearfreeze referendum,'' Mr. Swenson
said. ''We also have taken a strong stand against the United States involvement
in El Salvador and the funding cuts resulting from military spending there.''

Mr. Swenson is assistant director of the New Jersey SANE group.  Fred and Claire
Mayer of Branchburg - they are no relation to Paul Mayer - attended the New York
rally last month with neighbors, friends and supporters of the Citizens Against
Nuclear Arms, which they organized in Hunterdon and Somerset Counties in
January. They said they could not keep ahead of requests for the organization's
newsletters, now being mailed to 400 people throughout New Jersey.

''This is an issue that stretches from our house around the neighborhood and out
into the whole world,'' Mrs. Mayer said. ''If we all work in numbers with
determination, I'm sure something can be done.''

''The concept of the whole human race being wiped out and of not being survived
is beginning to grip people,'' Mrs. Smith said.  ''They're beginning to become
concerned about the psychological impact on their children in this sort of
oppressive aura to grow up in. I feel that my grandchildren are very vulnerable
in many ways.''

The Smiths are members of the New Jersey Coalition of Draft Counselors and
provided the only draft counseling in Sussex County.  During the Vietnam era,
when they counseled from quarters in the Presbyterian Church in Newton, church
members ousted them. Church fund-raisers said they viewed draft counseling as
controversial and a deterrent to their campaign.

Mr. Smith was one of seven Americans who made a religious trip to the Middle
East in 1980, the 15th anniversary of the Palestine Liberation Organization. He
said that the group had met Yasir Arafat, president of the P.L.O., and many
Christian Palestinians.

''We saw the human side of the P.L.O., a side that had been misunderstood,
dehumanized and wrongly labeled,'' he said. ''We found that a third of the
Palestinians are Christians and that those Christian Arabs have been
overlooked.''

When his trip and observations were publicized, Mr. Smith recalled, they caused
much reaction. As a result, he conducted Christian-Jewish meetings in the Sparta
Presbyterian Church in a quest for understanding.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of NY disarmanment march

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER IN REVIEW;
A SCARY AND FUNNY 'BLUE LEAVES'

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 15, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


GARDEN CITY GIVEN the haste with which an Adelphi Festival Theater production is
assembled, it is a wonder that a play as difficult to do as John Guare's
dazzling ''The House of Blue Leaves'' was chosen in the first place, and it's no
wonder that the result is diffuse.

Yet this is just the sort of vital, underexposed work that local audiences
should be seeing, and since Mr. Guare's style and theme seem to be all about the
coexistence of contradictions, there's a certain giddy sense in all of this.

Besides, the summer theater's producing director, William Gardner, who presented
the world premieres of two of the playwright's works at Chicago's Academy
Festival Theater, has an enormous affinity for Mr.  Guare's plays - the
beautiful and the bad.

''The House of Blue Leaves'' is beautiful; it was the first play that brought
him out of esoterica and into some renown. It won the 1971 ''Best American
Play'' Critics Circle award, and it remains his best.

The idea for the play came to Mr. Guare when he was in Rome in 1965 and saw a
newspaper picture of the Pope on Queens Boulevard when the Pontiff was on his
way to the United Nations to plead for world peace. Mr. Guare remembered how
seeing - and touching - the Pope in Rome was a required childhood dream in the
Queens Catholic grammar school he attended.

The play takes place in Queens. Artie Shaughnessy, who looks out at the stars
through a locked window gate, has a job feeding the animals in the Central Park
Zoo, but his dreams are big. He wants to be a Hollywood songwriter. So what if
his most familiar song sounds too familiar - just like ''White Christmas,'' in
fact?

Artie's suicidal wife, who once slashed her wrists with spoons and has visions
of jumping in front of the Pope's car, is appropriately named Bananas and eats
only when she can pretend to be a dog. She wanders through the play, half-crazed
and, almost, entirely lucid.

His go-getting girlfriend, Bunny Flingus, who lives downstairs, sleeps with but
won't cook for him until after they're married.  Throughout, she uses ''The Joy
of Cooking'' - dishes like eggplant meringue - as a come-on, and believes that
the arrival of the Pope is a miracle, just like the Beatles.

His son, Ronnie, who is in the Army, makes a spooky, silent AWOL appearance just
at the end of Act I. He plans to achieve instant celebrity by blowing up the
Pope.

All the characters take time out to address the audience, and in Act II, all
havoc breaks loose. Three wacky autograph-seeking nuns, a deaf one-time-only
movie starlet and Artie's boyhood friend, a famous Hollywood producer, burst in
and out of his apartment in Sunnyside.

The Adelphi production, directed by Ronald Roston, captures glimmers of
tenderness and flashes of farcical elements. It is an incomplete realization of
the play because the two do not converge, and the playwright's satiric edge,
which cuts through a whole false value system, from the Vatican to Hollywood, is
blunted.

Even so, Rochelle Oliver achieves a rare poignancy as Bananas, and Kim Beaty
does a flashy and funny turn as the statuesque movie star crawling about in
search of her hearing aid. Mark Zeisler is on the way toward getting the right
mix of eeriness and plasticity as Ronnie.

Last Tuesday, George Martin's Artie seemed more process than performance and
Marcia Haufrecht's Bunnie rather one-dimensional.  With perspective and without
the timeliness of the Vietnam War, ''The House of Blue Leaves'' hasn't lost its
potency. It remains simultaneously scary and funny - an off-center, on-target
view of a synthetic society and a futile search for real feeling. In this
staging, one senses that the play's seemingly but not necessarily disparate
elements could coalesce in time - but that, alas, runs out next Sunday.

(The remaining performances are today at 7 P.M., Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday
at 8 P.M., Friday at 8:30 P.M., Saturday at 5 and 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 7
P.M.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rochelle Oliver and George Martin

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS IN FILM: HOW MOVIEMAKERS HANDLE HOT ISSUES

BYLINE: By Robert Sklar

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2504 words


Robert Sklar teaches film at New York University and is the author of
''Movie-Made America.''

If you have a message, ran the old Hollywood maxim, send it by Western Union.
Movies aren't meant to be about the real world. Forget elections and
politicians, strikes and working conditions, race and class antagonisms,
dictators and foreign wars. People go to movies to escape all that.

There's a grain of truth in this hoary image of the dream factory, else it
wouldn't sound so familiar. But mostly it's one more piece of Hollywood
illusion, designed to keep the moralists and censors at bay. In fact, during the
heyday of the studio system, Hollywood turned out a fair share of films dealing
with events and issues of the time, by award-winning directors such as Frank
Capra and John Ford. Even the years of McCarthyism and the blacklist could not
drive politics from the screen, though it often appeared in covert ways.  And
today, after major feature films and documentaries on political themes by
directors from Marcel Ophuls to Warren Beatty, politics past and present has
demonstrated its continuing hold on filmmakers.

Still, in any given year, audiences are not likely to see more than a sprinkling
of political films or to see the varieties and the continuities of this
particular form. But filmgoers now have a rare opportunity to view half a
century of American political filmmaking in a continuing film festival, ''A Lens
on America - Political Perspectives.'' The festival, now entering its second of
three weeks at the 92d Street Y, has included such diverse examples of the
political film as John Ford's ''The Grapes of Wrath,'' Herbert Biberman's ''Salt
of the Earth'' and Alan Pakula's ''All the President's Men.''

Still to come in the Monday-through-Thursday screening schedule are feature
films such as Stanley Kubrick's ''Paths of Glory,'' Hal Ashby's ''Coming Home,''
Daniel Petrie's ''Raisin in the Sun'' and Robert Rossen's ''All the King's
Men.'' In addition, there are documentaries on subjects ranging from the 1954
Army-McCarthy hearings to America's Vietnam experience.

''I know the degree to which films have shaped my own sense of politics in
American democracy,'' said Annette Insdorf, professor of film at Yale
University, in explaining the rationale for the series, which she is moderating
along with Michael Webb, former director of national film programming at the
American Film Institute. ''The programs will explore the way American films have
revealed more about American politics and how they condition people's responses
to American politics. We hope to stimulate people into thinking about specific
political issues, and to create a greater sensitivity to the ways that films
express those issues.''

What emerges from the overview of the political film offered by the festival is
a surprising consistency of themes, strategies and formulas used by American
filmmakers working in this genre. But just what does the genre consist of? While
some moviegoers are inclined to find political or ideological messages in nearly
every film, and others prefer, as the old Hollywood moguls recommended, to check
their politics at the theater door, it's nevertheless possible to identify the
specifically political film.

Such films take political situations or issues - suspicious doings within a
large organization, a politician's struggle for power, a community's effort to
come to terms with some collective issue - as their primary, foreground subject
and often use their story in order to make a point about the inadequacies or the
nobility of political institutions and assumptions.

The filmmaker who chooses to make a political film is often a person with a
cause or an ideal; but how to translate these into a film that works
convincingly - and commercially -poses problems that are peculiar to the genre.
How do you convey ideas about such abstract matters as relationships between
groups of people and institutions, or about ideological philosophies, without
losing drama and audience interest? How do you communicate a point of view
without resorting to propagandistic distortions?

The touchy question of critical points of view and possible propagandistic
intentions is a major reason behind Hollywood's wariness of the political film.
And certainly, some well-known examples of the genre have taken an adversarial
stance. ''Salt of the Earth,'' the film about New Mexican mine workers made in
1954 by blacklisted Hollywood personnel, is one of the few American feature
films explicitly advocating collective political action. It was denounced as
Communist propaganda when it was released and blocked by a boycott from all but
a few theaters.

''Salt of the Earth'' was rediscovered in the 1970's by feminist groups which
found prescient the film's emphasis on an activist role for women. (A
documentary on the making of the film, ''A Crime to Fit the Punishment,'' is
receiving its New York premiere at the festival.)

''Coming Home'' was, of course, an explicitly anti-war movie, though the very
overtness of its perspective made it hard to accuse the film of hidden
propagandistic motives. However, the more recent ''Missing'' - a story of an
American youth who lost his life in the Chilean coup, made in Hollywood and
directed by the Greek director Costa-Gavras - was charged by some critics with
distorting the facts in the service of an anti-American viewpoint.

In general, in the context of American filmmaking and cultural life, it seems
clear that the most successful political films have been those that express the
deepest and most traditional of American political and social values. Films such
as ''All the King's Men,'' based on Robert Penn Warren's novel about a Southern
politician styled after Huey Long, and John Ford's tribute to Boston ward
politics, ''The Last Hurrah,'' focus on political leaders. But far more lasting
in their impact have been Frank Capra's sentimental Depression-era fables like
''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington,'' celebrating the Jeffersonian notion of the
natural aristocrat, the hick from the sticks who brings the virtues of small
town life onto the national stage with a fierce individualism.

In recent examples of political filmmaking, traditional values have remained
strongly in the forefront. ''All the President's Men,'' the film selected to
open the Y's festival, is thus a film less about the wrongdoing of the President
and his men than about two idealistic young reporters, Bob Woodward and Carl
Bernstein, who helped to bring the Watergate culprits to account.

''It was a David and Goliath story,'' the film's director, Alan Pakula, said
recently. ''In a time of enormous frustration, in a society in which the
individual did not seem to matter, that two unknown persons could have so much
power, that the individual was not impotent, had an important cathartic effect
for the country at that time. It had that kind of power for American audiences.
That to me was the most important effect of the film.''

Successful political films like ''All the President's Men'' not only frame their
political perspective within traditional American values, they also take many of
their dramatic cues from formulas and conventions developed in earlier periods
of Hollywood political filmmaking. These conventions come to us principally from
the studios' ''topical'' films of the Depression - fast-paced films about
political corruption and social problems made at a time of national economic
crisis, with titles like ''Black Fury'' and ''Mayor of Hell.''

These films identified a political or a social ''problem'' - say, housing
evictions or unemployment or political graft - and personified it in a ''bad
guy,'' an evil speculator or labor foreman or ward heeler, who was shown to be
the problem's cause. His victims, however, lacked the power to do anything about
it. But their plight, in these ultimately optimistic fables, enlisted the
interest of an uncommitted outsider, a journalist or inquiring official.
Ultimately this figure saw the righteousness of the victim's cause, converted to
their side and became their leader in exposing and crushing the villain, thus,
presumably, solving the ''problem'' and restoring social justice and order.

Though the contemporary political film exhibits considerably greater complexity
and sophistication, elements of this formula can be found in nearly every
American political film of the past decade.  In the movies as in the wider
political world, Americans seem to prefer to grapple with social issues in the
context of individual and family concerns, rather than in the larger units of
classes or social groups - and filmmakers have followed this preference as a
dramatic dictum.

Thus, when John Ford filmed ''The Grapes of Wrath,'' John Steinbeck's famous
novel about migrant workers, he shifted the emphasis from the migrants as a
group to concentrate on the fictional Joad family's search for a better life.
And even ''Salt of the Earth,'' with its collectivist philosophy, roots its
political struggles in family life and individual change.

The dramatic device of the personal conversion also continues to be central to
the political film genre. Everywhere in contemporary political film, the
narrative is carried by the individual's change of mind or heart. The figure in
''All the President's Men'' who experiences a conversion is the Washington Post
editor Ben Bradlee.  The efforts of Mr. Woodward and Mr. Bernstein efforts would
have gone for nothing without his eventual decision to support them.

In ''Coming Home,'' Jane Fonda's character transforms herself from a Marine
officer's conventional wife into a sexually and politically liberated woman. The
burden of villainy in that film falls on Bruce Dern as her husband, whose lack
of sensitivity as a lover seems far more important to the film's dramatic
situation than his military attitudes or political viewpoint.

In ''Missing,'' Jack Lemmon, as the father of a missing American youth, arrives
in the Latin American country ready to believe everything bad about his son and
daughter-in-law, putting implicit faith in the word of American officials.
Swiftly he discovers that he needs to believe just the opposite of what he
assumed - as Costa-Gavras presents it, it's the young people who speak the
truth, the U.S. ambassador and his subordinates who are the unreliable,
deplorable dissemblers. This transformation is abetted, to be sure, by the
performances of the actors playing the American officials. As directed by
Costa-Gavras, they bring to bear on their characterizations an array of stock
villain gestures hardly seen since the days of popular stage melodrama.

Nearly every other recent film about contemporary politics shares some aspects
of these basic formulas. The dramatic struggle of the individual may take place
in the political context, but as often as not the essential struggle is a
personal and private one - for family, for fulfillment, for self-knowledge. A
private triumph permits a happy ending, or at least an upbeat one, in a
political setting where few clear-cut solutions can be found.

But if one of the political film's purposes is to foster political awareness,
then this individualistic emphasis in the American tradition seems to have a
built-in contradiction. In adopting a structure that speaks to many people, the
personal-political film runs the risk of communicating a viewpoint to few or
none. While translating issues into personal conflicts makes compelling dramatic
sense, it enables the audience to leave the theater with political attitudes
unchanged from when they came in.

Clearly not everyone who was moved by ''Missing'' or ''Coming Home'' or ''The
Deer Hunter'' agreed with those films' interpretations of American involvement
in the Chilean coup or the Vietnam war; and fewer still who enjoyed ''Reds''
accepted John Reed's political viewpoint - but that was almost irrelevant to
their response. In such films the drama of individual lives takes precedence
over the drama of political choice.

There is another tradition of political film that avoids most of the pitfalls of
the conventional American form, though clearly it presents problems of its own.
This approach, practiced more by Europeans such as Rainer Werner Fassbinder than
by Americans, generally eschews the simple hero-villain dichotomies or the
''justice must always triumph'' ending. It is short on hope, long on irony. It
may have good guys and bad guys in it, but if so, it often depicts the
machinations of the bad guys as the norm of political behavior and the struggles
of the good guys as too little and too late.

The risk of the ironic approach is that it will appear too cold or too cerebral
for contemporary American moviegoers. But at least one moviemaker, Stanley
Kubrick, the expatriate American director based in London, has maintained, in
some of his films, an effective balance between ironic vision and audience
taste.

Two of these are ''Paths of Glory'' (playing Tuesday night in the Y series) and
''Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb''
(recently re-released to theaters in the wake of revived anti-nuclear
sentiments). As political statements, these films, one about military injustice,
the other about nuclear holocaust, say little more than that life is tragic or,
in the case of ''Dr. Strangelove,'' tragicomic.

In both of these films, the protagonists are defeated by the weight of
entrenched institutions or sheer bureaucratic muddle, which are shown to be as
vividly real as individuals and capable of exerting far more power. Mr. Kubrick
offers not only little hope but also hardly any political message of a
conventional sort, other than, here is a situation we find ourselves in, here is
how it was handled in the past or may be handled in the future, and don't look
to the filmmaker for solutions - find them yourself.

Clearly, this unconventional approach can be more disturbing than inspiriting.
But at least it communicates that heroes are not always saviors and villains not
the sole impediment to a better world. And that seems to be a solid beginning
for a style of political film that is concerned with the complexities of a
political world as well as with individuals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF a scene from ''All the King's Men''

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY IS QUIETLY REBUILDING ITS SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 18


The United States armed forces have quietly begun to rebuild a capability for
guerrilla operations, sabotage, clandestine assault and other forms of
unconventional warfare, according to Reagan Administration officials and
military officers.

Under instructions from Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, headed by Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., have started tightening the command
and control of unconventional forces to enable them to respond more quickly.

Senior officials said some consideration was being given to setting up a new
headquarters to command the various Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine units
trained for special operations. But they said no decision had been made.

Military officers knowledgable about special operations asserted that
unconventional forces had deteriorated because of cuts in funds for special
forces since the Vietnam War. But the officers said that the Reagan
Administration had requested new funds to build them up again.

Those sums, which have been hidden in the proposed 1983 military budget, are to
pay for improved communications equipment, additional air transportation, and
especially for expanded training exercises of units from the different services
to bring the forces to a high state of readiness, officials said. The proposals
are not considered likely to arouse significant opposition in Congress.

One official said the exact amounts were small, relative to the funds requested
for conventional forces. But he said that ''special operations are very
cost-effective,'' meaning that an increase in military power could be acquired
for a comparatively small investment.

The renewed emphasis on unconventional warfare coincides with the Reagan
Administration's increased emphasis on covert operations conducted by the
Central Intelligence Agency. The agency often draws on resources from other
agencies, including special military units.  Mr. Weinberger scarcely mentioned
special operations in his annual report to Congress in January. But the Defense
Guidance statement he signed in March to establish objectives for the military
services over the next five years laid out missions for special operations.

''We must revitalize and enhance special operations forces to project United
States power where the use of conventional forces would be premature,
inappropriate, or infeasible,'' the directive says. The United States must have
forces, it states, that ''can accomplish the full range of special operations in
conflict situations.''

Green Berets Included in Plan

The forces to be revitalized include the Army Special Forces, known popularly as
Green Berets; the Air Force's Special Operations Wing, and the Navy's Seals.
These units, plus Marine Corps parachutists trained in commando operations, are
all intended for missions behind enemy lines.

In peacetime, forces trained for special operations are to be employed in an
effort to avoid a direct confrontation with the Soviet Union, according to the
Defense Guidance.

''The United States must be able to defeat low-level aggression,'' it says,
''both to prevent the step-by-step expansion of Soviet or surrogate influence
and to prevent escalation to higher level of conflict. The United States must be
able to achieve these objectives when to its advantage without direct
confrontation.''

The paper says that when instability endangers American interests, ''special
operations forces will be employed to assist United States friends and allies.''

If a crisis begins, the guidance paper says, special operations would be
undertaken ''where the use of conventional forces would be premature,
inappropriate, or infeasible, to conduct surgical operations and to control the
situation or terminate the crisis on favorable terms.''

Should war with the Soviet Union break out, the guidance paper is explicit on
the mission of United States unconventional forces, saying: ''To exploit
political, economic and military weaknesses with the Warsaw Pact and to disrupt
enemy rear area operations, special operations forces will conduct operations in
Eastern Europe and in the northern and southern NATO regions.''

Special forces units would be among the first sent to the Persian Gulf region if
the Soviet Union invaded. The guidance paper says that ''Special operations,
ground, naval and air forces will assist regional states in impeding a Soviet
advance into the region until United States ground forces can be introduced.''

Not included in special operations, according to military officers, are
counterterrorist missions, which have also been emphasized by the Reagan
Administration. Planning and training for those forces is done by a
counterterrorist task force at Fort Bragg, N.C., with specially trained units
and people drawn from all four services.

Military units trained for special operations include:

Army Special Forces

The Army's Special Forces, or Green Berets, with headquarters at Fort Bragg, was
known in the Vietnam War for counterinsurgency operations, including training
the South Vietnamese to fight Vietcong guerrillas.

But the primary mission of the Special Forces is insurgency, particularly in
making contact with dissidents behind enemy lines and training them in guerrilla
operations, sabotage and terror.

Army Rangers, who wear black berets, are trained for missions in support of
United States conventional forces. They might raid a headquarters or a
communications center to disrupt enemy operations at the same time regular
forces are attacking at the front.

Air Force Special Wing

The Air Force's Special Operations Wing, with headquarters at Eglin Air Force
Base in Florida, flies black, unmarked airplanes that carry cargo to special
ground forces or their allies, drop secret agents and saboteurs by parachute, or
extract Americans or allies from behind enemy lines.

The Air Force unit also flies gunships in support of special ground operations.
The C-130 gunships that were prepared to circle over Teheran in the attempted
hostage rescue in 1980 were from that unit.

Navy's Seals

The Navy's Seals, or sea, air, land teams, stationed on the East and West
Coasts, are successors to the frogmen of World War II. They are trained to swim
into a harbor to plant explosives to sink ships, to sabotage harbor operations,
and to move inland to destroy enemy facilities. The Seals are also trained as
parachutists so that they can be dropped inland for a mission and then escape by
sea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Caspar W. Weinberger (page A9) photo of Gen.
John W. Vessey Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RESOLVING THE CRISIS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2177 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, July 18


In the view of Lebanese and Palestinian officials, negotiations for a settlement
of the crisis in Lebanon will remain deadlocked as long the Reagan
Administration refuses to choose between two policy options.

If Washington wants the Palestine Liberation Organization to leave west Beirut
peacefully, officials here say, it will have to reverse American policy and deal
directly with that group on the issue of an independent Palestinian state. This
would have obvious repercussions for American-Israeli relations.

If, on the other hand, the Administration is not prepared to do this, it will
have to stand aside while the Israeli Army tries to deliver a knockout blow to
the P.L.O. in west Beirut - with the obvious negative effects that this would
have on American interests throughout the Arab world.

Choosing between these two extreme options is made all the more difficult by the
fact that the current political situation in the Middle East offers the United
States a tremendous opportunity to extend its influence and strengthen its
alliances at the expense of the Soviet Union.

Leftists Urged Surrender

On the local, regional and international level, those parties in the Middle East
associated with the Soviet Union have been badly discredited by the events of
the last six weeks - and this has not gone unnoticed. P.L.O. officials
themselves admit privately that when the chips were down, their leftist Lebanese
allies, led by Walid Jumblat, were the first to call for their surrender.

The P.L.O.'s more radical Arab allies in the so-called Steadfastness and
Confrontation Front - led by Syria and Libya - proved to be neither steadfast
nor confrontational when Israel arrived at the gates of Beirut. As for the
Soviet Union, it has yet to take any tangible step on behalf of its P.L.O.
clients.

With its life on the line, the P.L.O. found itself relying locally on the old
conservative Sunni Moslem boss of west Beirut, Saeb Salam, who serves as the
main intermediary between the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, and President
Reagan's special Middle East envoy, Philip C. Habib.

'Proven to Be Rootless'

Regionally it has been Saudi Arabia and Egypt that have been making the P.L.O.
case in Washington, Western Europe and the United Nations. Internationally, it
is France and, for better or worse, the United States with which the P.L.O. now
finds itself negotiating its future.

''The pro-Soviet forces have proven to be rootless,'' Mr. Salam said in a recent
interview. ''Will the Americans take advantage of this opportunity and tap the
tremendous residual support for America in the Arab world, or will it just drive
everyone back into Soviet hands?''

The time is right, Mr. Salam said, for some bold, new and imaginative foreign
policy initiatives from Washington. Such an initiative, he said, must break out
of the old cycle of cliches and constraints that has shackled America's Middle
East diplomacy for the last 34 years, for the opportunity will not come again
soon.  initiatives, although Secretary of State George P. Shultz spoke of
opportunities to ''do something wonderful'' in foreign affairs when he was sworn
in Friday and, during his Senate confirmation hearings last week, said there
could be no peace until there was a solution to the ''legitimate needs and
problems'' of the Palestinian people.

U.S. Warns Israel on Beirut

The Administration has told the Israelis not to enter west Beirut.  But at the
same time it has refused to deal directly with the P.L.O.  or actually to send
American marines to a disengagement force that would have to have contact with
Palestinian guerrillas. With the Israeli Prime Minister, Menachem Begin, saying
that the P.L.O.  guerrillas ''do not have 30 days'' to get out of Beirut - a
working time Mr. Shultz suggested during his confirmation hearings - one of
those policy planks is going to have to give.

Mr. Arafat apparently has no intention of ordering his 6,000 P.L.O. fighters out
of west Beirut without some major political concessions. Palestinian officials
say, in the words of one, that Mr. Habib is ''fooling himself if he thinks
Arafat is going to just get on a bus one day and disappear into the grip of
Syria or some other Arab regime.'' Mr. Arafat could never survive politically
after such a nonpolitical, purely technical withdrawal from Beirut.

3 Demands for Americans

The crucial question for Mr. Arafat is not where the P.L.O. goes, but under what
conditions. The Palestinian guerrilla leader insists that if the P.L.O.
withdraws from Beirut it must be in the context of a ''package deal'' that takes
into account that the P.L.O. is a real political force in the Middle East and
that advances the cause of Palestinian statehood.

Hence, Mr. Arafat has made three demands vis-a-vis the Americans.  First, he has
asked that Mr. Habib end dealing through intermediaries and negotiate with him
directly. Second, he has asked that American troops be included in the
multinational peacekeeping force that he wants deployed between the Israeli and
Palestinian armies around Beirut, in advance of final negotiations over the
P.L.O.'s future.  The deployment of such a force would obviously necessitate
American-P.L.O. diplomatic contacts.

Third, Mr. Arafat has thrown his support behind a draft document that France and
Egypt have circulated among the 15 members of the United Nations Security
Council that would serve as a framework for any final settlement in Lebanon. The
draft document, as it now stands, is understood to incorporate Security Council
Resolutions 242 and 338 - which call for the right of all states in the region
to live in peace - while at the same time mentioning the P.L.O. and the issue of
Palestinian self-determination, neither of which have ever been included in a
binding Security Council resolution.

A Battle for Beirut

The Reagan Administration could continue to refuse to deploy its troops in
Beirut until the P.L.O. leaves, or veto such a United Nations resolution, but to
do so would be to run the risk of leaving Mr. Arafat with no option but to stand
and fight a battle for Beirut that would ultimately rebound negatively on
American interests and allies in the Arab world, since a wave of terror would
surely grow out of it.

But if the Administration agrees to deal directly with the P.L.O.  in some
manner, or approves the French-Egyptian draft document, then it will almost
certainly have to violate a written promise made to Israel in 1975.

As part of the second disengagement accord with Israel, Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger committed the United States to not recognizing or negotiating with
the P.L.O. until it recognizes Israel and accepts United Nations Resolutions 242
and 338. The Israelis would undoubtedly argue that a new United Nations
resolution incorporating 242 and 338, but also recognizing the P.L.O., would not
be acceptable, since Resolution 242 treats that Palestinian problem purely as an
Arab refugee issue and not as that of a people requiring an independent
homeland.

It is understood here that Washington can no more afford to ride roughshod over
Israel's sensibilities than those of Mr. Arafat, because ultimately Israel's
confidence in American promises and its willingness to participate in any future
negotiations will be essential if a more permanent Middle East settlement is to
be achieved.

Mr. Habib seems especially qualified for this impossible task.  Although many
people have forgotten, it was Mr. Habib who spent three months in Paris in the
late 1960's negotiating over the shape of the table for the Vietnam peace talks.
Then, as now, the issue was who would sit down with whom, when, where and under
what conditions.
UNITED STATES
Withdrawal of Forces
In the indirect negotiations conducted by Philip C. Habib, the special American
envoy, the United States has been trying to find a formula to allow the
Palestinian forces to leave west Beirut under honorable circumstances and avoid
an Israeli military thrust into the capital. The United States is willing to
help provide security for the evacuation, but the P.L.O. has reacted coolly to
the offer. One problem in reaching a settlement has been the fact that no Arab
country seems willing to take the 5,000 to 7,000 guerrillas and their families.
Peacekeeping Force
President Reagan has said that if an agreement is reached, 800 to 1,000 American
troops would be used in a multinational force for "temporary peacekeeping" in
Lebanon. The P.L.O. has supported this plan.
Future Of The P.L.O. In Lebanon
American officials say the P.L.O. guerrillas should withdraw from Lebanon,
leaving only an information office in Beirut. The officals say this would clear
the way for an eventual political settlement in which Israeli troops would leave
lebanon.
ISRAEL
Withdrawal of Forces
All factions of the P.L.O. should be disarmed and withdrawn from Beirut, then
leave Lebanon. They should be alowed to take "personal arms," presumably meaning
a pistol or rifle for each man. As they leave the country, the P.L.O. forces
should not detour north to Tripoli or stop short of the Syrian border. Departure
by land is acceptable.
Peacekeeping Force
Israel would agree to the deployment of a multinational force of American and
French troops in west Beirut, but only after the P.L.O.  has left or after the
bulk of the guerrillas have left. The force should not be permitted to act as a
buffer force between the Palestinian and Israeli forces before the withdrawal.
Israel has rejected early deployment in the belief that once such a force was in
place, the P.L.O. would not withdraw.
Future Of The P.L.O. In Lebanon
The Israelis would not allow the Palestinians to retain a political office or
any armed military units. However, they have not said they would bar civilian
Palestinians.
PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION
Withdrawal of Forces
The Palestinian guerrillas, who are now spread out in west Beirut and its
southern suburbs, should return to their camps with their weapons, while the
Israelis should withdraw five kilometers from the captial. Any P.L.O. forces
that are evacuated from Lebanon should leave by road after a pullback by Israeli
forces. The P.L.O. has never publicly committed itself to going anywhere except
"Palestine." It has offered to move temporarily to an area of northern Lebanon
controlled by Syrian troops while negotiations for a permanent solution
continue.
Peacekeeping Force
A multinational peacekeeping force should be formed, including American, French
and other European or Arab contingents; it should move into the Beirut area
before the Palestinian and Israeli troops disengage. This force should be
deployed in the Palestinian camps while the Lebanese Army restores Government
authority in west Beirut. The force should be in place before any P.L.O.
withdrawal from Lebanon, not only to provide security against attacks by
Lebanese Christians or Israelis but also to provide deplomatic contacts between
the P.L.O. the United States and France.
Future Of The P.L.O. In Lebanon
Senior lebanese Government officials say they believe that if the P.L.O.'s basic
conditions are met, it will agree to transfer its headquarters to Damascus. But
the P.L.O. is still insisting that two Palestinian brigades be stationed in
Tripoli and the Bekaa Valley under the command of the Lebanese Defense Minister.
It also wants to retain a diplomatic mission in Lebanon. In addition, it is
insisting that as many of the 650,000 Palestinian civilians be allowed to stay
in Lebanon as want to, particularly those who came in 1948 and are registered
with the Lebanese Government.
LEBANON
The Lebanese Government is largely powerless, undermined by the sectarian
rivalries.
Prime Minister Shafik al-Wazzan, a Moslem, is known to support the basic
outlines of the P.L.O.'s proposals with the understanding that the guerrilla
forces would be evacuated and a reduced P.L.O. military and political role in
Lebanon would be put back under Government authority. The Moslems of Lebanon are
much more sympathetic than the Christians to a P.L.O. role, since the P.L.O.
has, in effect, served as a counterbalance to the Christian Phalangist militia
of Bashir Gemayel, which is now stronger than ever with its Israeli allies
ringing Beirut.
It is not clear whether president Elias Sarkis, a Maronite Christian, and
Foreign Minister Fuad Butros, who is Greek Orthodx, would be willing to accept
even a sharply reduced P.L.O. role.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS FREEZE ISSUE DOMINATES A HOUSE CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 830 words

DATELINE: SALEM, Mass., July 18


The Salem Common, where in 1969 a crowd of 6,000 rallied to denounce the Vietnam
War and where the militia mustered in earlier centuries, was the oral
battleground Saturday in a Congressional race focused on 1982's political
concern over war and peace, the nuclear freeze issue.

The Common, ringed by Federal period houses and the Salem Witch Museum, has
become in recent years the site for debates on political issues that in earlier
times were held at the Lyceum, now restored as a restaurant.

On Saturday, Nicholas Mavroules, the Democratic Representative from
Massachusetts's Sixth Congressional District, embraced the freeze concept, which
has become more of an issue here than in nearly any other Congressional
campaign. His Republican challenger, meanwhile, sought to embrace the issue's
supporters without specifically endorsing the proposal.

The crowd of perhaps 300 people assembled on the Common for Children's Peace Day
cheered Representative Mavroules when he told them he was fighting for the
freeze not only in principle but in specifics, too. He said he had proposed an
amendment in Congress to an arms bill coming up for a vote Tuesday that would
block $1.1 billion in funds for the MX missile.

His Republican opponent, Tom Trimarco, had a more complicated approach. He
praised advocates of a mutual halt in the developent and deployment of nuclear
weapons by the United States and the Soviet Union as ''doing God's work.'' He
criticized the Reagan Administration for talking ''far too casually about
nuclear war.''

Assails Rival's Motives

But he also said that more was needed than ''the simplistic notion of a
freeze,'' adding that ''as valuable as it may be as a first step, it is simply
not good enough.'' As Mr. Trimarco worked the crowd, he told potential voters
that Mr. Mavroules's motives were political, not sincere. In a typical comment,
Mr. Trimarco told a woman that the incumbent was ''a phony politician'' who had
seized the freeze issue for 1982 as he had seized opposition to abortion in
their 1980 battle. That year, Mr. Mavroules won by just 8,201 votes out of
214,585 votes cast.

It is clear that the nuclear arms freeze issue has political weight in their
rerun in this North Shore district. Before coming to the peace fair here, Mr.
Mavroules's aides were at the First Baptist Church in Beverly, listening to
weekly reports on the movement's progress, offering speakers for meetings, and
promising help in getting a referendum on an arms freeze on the state ballot in
November.

The antinuclear group was also told that a long-sought meeting with the
Republican had been scheduled for July 29. ''I wish you all the luck with Tom
Trimarco,'' said Chuck Dolan, Mr. Mavroules's campaign manager. ''In the
meantime, call on us for help.''

In return for such pledges, according to the Congressman and Regina Villa, a
lobbyist in Boston and one of his supporters, a lot of earnest volunteers have
joined his campaign. Mrs. Villa, who serves as the chief liaison agent between
the Congressional and antinuclear campaigns, said Mr. Mavroules's stand
attracted volunteers who otherwise would not have become affiliated with the
affable, streetsmart former Mayor of Peabody.

Historical Precedent a Key

The apparent responsiveness in this district to an issue that appears to be only
on the edges of partisan contests elsewhere has a clear historical precedent. In
1969, Michael Harrington ended nearly a century of Republican control here by
defeating William Saltonstall in a special election fought largely over American
involvement in the Vietnam War and a proposal to situate an antiballistic
missile site in the district.

The Sixth, which includes the territory involved in the original
''gerrymander,'' the redrawing of State Senate lines in 1812 to help the party
of Gov. Elbridge Gerry, a Marblehead native, has undergone relatively little
change in its boundaries since the 1969 Harrington victory. But its electorate
has become steadily, though not yet safely, more Democratic.

One reason the freeze issue has more political breathing space here is that the
unemployment rate in this district, with a major employer in General Electric's
aircraft engine plant in Lynn, is below that of the state's 8.5 percent and the
nation's 9.5 percent.

Even so, Mr. Trimarco contends that he is asked far more often about ''the
economy and about jobs'' than about the nuclear freeze issue. He said television
news programs made everyone worry about unemployment even if their own area was
unaffected.

But Mr. Mavroules says that since Mr. Trimarco ''has challenged my motives in
taking on the freeze issue,'' that will be ''the predominant issue of this
campaign.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map photo of Tom Trimarco photo of Nicholas Mavroules

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and David Shribman

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 784 words


The Missing Bottle

C all it, please, a White House mystery. It is a story, brief and simple, about
four men, an office, a bottle of liquor and a symbol.  It is, moreover, a story
about power.

Just as the Reagan Administration prepared to take over in January 1981, Stuart
E. Eizenstat, President Carter's assistant for domestic affairs and policy, was
chatting with Martin Anderson, whom President-elect Reagan had selected as Mr.
Eizenstat's successor.

The two men sat in the second-floor corner office that Mr. Anderson was to use
until he, too, left office early this year. At one point, Mr. Eizenstat took his
successor over to a wooden case in the office. He opened it and revealed two
small bottles of liquor. One, it turned out, was a bottle of very old bourbon.

The bottle, Mr. Eizenstat explained, had been passed on to him by Jim Cannon,
who had been the domestic affairs adviser to President Ford. Mr. Eizenstat
suggested that Mr. Anderson take the bottle and, when the time came, pass it on
to his successor.

Mr. Anderson agreed to carry on what looked like a tradition, for on the bottle
was this inscription: ''Bottled expressly for John Ehrlichman.''

''It was there the last day I was there,'' Mr. Eizenstat said, and there is, of
course, no reason to doubt him.  But when Mr. Anderson paused, on his first day
in his White House office, to look at the Ehrlichman bottle, he found that it
was missing.

''I went over to show it to someone,'' Mr. Anderson said, ''and someone had
stolen it.'' The solution to this most modest of White House mysteries may never
be found, but Mr. Eizenstat and Mr. Anderson and, presumably, Edwin L. Harper,
who holds the office now, regret the passing of what Mr.  Eizenstat calls ''an
important symbol of what not to do, a symbol of the potential abuses of power.''

What's in a Name?

E nten Eller, the 20-year-old who was indicted last week for failing to register
for the military draft, explained his action at a Washigton news conference as
an act of faith ''to my God, my conscience, my church.''

Mr. Eller's name is Danish for ''either/or,'' and ''Enten Eller'' is the title
of Kierkegaard's most celebrated work, an exploration of the Danish theologian's
belief that the individual must choose between Jesus and the world.
Battle Over Veterans

O ne of the capital's least noted bureaucratic struggles pits a number of
members of Congress against the Administration in a battle over an employment
assistance program and a small-business loan program for Vietnam and disabled
veterans.

The latest salvo is a letter from Kenneth M. Duberstein, President Reagan's
assistant for legislative affairs, rejecting arguments that the Veterans
Administration has unnecessarily restricted participation in the jobs program
and arguing that the loans program duplicates Small Business Administration
programs.

''We're going at opposite directions here,'' says Representative David E.
Bonior, a Michigan Democrat and a Vietnam era veteran. ''We want to assist a
group of people who need some help, but the Administration is looking to save
money at the expense of these people.''

Mr. Bonior, who is planning an effort to pass further legislation to force the
Administration to see the Veterans' Health Care, Training and Small Business
Loan Act his way, says the whole affair provides an object lesson in government.

''If you want to follow through on things,'' he said, ''you've got to see that
the programs are implemented, and implemented in the way that Congress
intended.''
Cherry Harvest at Issue

I t was one of the hundreds of tiny Government decisions made out of the glare
of attention here. The issue was prompted by a vote by cherry growers in
Southwestern Michigan late in June that, against Agriculture Department
regulations, would have held back a fifth of the cherry harvest to support the
price of the fruit.

Despite considerable political pressure, the Office of Management and Budget,
which had jurisdiction in the matter because of the economic impact, disapproved
the order that would have allowed the growers to hold back the fruit.

One footnote: The cherry growers in question were from the former Congressional
district of David A. Stockman, now the head of the Office of Management and
Budget.  Phil Gailey David Shribman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Talking Back to the Tube

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 345 words


How do you talk back if you feel aggrieved by what's on the tube?  Retired
General William Westmoreland was so stung by a CBS documentary last January that
he called a press conference and raised a storm. There will now be a second
documentary to consider the case made in ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception.''

But suppose you are not a general? There is no satisfactory answer. The
departments adjoining -Letters and Op-Ed - don't have their equivalent in
television. The networks do, from time to time, produce talk-back shows. ABC,
creditably, even lets affronted viewers put their objections directly to
correspondents.

But none of these shows are routinely scheduled during peak viewing times, and
ABC's ''Viewpoint'' turns up only four times a year.  A good deal of the anger
about television programming springs from a belief that nobody at the networks
listens, or cares. By selective editing on a news program, anyone can be made to
look like a liar or fool, which is why TV news divisions have adopted elaborate
codes.  But as CBS concedes, these practices were violated in the documentary
that accused General Westmoreland of conspiring to manipulate intelligence on
enemy strength before the 1968 Tet offensive.

It is a matter of reasonable debate whether these acknowledged lapses - the
jiggling of interview sequences and favored treatment for ''friendly'' sources -
affect the program's central thesis. CBS News says no, though it plans a second
look in the future documentary and now regrets using that tricky word
''conspiracy.'' These are important matters, and CBS was right to take seriously
General Westmoreland's complaints and a muckraking article in TV Guide.

But how much better if the argument would now go, at each network, from the
General to the general - to the wider matter of giving other aggrieved viewers a
way to talk back in an imaginatively produced prime-time forum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 21, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thais Say Vietnamese Pulled Back in Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 20


Vietnamese forces in Cambodia abandoned their forward positions near the Thai
border early this month, Thai military sources said today.

The sources said the Vietnamese troops pulled back to three to six miles from
positions that had been as close as several hundred yards from Thailand.

The sources said the move was apparently part of a Vietnamese wetseason strategy
to counter the easier mobility of the Pol Pot guerrillas in the border region.
They said the repositioning was not connected to the announcement of a partial
withdrawal that was made by the Vietnamese in Ho Chi Minh City two weeks ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 21, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IN CONGRESS, THE INVASION HAS ERODED ISRAEL'S ALMOST AUTOMATIC SUPPORT

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


After six weeks of war in Lebanon, Israel's support in Congress has been
significantly eroded to what some members describe as its lowest point. But in
their view it has not reached the stage where substantial numbers would oppose
further American aid to Israel.

In more than a score of interviews, both Republicans and Democrats in Congress
warned that an Israeli assault on west Beirut could bring a change in support
for Israel and lead to moves for legislative retribution.

Already, both critics and long-time supporters of Israel talk freely of ''a wave
of revulsion'' caused by pictures of civilian casualties in Lebanon and of a
shift in the almost automatic support Israel has enjoyed in Congress. They say
there is frustration at the use of American arms by an ally that feels
unrestrained in taking actions that jeopardize United States interests in the
Middle East.

Anger Directed at Leaders

Both in Congress and in the Reagan Administration, the frustration is directed
at Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Defense Minister Ariel Sharon. Leading
members of Congress repeatedly draw a distinction between their support for
Israel and disagreement with Mr. Begin's policies.

The Administration has been careful to mute its irritation with the Begin
Government. But senior officials say President Reagan and his aides have been
particularily chagrined in recent days over the Israeli effort to cut off water,
power, food and the movement of Red Cross officials into west Beirut, all widely
reported on television and in the press.

''It could turn out to be, if it continues this way, Israel's Vietnam,'' said
Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois, the chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee.

Representative William S. Broomfield, Republican of Michigan, the ranking
Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said: ''We're going to have
some real problems on future legislation unless there is a clarification on the
use of American arms. Israel is going to have a lot of work to do to restore the
support they have had. It has been severely affected. For the first time we are
getting letters saying, 'Why don't we do something?' ''

Some members of Congress, including steady backers of Israel, say the mood of
displeasure with Israel is already sufficient for a sizable group to endorse a
cutoff in shipments of cluster bombs to Israel, because their use is
controversial in combat where there are heavy civilian casualties.

'A Vehicle for a Reprimand'

''If there were a vote on that, it's the kind of thing that could carry,'' said
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat who has consistently backed
Israel. ''It provides a vehicle for a reprimand. That would satisfy those who
are critical of Israel without significantly altering our basic relationship.''

Others, like Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Delaware Democrat and an outspoken
supporter of Israel, have privately warned Ambassador Moshe Arens that Israel
will face difficulties in sustaining its previously unassailable and largely
uncritical support for high levels of economic and military aid.

No aid program for Israel is due for a Congressional vote until late fall,
probably after the November elections. Congressional leaders consider foreign
aid generally too unpopular to bring to a vote before the election. The
prevailing view is that a vote on aid to Israel toward the end of the year will
be affected more by later developments than by the current critical mood.

''The Israelis have made some serious mistakes as it affects their relations
with us and the West,'' said Senator Henry M. Jackson, a Washington Democrat who
has been one of Israel's staunchest supporters, ''but the final judgment will
only come when one knows what the final results will be in Lebanon.''

There are backers of Israel, like Senator Dodd and Representative Jonathan B.
Bingham, Democrat of the Bronx, who contend that the current displeasure with
Israel amounts more to ''rhetorical criticism'' than any substantive shift of
support.

But Senator Jackson and others, like Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio,
suggest that deeper damage may have been done. They cite accumulating
displeasure in Congress that Prime Minister Begin has undertaken a series of
actions that many regard as offensive use of American weapons supplied for
defensive purposes, without apparent regard to the effect on American links to
the Arab world. They mentioned Israeli air attacks on an Iraqi nuclear reactor
and on Palestinian areas around Beirut last year as well as the invasion of
Lebanon.

Before the Israelis moved into Lebanon on June 6, the House Foreign Affairs
Committee approved the Administration's request for $1.7 billion in military aid
and $785 million in economic aid for Israel in 1983, and at the urging of
Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee increased the economic aid level to $910 million.

Mr. Cranston's aides estimate that the $125 million aid increase would not pass
the committee today.

Ambassador Cites Support

Ambassador Arens said many of Israel's traditional supporters remained unshaken
by recent events, citing conversations with such Democratic Senators as Edward
M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, Gary Hart of Colorado, Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio
and Carl Levin of Michigan, and Republicans like Rudy Boschwitz of Minnesota and
Steven D. Symms of Idaho.

Few of them, however, have spoken out on Israel's behalf, either during floor
debate or during the recent confirmation hearings of Secretary of State George
P. Shultz.

While careful to reassert American commitments to Israel and its security, Mr.
Shultz was unusually outspoken for an unconfirmed appointee in criticizing the
Begin Government's policy of establishing settlements in the West Bank and
removing elected Arab mayors there and in the Gaza Strip. Moreover, he commented
pointedly on the civilian casualties in Lebanon, saying, ''We cannot accept the
loss of life brought home to us every day on our television screens.''

In the midst of diplomatic negotiations with the Begin Government, the Reagan
Administration has kept its frustrations private. Except for a current holdup of
a shipment of cluster-type artillery shells for Israel, the Administration is
allowing American economic and military aid to Israel to continue. Since the
Lebanese hostilities began, however, the White House has delayed formal
notification to Congress of a new order of F-16 fighter-bombers, due in 1983.

Sharp criticism of the Begin Government has become increasingly common in
Congress. ''The love affair with Israel from the time of Golda Meir is gone
because of Begin,'' said Senator Paul E. Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts.
''How can I be concerned about human rights in El Salvador and the Soviet Union
and not speak out on Lebanon?''

In the House, Representative Jim Wright, the majority leader, said he had not
discerned any deep shift of opinion ''that would shake the longstanding and
special relationship with Israel, and I find no sympathy with the Palestine
Liberation Organization.''

But, he went on, ''many members feel that Begin tends to be hostile, rigid and
inflexible, and that makes it more difficult to see a solution to the
Palestinian issue.''

Need for Arms Is Questioned

In the months ahead, Israel could find its military aid challenged because of
its prowess in Lebanon. Representative Mickey Leland, a Texas Democrat, said he
had come back from Lebanon feeling that Israel's military supremacy was so
unchallengeable that future military aid should be subject to ''closer
scrutiny'' on the ground that it might not be needed to preserve Israel's
military superiority over the Arabs.

Eight other Representatives, led by Mary Rose Oakar, an Ohio Democrat of Syrian
descent, and Nick J. Rahall, a West Virginia Democrat of Lebanese descent, have
introduced a resolution calling for a halt in all American military aid to the
Middle East if it is determined that American equipment is being used for
aggressive purposes.

''By killing Lebanese, the Israelis have given other parts of the Middle East a
voice,'' said Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland. ''I
think when they crossed the Litani River and went beyond the P.L.O. sanctuary in
southern Lebanon into Lebanon proper, at that point the Israelis changed
something in the atmosphere here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Palestinians returning to Tyre, Lebanon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 22, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABC BACKS OFF CHARGE IT MADE AGAINST MOBIL

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


ABC News has told the Mobil Oil Corporation that it did not intend to include
the company in its comments about consumer fraud that were broadcast June 20 in
a documentary called ''The Oil Game.''

The documentary examined how oil companies benefited financially from the
Federal Government's oil-price controls during the 70's.  Mobil, whose crude-oil
purchasing activities were described in the program, protested on the ground
that the documentary contained ''prejudicial inaccuracies.'' On Monday, the oil
company received a letter from ABC in which the network backed down on some
aspects of its portrayal of Mobil.

ABC's dealings with Mobil come at a time when attention has been drawn to the
news practices of the networks because of complaints about the fairness and
accuracy of their programs. Last Thursday, after a six-week study of charges
published in TV Guide, CBS News conceded that there had been violations of its
journalistic standards in the preparation of a documentary in January, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' CBS said it would set up the position of
an ombudsman to evaluate complaints about its programs.

Mobil's Seven-Page Letter

At the beginning of the ABC documentary last month, the correspondent, Dan
Cordtz, said ABC's study would ''explain the workings of what has been labeled
the biggest fraud ever committed against American consumers.'' On June 30,
Herbert Schmertz, a vice president of Mobil, wrote a seven-page letter to ABC
requesting specifically that ''the public should be told that ABC did not intend
to include Mobil in any charges of fraud.''

After an investigation, ABC's ombudsman, George Watson, wrote a four-page reply.
Although Mr. Watson asserted that Mobil's charges were ''without merit and that,
therefore, no corrective action is in order,'' he acknowledged that the network
had not intended to include Mobil in its statement about the biggest fraud. That
statement, Mr. Watson wrote, appeared ''at the top of the program, not in the
segment dealing with Mobil's transactions.''

Mobil officials had refused to be interviewed for the program unless they could
appear live and unedited and could be shown confidential documents from the
Department of Energy, on which ABC was basing its questions.

ABC had rejected the conditions on the grounds that disclosing the documents
would compromise their source and that live and unedited air time was not ''an
appropriate demand of a documentary program'' that required careful editing.

Two Concessions Made

Mr. Watson also conceded that two statements made about Mobil in the show were
technically incorrect. One statement alleged that Mobil had received $1 million
from a Government ''bank'' set up to facilitate financial transactions among oil
companies.

''We understand perfectly well that there was no government bank as such,''
wrote Mr. Watson, who explained that ''bank'' had been intended only as an
analogy to make the transactions understandable to laymen.

The other statement alleged that Mobil paid a high price for crude oil that it
had previously sold to another company because ''Mobil could pass along its
costs to its customers.'' In response to Mobil's complaint, Mr. Watson wrote,
''We agree that this sentence could have been more precisely worded.''

''We are,'' Mr. Schmertz wrote, ''delighted now to learn that we were not part
of any fraud.'' He added that ABC's response was ''better than we have gotten in
the past'' and that ''at least there is acknowledgment of inaccuracies and that
conclusions the public came away with were not correct; it's a step in the right
direction.'' However, he said, ''I think ABC should go the last step of
acknowledging that on the air.''

The case of ''The Oil Game'' illustrates an effort by ABC to respond to Mobil's
concerns both before and after the program appeared. In a series of letters
beginning in March, executives at Mobil had tried to negotiate the terms by
which a spokesman for the company could appear on the program. A Mobil executive
also met with ABC News producers once without any cameras present for a
background discussion about the documentary.

List of 30 Questions

In a departure from ABC News policy, which says that ''interviews ought to be
spontaneous and unrehearsed,'' the network submitted a list of more than 30
specific questions to Mobil and stipulated that no additional questions would be
asked without Mobil's consent.

In a letter to the chairman of Mobil, Rawleigh Warner Jr., on June 16, Mr.
Watson wrote: ''We felt this was a fair and forthright manner of asking Mobil
detailed and limited questions directly involving the company's transactions.
Under this procedure there was no possibility that the company could be
'ambushed,' 'blind-sided' or asked about any matters on which it lacked
information or the ability to respond.''

Mr. Watson said Mobil's demand to see ABC's documents was unreasonable. ''It
seems wholly exceptional,'' he said, ''to ask a reporter to produce any of his
documentation before asking questions.'' For his part, Mr. Schmertz contended
that ''we should not be made to comment on documents we cannot see.''

In his letter of complaint, Mr. Schmertz disputed ABC's comments that Mobil had
benefited by $2.5 million from Government price controls by selling its crude
oil and buying it back in a series of complicated transactions. Mr. Watson's
response said that ABC stood by its statement, which it based on findings by
investigators for the Department of Energy. Mr. Schmertz now says only that ''we
are not going to resolve'' this part of the issue.

''This is the first time,'' Mr. Schmertz said yesterday, ''we have been given a
response that is positive in terms of analyzing in a fair way what we have said.
Most of the time, they come back and reject everything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Herbert Schmertz

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 23, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Draft Resister Is Indicted For Refusing to Register

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 155 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 22


A former Yale University philosophy student who refused to register for the
draft was indicted today by a Federal grand jury, becoming the third man to face
criminal charges in a recent crackdown on resisters.

David Wayte, 21 years old, of Pasadena, Calif., was named in an indictment
charging him with willfully refusing to register for the Selective Service
System, United States Attorney Stephen Trott said.

Mr. Wayte was ordered to appear before a Federal magistrate Aug. 2. He faces a
maximum of five years in prison and a $10,000 fine if convicted.

Earlier this month, Benjamin Sasway, 21, of Vista, Calif., became the first
American to be indicted for failure to register for the draft since the Vietnam
War. Enten Eller, 20, a clergyman's son and student at Bridgewater college, was
indicted in Roanoke, Va., last week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
IS EL SALVADOR MAKING PROGRESS ON HUMAN RIGHTS?

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1912 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


Sometime next week, President Reagan is expected to certify to Congress that El
Salvador's Government has made progress in human rights and economic and
political improvements.

Two top State Department officials - Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of
State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, and Thomas O. Enders, Assistant
Secretary of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs -have urged the President to
make the certification.

The Administration is required to report to Congress by July 28 as a condition
for continued economic and military aid to El Salvador.  Administration
officials said Mr. Reagan was prepared to accept the advice of the officials.
Mr. Abrams made a trip to El Salvador this week before sending his proposal to
President Reagan, Administration officials said.

Mr. Reagan's expected certification will be the source of debate next week at
Congressional hearings. Senators on the Foreign Relations Committee have
questioned whether political and economic changes - especially El Salvador's
land redistribution program - are actually taking place in the face of strong
opposition in El Salvador's legislative body, the rightist-controlled
Constituent Assembly.

Mr. Reagan will attempt to convince an uneasy House and Senate that El Salvador
is worthy of the $166.3 million in economic support and military assistance that
the White House seeks.

Why Certification?

The certification process, added last year to foreign aid legislation, is
designed to check every six months on whether El Salvador, which has been
convulsed by violence, is moving toward the development of a democratic society.
The Reagan Administration's first certification was in January.

The certification legislation says that El Salvador must show that it is
''making a significant and concerted effort to comply with internationally
recognized human rights, achieving substantial control over all elements of its
own armed forces, making continued progress in implementing essential economic
and political reforms, committed to holding free elections at an early date.''

The Senate is also expected to approve shortly an additional stipulation - that
the El Salvador Government show progress in its investigations to find the
killers of seven Americans - four churchwomen, two experts in the land program
and a journalist.

In recent weeks, the certification process has again become a touchstone for the
entire range of opinion on El Salvador and the American commitment to the
nation. Critics say that it will be a sham if the Administration seeks to prove
that El Salvador is making progress on human rights. Administration aides and
supporters of certification say that although progress in an impoverished nation
at war is difficult to measure, advances are nonetheless taking place.

''El Salvador's a crazy place,'' Deane R. Hinton, the United States Ambassador,
said recently. ''It's a mess, too much indiscriminate killing.'' He added:
''It's a sick society, an agonizing situation, but if the other guys take over
it would be a lot worse.''
The Background

Violence and political instability have characterized the history of El
Salvador, a small country about the size of Massachusetts that has about 4.8
million people. Potentially wealthy because of its coffee crop, El Salvador had
been dominated for decades by a landed oligarchy, while landless peasants have
remained in poverty. Only 30 percent of the people in urban areas are literate.

Through the late 1960's and the 70's, left-wing guerrillas emerged as a powerful
and threatening force, and by the late 70's a cycle of violence and
counterviolence had begun.

On Oct. 15, 1979, a group of junior and middle-grade army officers overthrew the
Government of Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero and announced a program of radical
change, denounced abuses of power by officials, called for a transition to
democracy and urged social and economic changes. In the spring of 1980 Jose
Napoleon Duarte joined the junta and became its President. In the election for
the Constituent Assembly on March 28, Mr. Duarte's Christian Democratic Party
won more seats than any other single party but failed to win a majority, and
four rightist parties emerged as the dominant political force.

Rights: Desires and Obstacles

A combination of forces - the Carter Administration's human rights policy, the
emergence of the Roman Catholic Church as a force for social change and the
apparent intention of the junta itself to transform El Salvador into a more
democratic society -accelerated Government efforts to undertake agrarian and
other social and economic changes.

State Department officials insist that the Salvadoran Government is improving
the human rights situation, but aides make it plain, too, that the breakdown of
law and order, the inadequacy of the judicial system and the terrorism of the
right and left have made progress difficult to measure.

At the same time, Administration officials say, five guerrilla groups, trained
and armed by Cuba, Nicaragua and other radical states, are dedicated to winning
through violence what they cannot win at the ballot box.
For Certification

Administration officials and some politically moderate groups, such as Freedom
House, say, essentially, that measuring human rights and political and economic
progress is problematic because El Salvador remains torn by violence and is in
the grip of guerrilla war.  Nonetheless, supporters of certification make these
points:

- To Administration officials, the central reason for supporting certification
is that an aid cut-off would insure, they say, an increase in guerrilla
terrorism and a Marxist takeover. ''One has to consider the alternative,'' one
high State Department official said.  ''Look at what's happened in Vietnam,
Iran, Nicaragua. Yes! Things can go from bad to worse.''

- Although there have been charges that El Salvador's Government inflated the
number of votes cast in the March election, the results are largely uncontested.
Even Mr. Duarte, who failed to win a majority, conceded this, Administration
officials say. Freedom House, a nonpartisan human-rights group that sent a
five-member team to monitor the elections, said criticism of the election was
''neither based on any substantive evidence nor compelling in its
argumentation.'' Moreover, the election ''clearly demonstrated the electorate's
broad desire for peace to be achieved through peaceful - not violent - means,''
it said.

- State Department officials insist that the land redistribution efforts are on
track, although rightists in the Salvadoran Assembly have made ''strenuous
efforts to derail land reform,'' and evictions of peasants through intimidation
or cheating remains a problem.  ''The efforts to derail it have failed,'' one
official said, adding that about 5,000 provisional titles had been issued to
peasants since the election. In June, the official said, about 2,000 titles were
granted.

- With the help of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, State Department
officials say, six National Guardsmen were picked up in the investigation of the
killing of the four American churchwomen.  Five of the six have been charged
with homicide, an official said, with the remaining guardsmen giving evidence
against the others.

- Administration aides say that the level of violence has begun to decline in El
Salvador, although there are almost daily reports of political murders and
terrorism. In the last year, Freedom House says, the military has dismissed more
than 300 from its ranks for human-rights violations and has issued a code of
conduct. According to Freedom House, 438 Salvadorans were murdered in March -
the month of the election. In March 1981, 599 Salvadorans were killed. In April
and May this year, the numbers of Salvadorans killed were 194 and 301. Last
year, the numbers were 493 and 454.
Against Certification

Several liberal members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, including
Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, and Paul E.  Tsongas, Democrat of
Massachusetts, have raised questions about whether President Reagan should
proceed with certification.

At the same time, such groups as the American Civil Liberties Union, Americas
Watch Committee, the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights, the
Council on Hemispheric Affairs and the Washington Office on Latin America oppose
certification. They offer these arguments:

- Political violence, torture and mass executions continue unabated, as ''the
Government of El Salvador deliberately engages in systematic political murder to
advance its interests,'' according to a joint statement by the A.C.L.U. and the
Americas Watch Committee.  Other groups also say it is virtually impossible to
give precise figures on the number of people killed in Government-controlled and
geurrilla territory.

- The National Guardsmen charged in the murders of the churchwomen have not been
tried, months after they were seized, and ''there have been persistent reports
that would indicate that high-ranking officials were involved in the murder,''
said the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a left-of-center group supported by
unions.

- Land redistribution has been largely brought to a standstill, despite
Administration claims to the contrary. Moreover, former Ambassador Robert E.
White, who served in El Salvador in the Carter Administration, has termed the
March 28 election a ''political disaster'' because Mr. Duarte was ousted and the
''oligarchy'' has been returned to power. State Department officials respond
angrily that the elections were free and that the distaste of Mr. White and
others for the results hardly diminishes their importance.
The Outlook

State Department officials say that Mr. Reagan is virtuallly certain to certify
that El Salvador is making progress on human rights and political advances.
Senate aides say the certification may have little impact on the debate over aid
to El Salvador.

The Administration's $166.3 million aid program for El Salvador - which the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee reduced to $100 million in May -will not
reach the Senate floor until late fall, perhaps November. By then, Senate aides
say, events in El Salvador may have overtaken the certification argument.

In the meantime, though, Mr. Reagan is pressing for passage in the next few
weeks of his Carribean development plan, an aid program that includes $128
million for El Salvador. Senate aides say that Mr.  Reagan's certification may
or may not have an impact on this program.

As one ranking Senate aide involved in the El Salvador issue put it: ''If the
President says, 'Everything's coming up roses,' people just won't believe it and
there'll be a negative reaction. If he says, on the other hand, that 'we see a
lot of problems but there are some good signs and the pressure needs to be
applied,' than it's doubtful the Senate's going to turn him down on this one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert E. White photo of Deane Hinton

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

COPTER FALLS, KILLING ACTOR AND 2 CHILDREN ON SET

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 488 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 23


Vic Morrow and two Vietnamese children the actor was holding in his arms were
killed early today when a helicopter crashed while they were making a movie
northwest of Los Angeles.

The tail rotor of the helicopter, carrying a camera crew, had been hit by debris
from explosives detonated in a Vietnam war scene.  Mr. Morrow and the children
were struck and killed by the main rotor of the helicopter as it pitched into a
river on the set, DeWitt Morgan, the Los Angeles County fire inspector, said.
The child actors were identified as Renee Shinn Chen, 6, of Pasadena, and My-ca
Dinh Lee, 7, of Cerritos, a sheriff's deputy, John Radeleff, said.

The three persons were killed as they were running through a set that resembled
a Vietnamese village. More than 100 movie extras and production assistants
witnessed the accident, which occurred during the filming of a scene for a film
based on ''The Twilight Zone'' television series,

Last Session of Filming

The accident occurred at about 2:30 A.M. at the private Indian Dunes Park, 40
miles from here. It was the last session of shooting directed by John Landis for
Warner Bros. Mr. Landis, director of ''National Lampoon's Animal House,'' was in
charge of one segment of ''The Twilight Zone,'' a four-segment anthology. The
other directors were Joe Dante, George Miller and Steven Spielberg.

''There was a village along a bluff being involved in war,'' Mr.  Morgan said.
''They were going to have a helicopter doing rockets and bombs, explosions and
fireballs. The debris from one explosion hit the tail rotor, and the helicopter
landed in the river.''

Also injured were the pilot, Darcy Wingo, who was listed in fair condition with
a cut hand and injured neck; the camera operator, Roger Smith, in fair condition
with leg and neck injuries, and the production manager, Danny Alingham, and
Randal Robinson, both in good condition with minor injuries.

Career Spanned 27 Years

Mr. Morrow, whose entertainment career spanned 27 years, created the role of
Sgt. Chip Saunders in ''Combat,'' which ran from 1962 to 1966. He began his
career directing Off Broadway productions, including ''Death Watch,'' ''The
Maids'' and ''The Firstborn.'' He also had a role in an Off Broadway production
of ''A Streetcar Named Desire.''

Mr. Morrow, who was 51 years old, made his film debut in 1955 in ''The
Blackboard Jungle.'' His other films included ''Tribute to a Bad Man'' in 1956,
''Men in War'' in 1957, ''Portrait of a Mobster'' in 1961 and ''The Bad News
Bears'' in 1976, in which he played the coach whose team battled Walter
Matthau's ragtag Bears.

Mr. Morrow married Barbara Turner, the actress, in 1957, and they were divorced
in 1965. They had two daughters, Carrie, 24, and Jennifer, 20.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of wreckage of helicopter photo of Vic Morrow

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTIQUES VIEW;
A MIGHTY ASSEMBLY OF TOY SOLDIERS

BYLINE: By Rita Reif

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words


Toy soldiers have probably been around as long as the world has had armies. And
they have been collected passionately for centuries. Only over the last decade,
however, has an assemblage of toy soldiers become important enough to fill a
museum and become subject matter for a book.

''Toy Armies,'' by Peter Johnson, a British writer, is a scholarly study of what
some people might think is a subject that is not very serious. Mr. Johnson is
the joint curator with his wife Anne of the Forbes Museum of Military Miniatures
in the Palais Mendoub in Tangier, Morocco. There, in view of the Rock of
Gibralta on one side and the Atlantic Ocean on another, are housed over 70,000
figures in lead and tin, the largest such collection in the world.

The palace, formerly home to the governors of Tangiers, was acquired in the
1970's as the office of Forbes Magazine's Arabic edition, which has since ceased
publication. Malcolm S. Forbes, the publisher, decided it was also the ideal
location for the toy soldier collection he has assembled over the last 14 years.
The museum opened in August 1978 displaying most of Mr. Forbes's miniatures
which cover practically every aspect of toy and model making, and include
soldiers and weaponry depicting battles from ancient Rome through the 1960's
Vietnam War. The cream of the Forbes collection - about 10,000 soldiers -will be
on view at the National Geographic Magazine in Washington from November 17
through March.

As a child, Mr. Forbes recalled recently, he and his four brothers warred with
toy soldiers and with marbles. But he did not become a collector of toy soldiers
until the late 1960's. It was then, at an auction he was attending in New York,
that he first experienced a desire to acquire a set of Lilliputian specimens.
''I bid and bought,'' he said, adding that he paid $20 or $25 for a set of
''worse-for-wear'' United States World War I doughboys. ''Up went my hand,'' he
added, ''and it's not been often or long lowered since.'' The wing housing the
museum, which is open daily to the public, has been enlarged twice and the
collection continues to grow.

Mr. Johnson has written an exhaustive work on the subject, documenting the
evolution of tin and lead soldiers from the earliest known German ''flats'' of
the mid-18th century to the more authentically detailed ''rounds,'' as he calls
today's more realistic figures. He does warn, however, that the book makes no
attempt to include definitive listings of every producer's soldiers or a guide
to the prices collectors must expect to pay for period selections. ''Auction
levels move too fast for any work of record to make claims in that area,'' he
explains.

Nevertheless, Mr. Johnson does share with readers some pertinent information on
the escalation of the values of some selections from, for one, the collection of
Douglas Fairbanks Jr. The actor sold his toy soldiers in 1977 through Phillips,
Son & Neale in London, the auction house, because he no longer had sufficient
space in his home to display the 3,000 lead figures. ''They've been in crates
for years,'' he said, ''but I still know and love every piece.'' At that sale
the most expensive offering of toy soldiers at auction until that date was the
Royal Marine Light Infantry band which sold for triple its estimate or $1,400.
The sale price gave Mr. Fairbanks 320,000 percent appreciation over what he had
paid for the soldiers a half century earlier when he was a young man in his
20's.

Toy soldiers as we know them today were probably made first by pewter artisans
in Europe, using the metal left over from producing kitchen wares. Single
figures of soldiers were made in Germany and France in the 16th and 17th
centuries, mostly for European aristocrats. The first to become commercially
successful were the mid-18th-century toys made in and around Nuremburg
documenting the successes of Frederick the Great and his Prussian military
machine in the Seven Years' War. The man who came to be known as the ''father of
the tin soldier'' was Johann Gottfried Hilpert, the first manufacturer to be
identified with such playthings. By the 1770's he and other members of his
family were far advanced in producing flat figures, an operation that came to an
end in 1801.

Collecting did not become widespread until there was a mass audience later in
the 19th century for both German and French flat and round tin soldiers. The toy
figures most popular among American and British collectors today did not appear
until William Britain of England introduced his hollow-casts in the 1890's.

Toy soldiers are one of the few collectibles that have not shown a decline in
price and bidding in the current recession, according to Mr. Johnson. The
auctions of toy soldiers at Phillips, Son & Neale in London and New York which
are among the most popular such sales in the world, have attracted brisk bidding
from throughout the world in the season now ending.

A review of the sales shows that the number of lots that did not find buyers
averaged about three percent over the season, an extraordinarily modest figure.
Not surprisingly, the most popular soldiers at these sales are the Britains
collected throughout this century by British and American children alike. The
highest price ever paid at auction for a toy soldier is $452, the sum paid for a
British Camel Corps trooper dating to 1910. The world record for an offering of
toy soldiers is the $9,048 paid for a battalion of the London Scottish regiment
dating to 1916.

In recent sales there has also been a marked increase in interest in Nazi
soldiers made of composition materials by the German producers Elastolin and
Lineol. And in dispersals on both sides of the ocean, American bidders often
account for half the total of the sale.

This was true at the two most recent sessions at Phillips in New York at which
most of the collection of the Chicago Art Institute was sold. The final session
will be held in November.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of toy soldiers

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR SITUATION 'BAD' BUT IMPROVING

BYLINE: By Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words


President Reagan is expected to certify to Congress this week that El Salvador
is reducing human rights violations and making advances in land reforms, a
Congressional requirement for continued United States aid. Elliott Abrams,
Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, who visited El Salvador last
week, discussed his findings with Bernard Weinraub of The New York Times
Washington Bureau. Excerpts from their conversation at the State Department
follow.

Question. Has there been actual progress?

Answer. There's been progress on land reform. There was certainly an attack on
the program but we think that the counterattack has succeeded and that the
program is moving ahead, the land-to-thetiller program.

Progress on human rights is much harder to measure. By our measurements, which
rely on the Salvadoran press, and by the measurements of virtually every other
Salvadoran source including the Central American University, which is
sympathetic to the left, the general trend of violence is down. There is a
beginning in the last six months of punishment of military officers and enlisted
men who commit human rights offenses -and policemen. That's a very important
sign that you can't do this stuff anymore. Progress has been slower than we
would like and the human rights situation continues to be bad. But Congress
wisely asked, 'Is it moving in the right direction?' The answer is yes.

Q. Has a lid been placed on the security forces in terms of wanton killings,
lack of discipline?

A. Yes. Again, I do not suggest that we have very good data, but it's clear that
there's been a decline. The real problem is professionalism and the command and
control structure. An example - the National Guard has little posts of 15 men in
almost every town (with) no communication, no radio, no telephone and no
transportation. They patrol by going out and walking 10 miles in one direction
and coming back. The next day, they walk in another direction. That helps
explain why it's so hard for the high command to maintain control and insist on
standards of behavior. One way you deal with it is professional military
training, which we've done; one way is with communications equipment, of which
we have given some and are giving more, and one way is to get a commitment from
the high command to punish wrongdoing. We've seen more of that in the last six
months. As near as one can make out, there is less gratuitous violence against
civilians.
The Guerrilla Link

I said to the head of the National Police - let's talk about human rights
violations. The first thing he did was pull down a looseleaf book filled with
the pictures and biographies of young National Police officers who were killed
by guerrillas. He said, 'Aren't those human rights violations?' When guerrilla
activity goes up, government military activity goes up. Inasmuch as the
guerrillas frequently hide behind civilians and travel with civilians, civilian
casualties go up too.

Q. How concerned are we about human rights violations, the killing of Indians,
in Guatemala?

A. We have been very concerned. Under the previous Government, we did not
provide military assistance because of the human rights record. The situation is
improved under President (Efrain) Rios Montt, especially in Guatemala City.
(Formerly) a phenomenal number of people would be killed, including Christian
Democrats and other political leaders. That is completely stoppped. It means
political life can begin again. It's been more difficult to control human rights
abuses (by) the military. As I indicated with respect to El Salvador, these are
not army units that have a tradition of respecting human rights. And that may be
the understatement of the year.
subhed somewhere

Q. What are the basic differences between the Reagan and Carter Administrations
on rights?

A. The Carter Administration believed that public criticism was more effective
than we do. In countries where we have good friendly relations and a lot of
influence, we use that influence first. We have recourse to public criticism
only when those private efforts have failed. Another difference may be more
fundamental. I would say the human rights situation has declined drastically in
what used to be South Vietnam and Iran. In the South Vietnamese Government and
under the Shah, you had real and serious human rights problems, but the
replacement regime is much worse. We try to ask, 'Who is the likely alternative
and what is that likely to mean?' We don't just ask 'Are you doing bad things
and should we therefore stop dealing with you?'

(Former Assistant Secretary of State) Pat Derian says, 'Who knows what the
future is going to bring to Iran or South Vietnam or South Korea? You act on
what you know is the case at a given moment.' That's wildly wrong because it
produces Vietnams and it produces Irans. It would produce another such situation
in El Salvador.

Q. Critics say the Administration is not concerned with rights in South Africa
or Argentina.

A. False. I understand the difficulty that we are in and why we have credibility
problems. (In) a country which is friendly - South Korea, Argentina, South
Africa - we have a lot of influence. The first thing we try to do is to use that
influence. Last week I called in, with a regional assistant secretary (of
state), the ambassador from one of those friendly, right-wing countries to make
a very strong protest about a human rights situation. We've done a lot of that
and we have seen some benefits. But the public doesn't see it.

Q. You have seen advances?

A. Yes. One has to remember that in most countries, friendly, unfriendly, the
influence of any outsider is marginal on a central political and social
question. Frequently good things happen and we can't really take credit. There
was an election in the Dominican Republic, in Honduras, in El Salvador, in St.
Lucia. That didn't happen because we said it should. (But) there are a good
number of cases where people are out of jail now, or never have gone in because
of what we did. Or where torture has been substantially reduced or an election
was held or the results were honored because of American influence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Abrams, Salvadoran funeral

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TO THE GREAT BARRIER REEF AND BEYOND

BYLINE: By James P. Sterba

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4837 words


James P. Sterba reports on science for The New York Times.
Herman Gross plunged over the stern into the Coral Sea on a sunny Sunday
afternoon last November. Within seconds, the 16 pounds of lead strapped to his
waist, and cameras in each hand, were tugging him down a foot per second through
chilly, gin-clear water toward what, as he sank closer, looked less and less
like a discarded length of rope and more and more like a very large snake.

Herman - an affable 65-year-old Great Neck, L.I., grandfather of four, apparel
importer and tennis entrepreneur - settled onto the sandy bottom at 80 feet and
did something that would have made his Long Island neighbors raise their
eyebrows. He swam to within touching distance of this marine cousin of the
cobra, inched a camera in farther, and began snapping close-up portraits.

Sinking into the coral canyon around Herman, the rest of us were quickly
enveloped in a blizzard of reef fish. Along ledges and crevasses, huge yellow
sea fans and gorgonian corals branched out above the deep blue mantles of giant
clams, and feathered arms of fiery red crinoids spread like flowers. A stingray
rose like a carpet out of the sand in the distance. A hulking brown nurse shark
seemed to snooze under a shady ledge. Three inquisitive gray reef sharks cruised
in quickly to check out the bubbly invasion of 10 ungainly creatures who had
carried hundreds of pounds of diving gear and camera equipment halfway around
the world to see and photograph the submarine neighborhood and, for a few weeks,
escape from their own.

Within an hour, we were out of both air and film. We clambered back on deck,
unstrapped tanks, peeled off wet suits, rinsed cameras in freshwater, and popped
the tops off soft drinks and beer. Herman, a natural punster, couldn't resist:
''I now pronounce you members of the Coral Majority.'' Australia's Great Barrier
Reef and its neighboring atolls in the Coral Sea form a marine wilderness nearly
the size of California - an unrivaled panorama so vast, diverse, complex and
isolated that it has long been viewed by experienced American divers as an
ultimate quest - the underwater equivalent of climbing Mt. Everest.

Australians have kept virginal most of the 2,500 individual reefs that
collectively form the Barrier Reef. Unlike reefs in many overpopulated
third-world countries, the Barrier Reef so far has been regulated to prevent
overfishing and other exploitation by the country's 14 million people. The
Barrier Reef is so vast that day trippers simply cannot reach most of it from
coastal ports in small boats. So much of what it offers for recreation is near
the coast, and few venture to its outer reaches and beyond.

But past the edge, within the pristine submerged atolls of the Coral Sea,
hundreds of miles from the nearest land, coral pillars called bommies (from the
aboriginal word bombora) rise hundreds of feet from the sea floor to within
inches of the water's surface.

Around them is a garden of genetic abundance so varied (some 1,500 species of
fish and 400 species of coral compared with about 500 fish and 40 coral species
in the Caribbean) that scientists routinely find creatures that have yet to be
named. Here, curious big fish, such as man-size potato cod, having never met a
human before, swim up close without fear to investigate the strange visitors
with bubbles coming out of their heads. It is still possible here, without
knowing it, to be the first human being to explore a particular patch of the
planet.

And the explorers are no longer confined to the ranks of professional
adventurers and scientists. Airlines, boats, compressors, air tanks,
demand-breathing regulators, bouyancy compensators, pressure gauges, and
discretionary income have all helped open obscure seas to curious amateurs.

Although the Aqua-Lung came along in the early 1940's, neither the training
required to get a diver safely to and from the depths nor diving and camera
equipment were widely available until the mid-1960's. here are now more than two
million trained scuba divers in North America; perhaps one million of them dive
regularly, and more than 200,000 new ones complete certification courses
annually.  Thousands of Europeans and Japanese now flock annually toward the
Equator with diving gear. The Diving Equipment Manufacturers Association says
recreational scuba diving in the United States has matured into a
$500-million-a-year retail business for its dealers, for instructors, airlines
and diving-resort operators.

The Y.M.C.A. first began offering scuba instruction in this country in 1959,
followed a year later by the National Association of Underwater Instructors, and
later by the Professional Association of Diving Instructors and others. But
scuba diving was stereotyped for many years as a fringe sport reserved for the
spear-carrying macho male, brave or foolhardy enough to ply waters full of
sinister sea creatures.

Jacques Cousteau's cameras and the warm clear waters of the Caribbean helped
soften that image. By the late 1960's, hordes of American vacationers were
hopping beyond Florida's beaches for their doses of sun and sand, and plying the
shallows with face masks, snorkels and swim fins. Gradually, island diving shops
opened, resorts began offering introductory scuba classes, and soon thousands of
families, including older members, were being lured below snorkeling depths by
coral vistas, which they would tout back home as ''another world,'' better seen
than described, and better seen in person than through Cousteau's prism.

Mine was an instant addiction. A childhood of gray Februarys in rural Michigan
made tropical reefs seem too enchanting to be true.  Later, when a Mexican
instructor in a Cozumel cove offered to rent me the scuba gear, give me a lesson
and not drown me - all for the bargain price of $10 - they became accessible.
That afternoon, in 20 feet of water, it seemed easier than learning to ride a
bicycle, only much more thrilling.

Back home, I enrolled in a six-week scuba certification course, began shopping
for diving gear and an underwater camera, and told my friends there was a
substitute for L.S.D. or going into space.

I began to haunt Cozumel and other diving meccas of the Caribbean: Grand Cayman
Island, the Bahamas, Roatan and Bonaire. That was 10 years ago. Since then, my
diving habit has gotten more expensive, luring me through Asian Pacific waters
and the pages of photoequipment catalogues. The Caribbean remained conveniently
accessible, but there were crowds of new divers and fish trained to perform on
cue. Diving exotica beckoned: the Japanese shipwrecks of Truk lagoon, the
unusual invertebrates of Palau, the manta rays of Ponape, Malaysia, Thailand,
the Philippines.

And those places, naturally, only whetted my appetite for the Maldive Islands,
the Red Sea, the Galapagos, and, of course, the big one - Australia's Great
Barrier Reef.  The Coral Sea before sunrise looked that first morning like a
giant vat of black undulating Jell-O. No wind, no sound, nothing in any
direction except a misty gray sky below puffs of dark flannel clouds. No lights
twinkling in the distance. No land. No other ships. Nothing above water but us.

We were about as close to nowhere as it was possible for 10 Americans to get to,
explore, and then get back from in three weeks.  The group was made up of a
pharmacist, a nurse, a film editor, a neurosurgeon, a veterinarian, a computer
programmer, a lawyer, a housewife and a journalist.

We gathered in Sydney, hopped a domestic flight north to the Queensland port of
Townsville, and set to sea aboard a chartered 65-foot, research and recreation
vessel named the Reef Explorer. It heaved and rolled for two-and-a-half days,
threading first through the Barrier Reef's calmer inner channels and then
pounding over 25-foot open sea crests through an unseasonal storm.

Now, 150 miles beyond the Barrier Reef's outer wall and 325 miles east of
Townsville, the first pink and yellow streaks of sunlight began to pierce the
eastern horizon as Dan Strandjord, a 29-year-old computer programmer from
Chicago, and I stood on the bow soaking up the stillness of our anchorage and
watching black water turn blue.  Suddenly, right below us, what looked at first
like a small periscope popped to the surface. It was a snake on its periodic
pilgrimage from the sea floor to the surface to fill its neck-to-tail lung with
air.  It appeared to look at us for several seconds before disappearing.  We
took it as an invitation.

We were anchored inside the submerged 25-mile-wide cone of a long extinct
volcano charted on maps as Marion Reef, a place the Reef Explorer could get to
only in the few weeks of calm spring weather between winter and summer storm
seasons. By the time Dan and I had loaded and sealed our cameras and begun to
suit up for a prebreakfast dive, Ben Blackett, Bill Hardy and Herman Gross had
stirred from cabins below, anxious to get wet.

We slipped quickly into nylon and neoprene wet suits, buckled knives to our
calves (more for poking than protection), tied depth gauges to our wrists and
strapped on inflatable air vests called buoyancy compensators, which
counterbalance the sinking effect of a weight belt. There is a precise order to
this dressing ritual, second nature but important in case trouble requires
undressing below. We fitted air tanks into backpacks, attached and tested our
breathing regulators and tank pressure gauges (2,300 psi, or pounds per square
inch, is a standard load for steel tanks), and then lifted the tanks to our
backs. Lead weight belts were strapped on last - with a flick of the buckle, the
weights can be jettisoned in emergencies.

Just before slipping off the stern, we fitted fins to our feet and masks to our
faces. The surface of the water was beginning to shimmer with flecks of
yellow-white sunlight.

''When you roll off the boat into the water, a great sense of euphoria overcomes
you,'' said Herman. ''Thousands of bubbles engulf you. You feel weightless. It
is so calm andquiet. It's like being home again.''

But in diving there is always a lot to do: watches to set, gauges to test,
camera light meters to set, strobes to turn on, cameras and camera housings to
check for water leaks. Air in the buoyancy compensator must be slowly released
in order to sink. With each few feet of depth, pressure on eardrums must by
equalized by blowing air through the Eustachian tubes toward the eardrums. In
the first 33 feet of depth, water pressure doubles on the diver's body, and so
he must compensate by increasing the air pressure inside his ears and in the
face mask.

It is an instinctive checklist of procedures for experienced divers -as we sank
that morning to the junction of a sloping sandy bottom and a coral wall at 60
feet.

Part of the lure of this trip was the possibility of seeing and photographing
sea snakes. Sure, but this was ridiculous. They were everywhere, swimming
S-curves to and from the surface with their paddle tails, resting on the sandy
bottom, poking into coral holes; they were cigar thin and wrist thick; two feet
long, five feet long; blue, tan, metallic gray, banded like rattlesnakes.
Astrotia stokesii, and a half-dozen other species around the reef, were all
generously endowed with enough neurotoxic venom to be deadly if provoked to take
a nip. I counted eight while I was sinking to the bottom, and I felt a little
like Harrison Ford descending into the tomb, searching for the lost Ark of the
Covenant. ear undoubtedly keeps more people out of the oceans than anything else
(which some people argue is probably good for the oceans). Divers learn soon
enough that the greatest danger they are likely to encounter underwater is their
own life-threatening panic reactions to unanticipated events, such as running
out of air. Nondivers and diving novices automatically assume that a variety of
vicious sea creatures are just waiting below to do them in: moray eels,
barracuda, sea snakes and sharks head most lists of such villains.
But it doesn't take long to learn, for example, that the moray eel's startlingly
fierce look, with open mouth and glistening teeth, is a breathing requirement
and not the posture of aggression. Likewise, toothsome barracuda have a habit of
staring down divers but are not stupid enough to tear into what must look like
giant blubbery monsters. And we knew that while caution is required around
curious sharks, the common ones found around reefs usually keep their distance
from divers - in sharp contrast to their film performances - unless food, like
freshly speared fish, attract them or they are feeling extremely territorial
that day.

But sea snakes were new to us. Only our guide, Theresa Detchemendy, and our
Australian boat crew (two men and two women) had been diving among them before.
There are about 50 species in the Pacific and Indian oceans - but none in the
Atlantic - and they are the only true marine reptiles.  For reasons yet to be
explained, their ancestors took to the sea several million years ago and evolved
flattened paddle tails for swimming. Unlike sea turtles, which crawl ashore to
lay eggs, sea snakes give birth in the water. The one concession of the sea
snake to its terrestrial past is the need to surface occasionally to fill a
single head-to-tail lung with air that can last while it is submerged for hours
at a time. Some herpetologists believe sea snakes also get some oxygen from
saltwater through skin respiration.  From reading, the rest of us knew that they
were not aggressive and would bite only if they felt threatened or endangered
themselves. But we didn't know exactly what constituted a threatening action on
our parts, how close we could approach, or how they would react to our presence.

''When Herman told me about the sea snakes, I didn't want to come on the trip,''
said Bill Greene, a lawyer from Shaker Heights, Ohio, who runs a three-hour,
18-minute, 26.2-mile marathon. ''I had gotten used to sharks in the Red Sea. But
sea snakes were different. First of all, from our childhood, most of us are
taught that snakes are dangerous critters. And from what I read about how they
wind around your tank and your fins, and how one bite and you're dead, sea
snakes just scared the pants off me. I really put off going on this trip because
I was really afraid I could die.''

The first sea snake I approached was Aipysurus laevis. It had a thick gray body
and a golden brown head. It was resting in open sand on the bottom at 60 feet. I
swam to about six feet from it, then slowly eased in to about three feet for
photos. With each photograph, of course, my strobe flashed and I noticed the
snake jump a little.  But it didn't otherwise move, so I inched in closer. On
the sixth or seventh flash of light, the snake seemed to wake up. It pulled up
its head and swam toward me and the source of the light.
The diving writers Emily and Per Ola D'Aulaire like to quote a herpetologist as
saying, ''An unsolicited approach by a large, highly venomous snake can induce a
frame of mind not conducive to detached observation of reptile behavior.''

I couldn't describe my reaction better, except to add that this first encounter
gave new meaning to the phrase ''heavy breathing.'' I tried to stay motionless,
which is not easy when you're nearly weightless. The snake swam up and touched
my strobe three or four times with its nose and then began slowly coiling around
the black rubber cord connecting the strobe to my camera. It then moved over to
my left arm and began nosing the sleeve on my rubber wet suit.
pg 18

After what seemed like hours, but was only about 30 seconds, the snake turned
its gold head around and swam away, as if bored.  Most recreational diving on
tropical reefs these days is done off relatively small boats that carry groups
of divers to and from inshore reefs on half-day or day-long trips. They make two
or three dives a day. For addicted photographers, that's not enough. With only
limited diving days before the real world again beckons, we want to be
underwater as much as is possible. Lying in the sun on the beach, or cruising
back and forth to dive sites, is a waste of time. The maxim is: You can't
photograph what you don't see, and you don't see unless you're in the water.
Live-aboard boats get us to isolated areas and park over a reef, shortening our
commute to down and up and allowing us to plop into the water day and night.

The Reef Explorer was just such an oasis. Between dives, we returned to eat,
sleep, refill tanks, change film, chatter, pore over fishing and invertebrate
identification books, play chess and Scrabble, and read paperbacks -to pass time
required to expel the nitrogen that normally accumulates in divers' bodies from
breathing compressed air under the pressure of water far beneath the surface.
This is essential in avoiding the bends, a potentially crippling affliction
caused when divers surface too quickly, causing excess nitrogen to form bubbles
in the bloodstream and body tissue.  (The excess nitrogen, released from water
pressure, expands to form bubbles just as carbon dioxide does when a soft-drink
cap is popped.)

By carefully monitoring our ''bottom time,'' our depths and the intervals we
spent on the surface, we could manage five to 10 dives daily, often starting at
sunrise before breakfast and not finishing until nearly midnight, happily
exhausted. (At night, many creatures that hide during the day, such as lobsters,
crabs and octopuses, come out to feed.) Ben Blackett discovered the ocean's
escape value while snorkeling off Quinhon, where on land he had patched up
casualties of the Vietnam War when he was an Army surgeon. Now, the tensions of
being a neurosurgeon in Tacoma, Wash., need periodic purging, and reefs offer
that to both him and his wife, Glenna, a former nurse.  ''This is total
concentration for me,'' he says. ''The medical problems back home disappear for
a while.'' Marion Reef's giant lagoon was peppered with bommies, rising like
clusters of skyscrapers hundreds of feet up from the floor of the atoll, and
each day we would move to new ones to explore. The snakes were ubiquitous.
Attracted by the water turbulence from our leg and fin motions, they often
followed us around the reefs throughout our dives, like puppies. Sometimes, as
we trained our cameras on other fish subjects, they would swim in and ruin our
careful attempts at composition. Occasionally, one would get close enough to see
its mirrored reflection in our face masks and poke the glass with its nose as if
meeting a new friend.

''There were so many, it took me a day to get comfortable with them,'' Bill
Hardy said later. ''By the end of the trip, they were almost like pets.''

''It is amazing how familiarity breaks phobias,'' said Herman. ''I read all
about how their toxin is more deadly, on an ounce-for-ounce basis, than a
cobra's. But I'll do anything for a good closeup. My problem was always getting
close enough. If I could get the head of a snake in my camera frame, then it was
a successful dive.'' Occasionally, Herman would gently grab a snake and simply
hold it in front of his camera.

With Theresa's help, even Bill Greene came to like them.  ''They turned out to
be very curious, friendly, interesting creatures,'' he said later. ''They are
constantly following you around. You realize that they mean no harm. They
certainly aren't aggressive. By the end of the trip I was looking for them,
playing with them, petting them.''

On one dive, Herman and I watched a four-foot snake's passivity tested by a tiny
three-inch damselfish. The snake was poking its head innocently into crevices
looking for tiny minnows to eat.  Damsels are notoriously territorial, and they
will dart out and nip at anything that intrudes on their sphere of influence,
including divers. Each time the snake's scaly head emerged from a hole, the
damsel would streak into it with a jolting collision. The snake finally gave up
and swam off.

Underwater photographers discover quickly that one of the best places to take
pic- tures of fish normally hard to approach is around spots that divers call
''cleaning stations.'' Here, big fish come to have parasites picked off them by
small fish and shrimps. These places resemble gasoline stations because big
fish, regardless of species, actually wait in line to be serviced by tiny
minnows.

The tip-off of a cleaning station is to see a large fish, such as a grouper,
suspended a few inches above a small coral head with its mouth open as if
yawning. If a diver can approach slowly and without creating too much water
turbulence, he can see the tiny fish actually darting around inside the big
fish's mouth, a seemingly perilous place if, for example, the mouth belongs to a
barracuda.

But here at Marion Reef's cleaning stations, we found the usual protocol of
behavior that provides rewards for both the big fish and the little fish. The
big fish gets rid of parasites around its teeth, gills, jaws and other parts of
its body. The little fish gets food, delivered.

For sheer photographic beauty, the symbiotic relationship between anemones and
clown fish is hard to top. Anemone fingers are poisonous to other fish, but the
clown-fish families that live pg 19 and hide among them are protected from the
poison by a mucous coating. The brightly colored clown fish, usually white and
red striped, serve as a lure, drawing in food for the stationary anemone, which
is usually rooted in a coral crevice, spreading its fingerlike tentacles in a
bouquet. If a fish other than a clown fish swims into the tentacles, it is
stunned by their poison and immobilized. The tentacles quickly envelop it. The
anemone gets fed. The clown fish gets a home.  No matter how often you've been
diving with them - and, collectively, our group had logged hundreds of hours
-sharks tend to put a little edge into a dive. They demand attention and
caution.

Bill Hardy, 42, who heads Sloan-Kettering's New York Laboratory of Veterinary
Oncology, where he studies cancer in dogs and cats, started diving in the
Florida Keys when he was a teen-ager. In 24 years of diving in both the Atlantic
and Pacific oceans, he had seen less than a dozen sharks.

''On this trip, I knew we were going to see a lot of sharks and I did not know
how they would react or how I would react,'' he said.  ''It worried me a
little.'' Instead of seeing one or two lone whitetips or grays, as is common in
other areas of the tropical Pacific, we found that the sharks around the Marion
bommies often moved in packs of half a dozen or more. And while the whitetips
tended to be average-size in the fourto five-foot range, other species, such as
grays and silvertip whalers, were bigger.

We carried no spears or bang sticks (poles tipped with rifle or shotgun shells)
for protection, largely because we never felt threatened, but also because we
felt that those weapons, carelessly handled, were much more dangerous than the
sharks themselves. It should be mentioned that while we saw and photographed
sharks on virtually every dive, including dives at night, the species we
encountered were not noted for their aggressive tendencies. We saw no great
whites, sand tigers, hammerheads or makos. We saw no sharks of any species over
eight feet long except for notably docile nurse sharks.

''You have to have a whole different view of sharks after a trip like this,''
said Herman, who didn't start diving until three years ago, when he was 62.
''Beforehand, I was a little apprehensive. But once I was in the water with them
for a while, I was struck by their beauty, their grace, their speed.  ''People
have the assumption that if you're in the water with any shark, you're dead,''
he added. ''It just isn't so. I usually start a conversation like that by saying
sharks are overrated. Of course, nobody who hasn't been diving believes me.''

Only John Bound, our captain, went into the water with a pole spear, and then
just on two occasions when he went after fish to eat. A few in the group
objected. But since spearing fish instantly attracted sharks for our cameras,
most of us were delighted.

Near the end of our trip, John decided to up the voltage of a dive by taking
down the remains of three coral trout for the sharks to eat. As we perched
around him at 90 feet with cameras ready, a pack of 15 big grays and silvertips
approached almost immediately. For a few minutes, they swam in slow broad arcs
approaching neither us nor the food. One of them gradually came in timidly and
bit into a piece of fish on John's spear. Instantly, the others reacted by
switching into overdrive, darting in and out, among us.
Another shark then came in and grabbed a chunk of fish too big for it to swallow
in one gulp. As the tail half of the fish dangled from the shark's mouth, the
other sharks streaked after it, thrashing, biting and swirling in a wild frenzy
after the food in the mouth of their colleague.

''At one point, a shark took a piece of fish off the stick, turned left and
headed right between me and Bill,'' said Herman. ''He was inches away from both
of us, and all I was concerned about was how much of him I was going to get in
my camera. Amazing. You're right alongside them and you're saying to yourself,
'Gee, I'm supposed to be scared now.' ''

Even when they seemed most frenzied, the sharks carefully distinguished between
us and the food we had set out for them. For that, we were of course grateful.
It was a another lesson in shark behavior that Hollywood had not learned. After
that, seeing only one or two sharks at a time was an anticlimax.  In the two
weeks we spent diving around Marion and along the Barrier Reef, we realized we
had seen far more of the diversity of the region than had Capt. James Cook, who
spent four months mapping it 211 years before we got there. He described the
reefs as submerged rock piles without, of course, benefit of a personal
look-see. Scuba gear would have drastically altered his view of the place.

We took more than 400 rolls of film among us. Our captain speared six fish for
dinner but otherwise we left the place as we found it.  Said Bill Greene: ''As a
beginning diver, you say to yourself, 'I want to take one of those home. I want
a piece of that and a piece of that.' And after you begin to understand the
balance of nature underwater, as perhaps we feel above water, you become
protectionist. You want to do whatever you can to preserve that beautiful world,
and you almost want to keep man out. You want people to take an entrance
examination and make them pledge, 'I will go and look, I will shoot nothing but
pictures, and I won't touch and won't disturb anything in any way.'

''I found this one shell, a beautiful shell, and I bet I stayed there looking at
it for five minutes. I looked and thought, 'My goodness, this would be beautiful
on my coffee table.' But I couldn't bring myself to take that shell with me
because my feelings had changed to that extent over the years. I felt that that
shell was part of the world where it was.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of coral tuastrea (Page 16) photo of school of
snappers (Page 16) photo of divers photographing a nurse shark (Page 15) photo
of a diver holding a poisonus sea snake (Page 14) photo of a blue angel fish
photo of the divers eating lunch in the galley of their ship

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

300 NORDIC PROTESTERS MARCH IN SOVIET

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 25


A group of 300 antinuclear demonstrators from four Nordic countries left Moscow
today for rallies in Smolensk and Minsk, some convinced that their tightly
organized meetings amd marches had advanced their cause and others exasperated
with what they regarded as manipulation by their Soviet hosts.

A high point of the two-week tour, called ''Peace March '82,'' was reached
yesterday with a parade along Gorky Street in the heart of Moscow. It was the
first time in memory that Westerners had been allowed to stage such a
demonstration in the Soviet capital, but the results were disappointing for the
visitors.

The parade, half a mile along a thoroughfare that was closed for traffic, began
nearly two hours late. There was a steady drizzle and the thin line of people
watching from the sidewalks offered almost no response. Many appeared baffled
and uncertain how to react when participants approached them with embraces and
cries of ''Mir!'' meaning peace in Russian.

The event summed up the difficulties confronting the Swedes, Finns, Danes and
Norwegians participating in the tour. Mainly women, they hoped to mount a
counterpart of the marches that have drawn widespread support in Western Europe
in the past year. But they have been trammelled by agreements reached beforehand
to remain within official channels and by Soviet officials' insistence on
treating them, as one disaffected participant put it, ''like peace tourists.''

Undertaking to Remain Neutral

In the parade down Gorky Street, the visitors held to their pledge to remain
politically neutral. They were led by a group of women in flowing pink caftans,
carrying a banner mounted with a styrofoam dove. They sang protest songs, some
of them borrowed from the American struggles for civil rights and against the
Vietnam war, and their placards were restricted to prearranged slogans, such as
''no to nuclear weapons in the whole world.''

When an unidentified interloper, speaking fluent Russian, attempted to prompt
the visitors into a chant against President Reagan, those at the head of the
line vigorously waved him away.

But there were many who felt that Soviet officials had broken their side of the
pact. The parade was rescheduled for late morning without notice, perhaps to
foil potential demonstrations by Soviet dissidents. The route ran from below Red
Square and moved away from the city center, not towards the Kremlin as the
visitors had previously been told.

There were more serious objections which culminated in an inconclusive meeting
at which the visitors' leaders sought explanations from the Soviet Committee for
the Defense of Peace, the official body that was host for the tour. A major
criticism was that Soviet speakers throughout the visit here, and previously in
Leningrad, made polemical speeches calling for acceptance of Leonid I.
Brezhnev's recent series of disarmament proposals, in breach of a mutual pledge
to keep the meetings broadly for disarmament and not politically edged.

Attacks on Reagan

The issue was broached early in the visit, when Soviet demonstrators bused in
for rallies hoisted placards lampooning President Reagan and accusing the West
of fomenting an arms race.  These disappeared, but Soviet speakers lost no
occasion subsequently to demand a response from the United States to Mr.
Brezhnev's pledge that the Soviet Union would not be the first to use nuclear
weapons, and to other Soviet initiatives.

Another frustration was the Soviet effort to keep the visitors away from
spontaneous contacts with ordinary Russians. A phalanx of K.G.B. security
policemen were in evidence wherever the marchers went and access to most of the
meetings and parades was by permit only. Much time was spent on tourist visits,
and Soviet press reports reworded several of the visitors' speeches to make it
seem that they were directing their appeals only at Western governments, not at
Soviet and Western authorities equally.

The visitors agreed from the outset that it would be inappropriate for them to
have contacts with an independent group that has been harassed by the K.G.B.
since it was established last month. In any event, officials saw to it that
contacts were inhibited by cutting off the telephones of the group's leaders
just before the marchers arrived, and by placing two of the leaders under 15-day
detention orders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of peace marchers

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Fund Prepares Salute To Vietnam Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 164 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 25


Vietnam veterans from around the nation are being urged to come to Washington in
November for the welcomehome they never got.

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, the chief sponsor, says 100,000 veterans
will participate in the four-day National Salute to Vietnam Veterans scheduled
to start on Veterans Day, Nov. 11. The Pentagon says nearly nine million
Americans served in Southeast Asia from 1965 to 1973.

Unlike the combatants of earlier wars, returning Vietnam veterans found no
parades awaiting them. More likely, they were met by hostility or indifference.
A 1980 Veterans Administration survey of Vietnam veterans found much bitterness
about their experience.

Sandie Fauriol, director of the National Salute to Vietnam Veterans, said
veterans could get a schedule by writing her at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Fund, 1100 Vermont Ave. N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
U.S. Court Denies Bid For Agent Orange Data

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jul 28


A Federal appeals court has upheld the Government's refusal to release deleted
portions of its official history on the use of Agent Orange and other herbicides
in the Vietnam War.

In a separate ruling Friday, the United States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia also denied a request under the Freedom of Information Act by the
Unification Church of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon for F.B.I. files containing
citizens' complaints tomembers of Congress. The court said that the letters
contain descriptions of ''bizarre'' and ''possibly illegal activities''
involving the church and that the material came under the act's privacy
exemption.

In the Agent Orange case, Elizabeth Russell, a student, and the National
Veterans Task Force on Agent Orange also cited the information act in requesting
20 pages of a draft of an Air Force history that were deleted in the final
version.

The three-judge panel upheld a lower court decision and ruled that the act
exempts from mandatory disclosure ''communications which would expose to public
view the deliberative process of an agency.'' Disclosure, the court said,
''would violate the integrity of the decision-making process whereby senior Air
Force officials determined the content of the official history.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vic Morrow Is Eulogized

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 7, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: CULVER CITY, Calif., July 25


Vic Morrow, the actor, killed with two children Friday while filming a mock
Vietnam battle scene, was eulogized today as having given the finest performance
of his career in the movie, ''The Twilight Zone.'' At Mr. Morrow's funeral,
George Folsey, associate producer of the film, told about 100 people at Hillside
Memorial Park: ''If there is any consolation in this, it is that the film is
finished. This performance must not be lost. It was Vic's last gift to us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 28, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LAG IN DRAFT REGISTRATION RAISES DOUBT THAT LAW CAN BE ENFORCED

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


Almost 150,000 young men have failed to register for the draft since March,
bringing the total to at least 675,000 since 1980, Reagan Administration
officials said today.

The total, which was arrived at by matching Selective Service and Social
Security records, is now so large that it raises new questions about whether the
draft registration law can be enforced. The number of men who could be convicted
of failing to register is more than 20 times greater than the entire population
of Federal prisons.

The Justice Department has begun to seek indictments, but even so, the officials
acknowledged, young men reaching their 18th birthdays have continued to ignore
the law.

So far, four young men have been indicted, with more indictments expected each
week. Those convicted of the Federal crime of failing to register could be
punished by up to five years in prison and a fine up to $10,000.

Opponents of draft registration in Congress and among civil liberties groups
contend that prosecuting every young man who fails to register would impose a
crushing burden on United States attorneys and the courts while selective
prosecution would be illegal. Thus, they argue, the law cannot be enforced.

Dissidents Not Seen as Numerous

Officials at the Selective Service System, while acknowledging that the rate of
compliance is well below the 98 percent needed for the system to be fair and
effective, said they believed a vast majority of those who had not signed up
were not political dissidents. Most were either uninformed about the law, the
officials said, or had ignored it for no particular reason.

They also pointed out that the number of nonregistrants was bound to rise as
more young men became subject to draft registration.  The officials asserted
that the rate of registration, even though lagging, has been acceptable;
8,365,000 men have registered since 1980.

Further, the officials said, relatively low rates are normal and compliance will
rise because of the indictments and better public information.

While the Selective Service puts the number of young men who have failed to
register at 675,000, a new audit by the General Accounting Office, not yet made
public, says more than 700,000 men have failed to comply with the law.

The law requires young men born in 1964 to register this year in a period from
30 days before their birthdays until 30 days after.  Under the law, women are
not required or permitted to register.

Reagan Administration officials said the rate of compliance for this year was 87
percent through mid-July. But the General Accounting Office report asserted that
the rate dropped below 80 percent in recent months.

The overall rate of compliance has been 93 percent, according to the Selective
Service.  Even at the height of the Vietnam War, when many young Americans
opposed United States involvement and some evaded the draft, compliance with
draft registration never went below 98 percent, officials said.

The leader of an antidraft coalition, Barry Lynn, and an attorney for the
American Civil Liberties Union, David Landau, said in a recent statement, ''The
Selective Service System and the Department of Justice face a potential
law-enforcement problem far more massive than ever during the Vietnam era.''

They cited court reports showing that from 1964 to 1973, when the draft ended,
the Selective Service referred 209,517 people to the Justice Department for
violations of the draft law. Of those, 25,279 were indicted and 10,055 were
tried; 5,540 pleaded guilty, 3,210 were convicted and 1,305 were acquited.

Low Compliance Rate in New York

The registration compliance rate for New York was 86.6 percent in June, as
against the national average of 93 percent, and it ranked 45th out of the 50
states. Connecticut, at 93 percent, ranked 20th, and New Jersey, at 92.3
percent, was 22nd.

Of the other states, Montana had the best record and California the worst.  The
Selective Service has been identifying those it believes are evading draft
registration by matching Social Security numbers with those who have signed up.
When the computers have finished identifying those who have not gone to a post
office to fill in registration cards, they will be notified by mail that they
are subject to prosecution.

Those young men will also be urged to sign up right away.  Selective Service
officials said that a form for mail registration would be included in the
letters scheduled to go out in early August, a week behind an earlier schedule.

Information Campaign Rejected

Selective Service officials contended that failure to register could be traced
to several causes, primarily lack of publicity and the absence of a military
emergency. They said that Congress had rejected a request for $400,000 more this
year for a public information campaign aimed at young men.

After the Soviet Union intervention in Afghanistan in late 1979, President
Carter ordered the resumption of draft registration under authority given the
President in existing law. But he had to ask Congress for funds to pay for it.

President Reagan said in his election campaign that he was opposed to peacetime
registration and a peacetime draft. Once in office, he changed his mind about
registration. But the Administration, according to senior officials, remains
opposed to a peacetime draft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 28, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND INDONESIA, LONG CLOSE, DRIFT APART ON SEVERAL ISSUES

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: BANDUNG, Indonesia, July 22


A modest protest recently at the United States Embassy in Jakarta by a group of
Moslem youths protesting American support for Israel was just one example of the
tensions between Indonesia and the United States.

Disagreements on China and the world economy are also straining a relationship
that has remained friendly since General Suharto came to power in the
mid-1960's.

Indonesians believe that the tensions are the fault of the United States.
Although relations have grown closer in recent years, it is the complaints of
the Indonesian Government that are being voiced most clearly.

Diplomatically, relations have improved in one respect since last spring, when
Morton Abramowitz was rejected by Indonesia as the United States Ambassador.

Having taken the extraordinary step of rejecting Mr. Abramowitz - and been
accused of doing so because he is Jewish and outspoken as well - the Indonesian
Government is now said to be prepared to take anyone offered.

Suharto to Visit U.S. in October

President Suharto is expected to be warmly received when he visits Washington
next October, his first such trip since 1975. Moreover, a recent visit to
Washington by the Indonesian Minister of Research and Technology, Bachruddin
Jusuf Habibie, who has been seeking advanced American weapons, reportedly went
well.

While Jakarta has been seeking more weapons and while it believes that the
United States is right to want to match the Soviet Navy's buildup in the
Pacific, some Indonesians are worried about the focus on military matters.

''The Reagan Administration is so military,'' said Jusuf Wanandi, director of
Jakarta's Center for Strategic and International Studies. Dr. Wanandi, who is
highly regarded by diplomats for his knowledge of government and military
thinking, said the American military focus was out of step with Indonesia's top
priority, the economy.

Need for Economic Aid Stressed

''The countries around here think of their main threat as domestic,'' he said.
He said Indonesia needed economic help more than ever because world prices for
its oil, tin, rubber and other exports have been so depressed that the country's
reserves and development plans are swiftly being cut back.

Yet the United States, he said, has withdrawn support for international
commodity agreements that might have kept prices higher, has lost interest in
aiding international lending institutions and has declined to sign the Law of
the Sea Treaty.

''It is boggling our mind,'' Dr. Wanandi said. ''Economic help is more important
for our stability than a few more tanks.'' Reflecting Indonesian ambivalence
about the rearming of Japan, which occupied Indonesia in World War II, Dr,
Wanandi asked where it might end if the United States kept urging Japan to bear
more of a military burden in Asia.

Concern About Japan Voiced

''What, really, do you want the Japanese to do?'' he said. ''If they really
decide to arm, if they set their minds to it, if they can work out some
consensus in the next five years, they could become a nuclear power. They can do
anything they want, you know.''

American policy toward China causes further grumbling, an attitude that in the
military's case goes back to 1965, when Peking was accused of encouraging the
Indonesian Communist Party, which was powerful at the time, to stage a coup. The
party was later liquidated.

Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusum@aatmadja said in a recent interview: ''I wish
that the United States more actively supported our position, especially on the
Cambodian question, rather than the Chinese position.''

He was alluding to China's emphasis on opposing the Vietnamese militarily and
making their occupation of Cambodia as expensive as possible.

Indonesia For Aid to Vietnam

Though a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, an anti-Communist
grouping, Indonesia favors economic aid for Vietnam and feels that its fear of
China is well founded.

On June 10, the Deputy Secretary of State, Walter J. Stoessel Jr., told the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee that United States relations with China ''are
seen by our Asian friends as a positive influence on the future direction of
China's foreign policy and a stimulus to regional cooperation.''

When asked about that testimony, Dr. Wanandi said, ''One of the confusing things
is what your China policy is.'' Indonesia, which broke diplomatic relations with
China in 1967, but has revived trade relations since then, has its own problems
with its China policy.

In an interview with Newsweek last month, the Foreign Minister said China was
the most dangerous influence in Southeast Asia. Two weeks ago, the Minister of
Information, Lieut. Gen. Ali Murtopo, said in a seminar that the greatest threat
in Southeast Asia was the Soviet Union.

The Foreign Minister later explained that perhaps he had been thinking of the
past, and his colleague of the future. But what struck some Indonesians as most
significant about the mix-up was its possible relevance to Indonesia's stance in
the East-West alignment.

''According to us,'' said the newspaper Merdeka, ''to cry anti-Soviet and
anti-People's Republic of China and, at the same time, to sing the United
States' song will lead the people to interpret our foreign policy wrongly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 28, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam and Malaysia Unable To Reach Cambodia Accord

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 75 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, July 27


After two days of talks here, Vietnam and Malaysia failed to reach agreement on
how to bring peace to Cambodia, a senior Foreign Ministry official said today.

The talks were conducted by Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam and
Foreign Minister Muhammad Ghazali bin Shafie of Malaysia. The two met Monday and
Mr. Thach, who has visited Singapore and Burma, leaves for Bangkok on Wednesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 28, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JACK HIGGINS'S ODYSSEY: POTBOILER TO BEST SELLER

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1015 words


''TOUCH THE DEVIL,'' the new novel by the best-selling British author Jack
Higgins, has a scene in which a terrorist penetrates 10 Downing Street and
confronts Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in her study. Security is much
tighter around British officials since those words were written, as a result of
the recent discovery of an intruder in the Queen's bedroom and other security
problems, but Mr.  Higgins thinks it could still use improvement.

''I was in Buckingham Palace for a garden party recently,'' he said here Monday,
''and I was interested to see how the new security precautions were taking
place. To tell the truth, they still weren't terribly effective.'' Indeed, Mr.
Higgins said he and his wife had been waved through one of the side gates at the
palace by a guardsman who had asked only to see their invitation, rather than
the security pass that accompanied the invitation. ''It was obvious from looking
around that there are terrible security loopholes,'' he said.

Mr. Higgins has an eye for that sort of thing because it goes with his
territory, which is writing successful thrillers with international settings.
That well-developed eye wed to a vivid imagination have paid off handsomely,
resulting in a string of international best sellers beginning with ''The Eagle
Has Landed'' in 1975 and including ''Storm Warning,'' ''Luciano's Luck'' and
''Solo.''

Success Under Pseudonym

Mr. Higgins has also had huge successes with ''The Valhalla Exchange'' and ''To
Catch a King,'' but they were written under the pseudonym Harry Patterson, which
is similar to Henry Patterson, the name he was given at birth in Belfast 53
years ago today.

Over the years he adopted several pseudonyms, including James Graham, Hugh
Marlowe and Martin Fallon, while churning out some 30 or so potboilers at the
same time that he was a tutor in social psychology at Leeds University in
England, where his family moved when he was 12 years old.

The potboilers didn't earn much money, but they taught the author the elements
of plot and pacing that are crucial to the thriller genre. Nevertheless, Mr.
Higgins said that it wasn't until he read the notes to F. Scott Fitzgerald's
''The Last Tycoon,'' and came across the dictum that character is action, that
he realized what the major ingredient of his books should be.

''It was quite a revelation,'' he said. ''I think in my early works I fell into
the trap of thinking of a plot and making the characters act it out. Now I start
with a concept, then create the characters, and let the characters make it
happen, like in real life.''

To Sign Autographs

Mr. Higgins, who flew into New York on the Concorde, is here for a week of
giving interviews and signing autographs. Although ''Touch the Devil'' (Stein &
Day) will not be publishing officially until Aug. 30, it is already in
bookstores.

The novel revolves around an Irish-American graduate of Andover and Princeton -
a Vietnam veteran and a Protestant - who enrolls for post-graduate study at
Trinity College in Dublin, visits Belfast, and becomes involved with the Irish
Republican Army. The title, Mr.Higgins explained, is from an Irish proverb that
cautions that once you touch the Devil you find it difficult to let go.

''Solo,'' published two years ago, was about a half-Greek, half-American concert
pianist who doubles as an assassin. After murdering a prominent British Zionist,
he is pursued across London by a tough Welsh-born British soldier in a chase
that involves an attractive young woman who is an expert on terrorists and
classical music. But Higgins-Patterson novels frequently contain recognizable
people, as for example the Duke of Windsor and Hitler in ''To Catch a King.''

A Bit of Social History

Mr. Higgins said that although he considered his novels primarily entertainment,
they were also something more. ''I think the type of book I'm writing, and the
type that Robert Ludlum writes, is also a kind of social history of our times,''
he said. ''People who read them a few years from now will actually get some idea
of what was happening politically in our time.

''People often talk about the personal novel, about individuals and their lives.
If you read it 50 years from now you'll still be reading about people, whereas
if you read 'Touch the Devil' you'll be reading about social history. On the one
hand it is an exciting story, but the theme is how long can we carry on with
death and destruction.''

Such questions, or at least the author's way of presenting them, has made Mr.
Higgins a wealthy man. A citizen of both Ireland and Britain, he lives on the
Channel Island of Jersey, near the Normandy coast of France.

He earned more than $2 million from ''Solo,'' and 'The Eagle Has Landed,'' which
has sold more than 2 million copies in paperback in England alone, continues to
bring in royalties from around the world. ''Touch the Devil,'' with an initial
printing of 75,000 copies, has earned from the Literary Guild the highest
book-club guarantee in the history of Stein & Day (it is an October dual main
selection).

Record Paperback Money

It drew the largest number of bidders for the paperback rights in the
publisher's history (New American Library's $465,000 bid topped that of six
other publishers). And the 15 percent paperback royalty is reportedly the
highest ever offered for a Jack Higgins book.

Books by Higgins-Patterson are printed in more than 40 languages, the author
said, including Hindi and Indonesian.  ''I just heard from China that they've
done a reprint of over half-a-million copies of 'The Eagle Has Landed,' '' he
said with a laugh. ''Unfortunately, they said they didn't believe in paying
writers, but they added they'd be pleased to have me as a guest whenever I
wanted to go there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jack Higgins

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 28, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHILD ACTRESS BURIED: John Landis, the director, comforting his wife yesterday
after the funeral service for Renee Shinn Chen. The sixyear-old Taiwanese girl
was killed Friday with the actor Vic Morrow and another child, My-Ca Dinh Lee,
when a helicopter crashed in the filming of ''The Twilight Zone,'' a movie being
directed by Mr. Landis. A cameraman who worked on the film, which deals with the
Vietnam War, said yesterday that he heard Mr. Landis order the lowflying copter
to fly even lower as firebombs exploded on the set below; another cameraman said
the craft was supposed to be clear of the area by the time the explosions
started.

BYLINE: United Press International

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 2; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
BUYERS OF DEATH

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 28


A nasty little quarrel has broken out between the French and the British,
another example of what's to be expected as the world arms trade grows ever
larger and more advanced.

London's Sunday Times quoted a French engineer at Argentina's Bahia Blanca air
base as saying that he and his team fitted Exocet missiles to French-built
planes during the Falkland war. The report suggests it was a secret and perhaps
deliberate breach of France's military embargo on Argentina, enabling two
British ships to be sunk.

The French Government is furious. A flat public denial has been issued, and
privately officials say darkly that they think the British Government had a hand
in magnifying the story ''at a time when unity of European states is an
imperious necessity.'' That is a reference to the European-American quarrel on
the Soviet gas pipeline deal, steel and other issues. Further, the French note
that they gave substantial ''operational'' help to the British, and warn that if
charges of disloyalty to an ally aren't stopped, they might reveal some ''direct
or indirect'' breaches of the blockade by British arms firms.

Before making its statement, the French Government held an investigation
''because it's true, strange things can happen in the arms trade,'' an official
said. Herve Colin, the Dassault engineer who headed the team sent to Argentina
last November along with the first batch of Super-Etendard planes, was summoned
to Paris.

The Government concluded that he didn't have the expertise to adjust the
missiles. That was to have been done by a team from SNIAS, the state-owned
producer of Exocets, scheduled to reach Argentina on April 10 but held back in
France when the embargo was imposed on April 7.

However, the French pointed out that Argentine technicians had been working with
the planes and missiles for seven years. ''The British think the Argentines are
underdeveloped monkeys, and maybe they are politically and economically, but
their technicians are good,'' a knowledgeable French source said.

The point rankles, because at the start of the war Paris told London not to
worry too much about the Exocets since the French specialists weren't going to
install them. Further, the French sent Super-Etendards and Mirages to make mock
attacks on the British fleet sailing to the Falklands so it could practice
against the French equipment. The other ''operational'' help is still being kept
secret for fear of upsetting other French arms customers.

The whole incident shows what sensitive political problems are being fused by
the flourishing modern arms trade and how likely there are to be future
explosions. There has been an important leap in the quality as well as the
quantity of arms transfers in the last seven or eight years, virtually all of it
under the close supervision if not actual command of governments.

Until then, most big sales to developing countries were of surplus or obsolete
equipment. Two events changed the pattern of purposeful production of advanced
equipment for export. One was the 1973 oil crisis, which spurred the search for
ways to earn back petrodollars.  Sale of expensive weapons suited perfectly. The
other was the end of the Vietnam war, which brought the U.S. back into the
export market so it wouldn't have to shut down plants.

During the Carter Administration, efforts were made to negotiate some restraints
on this monstrous extravagance in a world that contains so much hunger and
poverty. Three-quarters of the $30 billion worldwide arms transfers now go to
third world countries.

But the talks with the Soviets broke down. Andrew Pierre, who wrote a recent
book about the arms trade, thinks brakes could still be applied providing the
U.S. gets agreement among all major Western suppliers first and only then seeks
an overall deal with Moscow.

Officials consider that wildly optimistic. For one thing, the real momentum
comes from buyers, not exporters. Repeatedly, big third world countries have
blocked tries by small European countries to get even a comprehensive study of
the trade launched by the U.N. The customers are still more eager than the
merchants of death, so there's not much hope of limiting demand.

The chance of restricting supplies is probably limited to items not produced by
more than three or four countries. And even then, a French Defense Ministry
expert pointed out, there's always somebody who finds an overriding political
reason to make a sale and then everyone wants to compete.

The only realistic way to impose a ceiling at least on the quality spiral is to
identify new weapons under development and apply an agreed ban. ''Once the
production line gets going, it's too late,'' the expert added.

But a try must be made, by public demand. As the Franco-British tiff shows,
nobody can be sure when their own or their ally's arms will be turned against
them. The one sure thing is that some of the weapons will be used, somewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Clyde Haberman and Laurie Johnston

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 252 words


Veteran Struggles With Job as Impresario

A ll was not going well for Richard Sanders. Fact was, things were terrible.
''I'm three months behind in my rent and two months behind in my Con Ed bill,''
Mr. Sanders said. ''I'm in the hole - big.''

He has been putting together an outdoor rock concert for tomorrow night for
Agent Orange Victims Inc. Any money raised will go to inform Vietnam veterans
about matters like getting children tested for toxins and deling with the
Veterans Administration. Mr. Sanders is a Vietnam vet himself. He also operates
a Greenwich Village restaurant. One thing he isn't is a rock impresario, and
arranging this concert on Pier 84, at 44th Street along the Hudson, has left him
shaken.

''We're going to have people like Ian Hunter and Todd Rundgren and Paul
Butterfield, and so with all these names, no problem - right?'' he said.
Instead, ticket sales lagged far behind the break-even point, and he was up
against a deadline to pay the rock producer Ron Delsener for light and sound
equipment. Yesterday, he even talked about canceling the event, although city
officials - he is using a city pier - thought the show would go on.

During the war, Mr. Sanders recalled, he was a medic. He served one tour and
part of a second and was in combat his share of times.  ''Well,'' he said,
''here I am again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE TIES TAX STAND TO SENATE BILL

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


The House of Representatives, in a break with custom, voted tonight to go to
conference with the Senate on the Senate's three-year, $99 billion
revenue-raising bill without first passing its own separate tax measure.

The vote, 208 to 197, greatly improved the prospects for sending a revenue bill
to President Reagan by the time Congress takes its Labor Day recess on Aug. 20.
For that to occur, the conference would have to send a bill back to both
chambers, which would then have to approve it.

In an hour of impassioned debate on the floor, both the Republican and
Democratic leadership of the House supported going directly to conference as the
best means of adopting a tax bill that would reduce huge projected budget
deficits and thus help to stimulate the economy.

How They Voted

Voting with the leadership were 164 Democrats and 44 Republicans.  Opposed to
the conference were 60 Democrats and 137 Republicans.  Representative Robert H.
Michel, Republican of Illinois and the minority leader, told rebellious
Republicans that going to conference directly was also the best way to prevent
the Democrats from repealing the third year of the three-year income tax cut for
individuals sponsored and signed by President Reagan in 1981. The final 10
percent cut will become effective next July 1.

He also argued, as did several Democrats, that Congress had to pass a
revenue-raising bill promptly to show the country and the financial markets that
it was serious about shrinking future budget deficits.

The second-ranking Democrat on Ways and Means, Sam Gibbons of Florida, asserted
that if the House tried to go the usual route - drafting a tax bill in the
committee followed by floor debate - ''there won't be any legislation to vote up
or down on until Christmas time.''

Mr. Michel contended, as did the Democratic floor manager, Dan Rostenkowski,
chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, that Congress had to proceed with the
Senate-passed bill to comply with the instructions of the budget resolution to
raise revenue and cut spending.

Earlier, Representative Rostenkowski sought to portray the Democrats as
opponents of deficits and deeply worried by them. ''Our deficits are soaring,''
he said. ''Unless we get this bill passed, I'm worried about the economic future
of the country.''

Republican opponents of going to conference, led by John H.  Rousselot of
California, asserted that the procedure would violate the Constitutional
instruction that ''all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives.'' Democrats replied that there were precedents for such bills
originating in the Senate.  Mr. Rostenkowski said that the 1968 Vietnam surtax
was enacted after the Senate initiated it and the House went to conference on it
without a House-passed bill.

Mr. Rousselot, in an arm-waving speech from the well of the House that had his
Republican supporters cheering, said going to conference without a House bill
would mean letting the Senate ''decide how your constituents are going to be
taxed.''

Talks Could Start Friday

House and Senate conferees could hold an initial meeting Friday, but are not
expected to send a bill back to their respective chambers until late next week
at the earliest.

Prodded overnight by the White House, four Republicans joined 22 Democrats today
in the Ways and Means Committee in supporting the strategy fashioned by Mr.
Rostenkowski and the leadership of the House, where the Democrats have a
majority. Seven Republicans and one Democrat, James M. Shannon of Massachusetts,
voted no.

The committee Republicans balked on Tuesday at supporting Mr.  Rostenkowski and
he refused to have the committee fashion a purely Democratic majority. That
refusal was part of a larger Democratic strategy to try to avoid putting a
Democratic stamp on the tax bill sponsored by the Republican majority in the
Senate and the White House.

Democrats' Maneuvering

The Senate approved the bill, which would raise $99 billion over three years
last Friday, by a vote of 50 to 47, with no Democratic votes in favor.

The Constitution provides that revenue bills originate in the House, and for
that reason they usually do. But the House Democrats insisted this year that a
bill increasing some taxes and tightening up on enforcement originate in the
Republican-controlled Senate.

To achieve technical compliance with the constitutional requirement, the Senate
Finance Committee wrote its bill as an amendment to a minor House-passed revenue
bill, H.R. 4961, the content of which had been transferred into still another
bill months ago.

Representative Rostenkowski offered a mild disclaimer when asked if his party
was attempting to avoid being identified with what is likely to be the 1982
revenue act. ''I don't see why there should be any imprints on it by
Democrats,'' he said. ''It was a request by the Administration.''

Emerging from his committee's meeting behind locked doors, Representative
Rostenkowski expressed the hope that ''the President will join us.'' He added:
''Without his full support and effort on the part of the White House, this could
be a futile effort.''

Raising Taxes Before Election

Representative Rostenkowski was referring to the distaste of members of both
parties for raising taxes in an election year. His aides have said the chairman
feared that the usual deliberations over a committee bill on the House floor
could lead to a stalemate such as occurred earlier this year when the House
rejected one proposed budget resolution after another. With the elections just
three months away, he said, the most prudent course would be to have a single
vote on the House floor on a tax bill approved by a Senate-House conference.

Republicans signaled their unhappiness about voting for a revenueraising bill in
a letter to President Reagan that circulated within party ranks for signatures.
The letter, drafted by Representatives Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York and
Robert S. Walker of Pennsylvania, asserted:

''Quietly, without debate, the Republican Party is in danger of making a U-turn
back to its familiar role of tax collector for Democratic spending programs.
This is potentially an explosive scenario politically because the G.O.P. clearly
will take the blame for any tax increase passed by Congress.''

Therefore, the House Republicans said, ''we find it impossible to support the
Senate-passed tax increase.'' House aides said more than 100 of the 192
Republicans had signed the letter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

General in My Lai Case Loses Court Bid to Clear His Name

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 194 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


An Army commander who was censured and eventually demoted for not promptly
investigating the 1968 My Lai massacre in Vietnam lost a court attempt today to
clear his name.

The United States Court of Claims refused to lift administrative sanctions
imposed by the Army on Brig. Gen. Samuel Koster, now retired, for failing to
start an immediate investigation into the killing of 102 unarmed Vietnamese
civilians in the village.

Genral Koster was the commander of the 23d Infantry Division in Vietnam on March
16, 1968, when a platoon of troops from the division killed the civilians.

While not holding General Koster personally responsible for the killings, the
Army censured him for not investigating the incident promptly and demoted him
from the temporary rank of major general.

After losing an earlier appeal to the Army Board for Correction of Military
Records, General Koster asked the claims court to reverse the sanctions. But the
three-judge panel found that even though the general's claims of lost rank
resulted in a salary drop and lower retirement pay, it was powerless to correct
the situation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

INDONESIA SEEKS TO KEEP PACE IN ARMS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 29


A series of meetings in Washington this week between Indonesia's Defense
Minister and the Reagan Administration are aimed at maintaining Jakarta's
military equipment and retraining its personnel, the chief of internal security,
Admiral Sudumo, said today.

But Admiral Sudumo also said in an interview that the United States should let
Indonesia buy more and better arms.  The Defense Minister, Gen. Mohammad Jusuf,
met with President Reagan Monday and with Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
Tuesday. The visit, in response to an invitation from Mr. Weinberger, was
described by an official of the American Embassy here as an important one.

General Jusuf and his staff, the official said, wanted to get acquainted with
the Reagan Administration and to discuss Southeast Asian strategic and political
matters.

Synpathetic Line Toward Vietnam

Although Indonesia has taken a more sympathetic line than any other
non-Communist country in Southeast Asia toward Vietnam's military occupation of
Cambodia, it has also officially backed its fellow members in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations in opposing the Vietnamese occupation.

''I think we have enough weapons now,'' said Admiral Sudumo, who is deputy
commander of Indonesia's armed forces as well as the head of Kopkamtib, the
internal security agency.

Admiral Sudumo said Indonesia had been modernizing its armed forces,
particularly its navy and air force, since General Jusuf took over the Defense
Ministry in 1978. He added, however, that the $40 million currently authorized
for American weapons sales to Indonesia could not buy much at today's prices.

Dispute Over Choice of Envoy

Relations between Indonesia and the United States have lately been strained by
President Suharto's rejection last spring of the Reagan Administration's choice
of a new United States Ambassador to Jakarta, Morton I. Abramowitz. There has
been no American Ambassador here since November.

There have been disagreements as well over Administration policy on several
international commodity agreements that Indonesia, a major exporter of tin and
rubber, favors, and over policy in the Middle East.

Earlier this month, Indonesia's Minister of Trade and Technology visited
Washington and other cities in what was reportedly an attempt to attract aid for
Indonesia's fledgling aircraft industry and to investigate the purchase of new
helicopters.

Indonesia's Air Force relies mainly on American planes, including A-4 and F-5
fighter jets. Jakarta also arranged last year to buy three Boeing 737's equipped
for long-range maritime surveillance. One of these planes has been delivered.

Budget Constraints a Factor

Budgetary constraints caused by low world prices for oil, tin, rubber and other
Indoensian exports make it unlikely that the Government is in the market for
many expensive arms.

But it was reported from Washington that howitzers and torpedoes were on
Jakarta's shopping list, as well as more technical aid in maintaining its C-130
transport planes, destroyer escorts and landing ships.

Admiral Sudumo said more advanced equipment for the air force was also being
sought.  Explaining one reason, beyond economic problems, that Indonesia was not
planning a major new weapons purchase, Admiral Sudumo said that over the next
decade ''we do not expect any invasion or aggression from outside.''

''We have to cope now only with internal subversion,'' he said.  ''This is our
main threat at the moment.'' He said, however, that the United States should be
more understanding of Indonesia's past attitudes toward Communism.  ''When we
crushed the Communists in 1965,'' he said, referring to the popular and military
reaction to what has usually been characterized as an attempted coup by the
Communist Party of Indonesia, ''this was without any help from outside. We did
it by ourselves. So this must be considered by the United States.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AIDES PLEASED BY NEWS CONFERENCE LOW ON NEWS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 29


Assessing President Reagan's performance at his news conference last night,
several White House officials today rated it high on substance but low on news,
a mix that obviously pleased them.

It has, in fact, become axiomatic among Reagan aides that news conferences are
''minefields to be tiptoed through periodically, but not something you hope to
get a lot out of politically,'' as one Presidential assistant put it.

Accordingly, the President's aides concentrate on helping him prepare a battery
of careful restatements of existing policies for news conferences, leaving the
disclosure of new policies to other formats that give the President more control
over what he wants to say.

''A virtuoso performance at a press conference may impress the press corps and a
few sophisticated people,'' said a White House official. ''But it's not where
most Americans are going to get their estimate of his job performance. Press
conferences are more to be looked at from a hazard point of view, because
blunders can hurt you more than a virtuoso performance can help.''

Familiar Predictions

Last night, for example, Mr. Reagan took care to avoid commenting on the
American-sponsored negotiations involving Israel and the Palestinian Liberation
Organization in Lebanon. He acknowledged, somewhat sheepishly, it seemed, that
he was using the news conference ''to get a little publicity'' for the proposed
Constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget.

And on the economy, Mr. Reagan mixed familiar demands for Congress to cut
spending with equally familiar predictions that economic recovery was in sight.

At one point, he brushed aside a perfect opportunity to make news by formally
announcing his decision to extend the grain supply agreement with the Soviet
Union, a decision that the news media had already reported was expected
imminently. The grain extension announcement is now due to be made Monday when
Mr. Reagan speaks to the National Corn Growers convention in Des Moines, where
it will be welcome news indeed.

From the early days of his 1980 Presidential campaign, Mr. Reagan has never been
comfortable taking questions from reporters. In contrast to the smooth,
insistent delivery of his speeches, the President frequently stammers when
speaking off-the-cuff, interrupting himself in mid-sentence and veering
hazardously off into irrelevancies.

Material Ordered 'Scrubbed'

On occasion, Mr. Reagan has erred at news conferences because of what White
House aides said later was inadequate material presented to him about his
programs. Such was the case, they said, when the President mixed up some
unemployment data earlier in the year and, on another occasion, suggested that a
man who had had his job disability benefits cut had been trying to cheat the
Government.  After these episodes, senior aides ordered that the material going
to the President be better ''scrubbed'' to rid it of errors.

In other cases, errors occurred when Mr. Reagan allowed himself to digress into
such matters as his personal theory about the origins of the Vietnam War.

To prevent such digressions, Mr. Reagan's aides have in recent months begun to
spend more and more time with him in preparation for news conferences. The
President's performance last night, for instance, appeared to reflect increased
discipline in the sense that his answers seemed concise, rapid and
informational.

Normally, the President prepares for a news conference by reviewing a 30-page
book of materials assembled by David R. Gergen, the assistant in charge of
communications, from papers submitted by various agencies and staffs in the
White House.

Mr. Reagan then discusses questions and answers with aides. For this news
conference, the White House cleared Mr. Reagan's calendar of events for most of
Wednesday and Thursday, although one person who participated in the discussions
said the President devoted only three to four hours to preparing his answers.

'Still Too Defensive'

White House aides said the main factors in Mr. Reagan's relatively smooth
performance last night, however, were that the questions focused on issues that
he had been dealing with lately, and that there had been no major new
developments since the previous news conference.

''I personally think that news conferences are successful if you take the
questions and use them to develop themes you want to get across,'' said a White
House official. ''The President is getting better at that, but he's still a
little too defensive.''

The confidence of Mr. Reagan's aides in his news conference skills is mixed with
a bit of cautionary strategy on timing: The conferences are now scheduled in the
evening, at least in part because of the knowledge that any mistakes then won't
be picked over in the evening television news programs.

''The feeling was that if there were a snafu at a news conference, that would be
all that would end up on the evening news,'' said a White House official. ''Our
belief is that the President's news conferences are better than the sum of their
parts, so that it's just as well to have them at prime time for all to see.''

Another aide said, however, that evening news conferences do not receive high
ratings, and that many viewers tended to listen to the opening statement and
then tune in to something else. The opening statement, such as last night's on
the budget-balancing amendment, thus becomes important to the President's
purposes.

Mr. Reagan took care last night to call on several reporters by name, apparently
checking first with a list he had with him on the podium. Larry Speakes, the
deputy White House press secretary, said Mr. Reagan usually decides whom he
wants to call on before the news conference begins and is told where these
people will be seated.

For all his efforts, Mr. Reagan did make at least one questionable assertion
last night about the economy, when he stated that he had always predicted that
the economy would be ''sluggish'' following enactment of his program. In fact,
early last year, he had predicted that the economy would grow in robust fashion
when the program was put into place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

INTRODUCING NORTHROP'S F-5G

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1334 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 29


Two years ago, Thomas V. Jones, chairman and chief executive officer of the
Northrop Corporation, set out on his own to develop a new plane without
Government help.

Now, as Northrop prepares for the ceremonial rollout here Sunday of Mr. Jones's
latest creation, the F-5G Tigershark, an agile, low-cost jet fighter believed to
be highly marketable in third world countries, his reputation as a shrewd
innovator is on the line.

Northrop, after spending $350 million to develop the Tigershark and suffering a
$24 million loss for the first half of 1982, has not received a single order for
the new plane and has had to put an innovative production system on hold.

The outward mood at Northrop is buoyant. Thirty countries fly more than 2,500 of
Northrop's F-5 fighters and most, with exceptions like Vietnam and Iran, are
considered good prospects for the Tigershark.

Talks With 42 Countries

Northrop is talking with 42 countries. One of them is India, which is said to be
considering an initial purchase of more than 50 Tigersharks, an order that would
be worth at least $400 million. The sale was expected to be among the topics
discussedbetween President Reagan and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi at their
meeting today in Washington, according to an industry source.

Military specialists say a powerful new engine and increased agility make the
plane superior to the Soviet-built MIG-21's and MIG 23's that it is likely to
face in battle well into the 1990's.

''We know these people and they are very pleased with the progress of the
plane,'' Mr. Jones said. ''Some orders could still come this year. We're very
confident.''

''There are a lot of candidates,'' said Morton Langer, an aerospace analyst with
Bear, Stearns & Company. ''It's just a question of timing.''

But Pentagon and Wall Street analysts say they are not so sure of that. Wars in
the Middle East and the transition from Alexander M.  Haig to George P. Shultz
as Secretary of State have slowed policy talks in the State Department, which
must approve all military sales to foreign governments.

Ultimately, Mr. Shultz is expected to look more favorably on military exports to
Arab countries than Mr. Haig. And few doubt that the Tigershark will someday
become a mainstay in the air forces of developing countries like South Korea,
Turkey and Saudi Arabia.

Challenges by Competitors

But there are other problems. Northrop is being challenged for orders by General
Dynamics' F-16/79, the French-built Mirage, the British Harrier and a new
Swedish entry.

''There is always a certain amount of gamble in going into the foreign market,''
said William W. Kaufmann, a military planning specialist and professor of
political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ''Today the
market is more crowded and the uncertainties are greater.''

In addition, many countries are holding back until they can review the
Tigershark's performance after it begins flight testing in September. ''That is
a very important marketing tool,'' said C.  Robert Gates, a Northrop vice
president and head of the F-5G program.

Then, too, some nations covet a large fleet of the faster, longerrange F-16's
and F-15's favored by the United States Air Force, the aircraft that the
Israelis sent with such devastating results into Lebanon.

'Unstated Change of Policy'

Those planes, however, are likely to be parceled out sparingly, according to a
Pentagon spokesman. Both the Carter and Reagan Administrations called for ''an
intermediate fighter'' that allies could use mainly as an interceptor to defend
their borders as well as United States air bases.

If the more aggressive and expensive F-16's are approved for export in
competition with the Tigershark, it would amount to ''an unstated change in
United States policy,'' said Les Daly, Northrop's vice president for public
affairs. It would also use up a limited account in the military budget for
financing sales of military exports, he added.

According to Northrop, the existing ''intermediate'' fighters pale beside the
brilliantly colored, red-and-white Tigershark on several key points. The
Tigershark, powered by an F-404 engine designed by the General Electric Company
in partnership with Northrop, has 70 percent more thrust than its predecessor,
the F-5E.

Its new electronics systems, developed by the Bendix Corporation, Honeywell Inc.
and General Electric, allow the Tigershark to maneuver quickly and, in effect,
take on several MIG 21's and 23's simultaneously. That is crucial, according to
Mr. Jones, because MIG's are expected to outnumber Western-made tactical
fighters by four to one by the end of the decade.

Tigershark Is Less Expensive

With the Tigershark, ''you don't even have to point at your target anymore, you
don't even have to see him,'' said Harry Harwood, an aerosapce analyst with
Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards Inc., a Los Angeles-based brokerage.

The Tigershark, at a cost of about $9 million a plane, is less expensive than
the F-16/79, a trimmed-down F-16 that General Dynamics lists at about $13
million. The Tigershark also requires about half as much fuel and maintenance
labor as comparable fighters now being flown, Northrop boasts that its total
operating and maintenance costs are about one-third of the current average.

''Third world countries are looking for an aircraft that is easy to maintain,
easy to fly, inexpensive and for use in a defensive role,'' Mr. Langer of Bear,
Stearns said. ''Clearly, this is more than adequate.'' Mr. Kaufmann, the M.I.T.
defense specialist, added: ''I wouldn't like to send an aircraft against it.''

The Tigershark is the first fighter built in this country completely without
Government funds. Mr. Jones has long argued against the cost overruns and waste
in conventional military programs.

Northrop Reports Loss

The Tigershark's developmental expenses caused Northrop's earnings to fall 45
percent last year, and analysts are divided over whether Northrop will make any
money this year if no F-5G orders are booked.

Last week Northrop reported a $1.6 million loss in the second quarter, compared
with a net income of $5.2 million in the corresponding period last year. Sales,
however, jumped 21 percent, to $467.1 million.

For the first half of 1982, the loss was $23.9 million, compared with a profit
of $28.3 million a year ago, on a 17 percent sales gain, to $1.06 billion. With
$162 million allotted for Tigershark development in the first six months, the
heavy spending push is nearly complete.

Mr. Jones announced in late June that Northrop had canceled any firm production
schedule for next year since no orders had been placed. Instead, Mr. Jones said,
Northrop will pace production to match the flow of orders, a cost-saving move
that some analysts said would return Northrop to profitability this quarter.

Stock Price Remains Strong

The strong price of Northrop's common shares has mirrored Wall Street's
confidence in the company. It closed today in consolidated trading at $53.50, up
$1, below its high of $55 for the last 12 months.

Analysts said the price was buttressed by the prospects for the F-5G, as well as
Northrop's multibillion-dollar contracts for the F-18, a new Navy fighter plane,
and the Stealth bomber, a futuristic craft designed to elude enemy surveillance.

Indeed, they see a rebound to earnings of $8.50 a share next year, and as high
as $17 a share in 1985.  ''Hey, look, this company has everything going for
it,'' said one aerospace analyst who recommends the stock. ''The demand for
these kind of airplanes from here on out is going to be significant.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart (page D3) photo of F-5G Tigershark photo of Thomas
V. Jones

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 31, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
Warner Bros. Charged In Deaths of 2 Children

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 30


Civil charges of exposing children to a hazardous situation and violating child
labor laws were filed today against Warner Brothers and three individuals for a
movie helicopter crash that killed the actor Vic Morrow and two children.

The crash occurred at 2:30 A.M. Thursday on a movie set as crews filmed a
Vietnam War battle scene for a film called ''The Twilight Zone.''

State Labor Commissioner Patrick Henning said, ''The obscene tragedy would never
have occurred if the child labor laws of the state had been followed.''

A Warner spokesman said, ''Really, we haven't been served with the actual
citation so we haven't had a chance to review it, but as soon as we do, we
probably will have a statement to make.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 31, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY CHAPLAINS STRUGGLE IN SERVICE OF TWO MASTERS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL NORMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words

DATELINE: FORT MONMOUTH, N.J., July 28


The reading from the pulpit on this particular morning was drawn from the 18th
chapter of the First Book of Kings. The man who delivered it was a chaplain in
the United States Army, and he read these words:

''When Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab said to him, 'Is it you, you troubler of Israel?'
And he answered, 'I have not troubled Israel; but you have, and your father's
house, because you have forsaken the commandments of the Lord and followed
Baal's.' ''

Maj. Donald E. Overton said he was simply reminding his colleagues here at the
Army Chaplain Center and School that their mission was to bring the message of
faith to the troops. But the reading - which came at the regular morning service
at the school's Protestant chapel - was really more than a call to the
brotherhood of clerics. It was a parable of the conflict that in recent times
has troubled the chaplaincy itself.

'Sheep in Wolves' Clothing'

This week the 1,400-member Chaplain Corps celebrated its 207th anniversary. The
school serves as a training center where some 200 chaplains a year gather from
around the country to take basic and advanced courses. Thus this Monmouth County
post seemed like an appropriate place to mark the history of the corps and to
talk about the philosophical questions that unsettle it.

Men of the cloth who dress in the uniform of their country have always appeared,
as one chaplain put it, like ''sheep in wolves' clothing.'' On one side of the
uniform they wear the symbol of their faith and like Elijah must sometimes stand
as prophets. On the other side they wear the insignia of rank, a modern-day
reminder of Baal, the Canaanite lord of war.

''Chaplains,'' said a civilian employee here, ''are at the corner between God
and the Army.''' And often the quandary for many of them is which way to turn.

Throughout most of its history, the image of the corps was secure, bolstered by
accounts of uncommon faith and sacrifice.  In 1943 on the freezing sea between
Newfoundland and Greenland, the transport Dorchester was hit by a torpedo. Four
Army chaplains aboard gave their life jackets to others, then, as the Dorchester
sank rapidly by the bow, ''they stood hand in hand,'' according to eyewitnesses,
''praying to the God they served for the safety of those men who were leaving
the stricken ship.''

But in Vietnam, chaplains, like the rest of society, split ranks.  There were
those who opposed the war, but felt a duty to serve the spiritual needs of the
troops. And there were others who supported the war and at least one who crossed
the line between man of peace and combatant.

A chaplain here said privately that he sometimes took part in combat missions
and fired a weapon. ''I didn't take an oath to God that I would never shoot
anybody,'' he said. ''It was the only way I could be with my troops. I make
choices and pray to God it's the right thing.''

From the war arose the conflict about a chaplain's role and mission. ''What
Vietnam did was make us much more aware of what the chaplain did as far as his
support of the government's action,'' said Col. Richard R. Tupy Jr., a chaplain
and commandant of the school.

''What we're dealing with,'' he added, ''is a situation in which we have two
professions and we have to remind ourselves to pay attention to both.''

Chaplains who volunteer for Army duty must first have the permission of their
religious superiors. They sign up for a threeyear hitch, but many make the Army
a career. Only 10 percent leave the corps after their initial tour of duty.

Personal and Patriotic Reasons

Like their layman comrades, they join for reasons that are both personal and
patriotic. Almost half have had prior military experience. ''They see a ministry
in the Army they'd like to be part of,'' said Colonel Tupy. ''Some do it for a
sense of excitment and travel. Some are escaping from an unhappy situation in
their parish.''

As ordained clergymen with advanced degrees, they are usually commissioned as
first lieutenants or captains and receive six weeks of basic training,
everything from map reading to ''counseling in a military setting.'' Later,
after a tour of duty at an Army post, they return here for a six-month advanced
course.

They represent more than a hundred religious demoninations and they perform such
varied tasks as ministering to the religious needs of the sick and counseling
homosexuals.

Their motto is ''Pro Deo et Patria,'' but many ask themselves if they can truly
serve God and country, their church and the state, at the same time.

Oldest and Most Outspoken

Capt. Clement Comesky, at 52 years old the oldest and most outspoken member of
the advanced class, is a Franciscan friar who has been a priest for his order in
the jungles of Colombia and as a chaplain in Vietnam.

''We're a minister, rabbi, priest before we're an officer,'' he said. ''But I've
never found the chaplaincy corps having the guts to speak out. We should be
asking ourselves, 'Are we willing to risk telling the U.S. Government and the
Army that the chaplaincy corps should be about things ethical and things
pastoral?' ''

He says his first allegiance is to his faith and the Franciscan provincial who
heads his order: ''Like I told a general, I may wear two hats, but I know what
my first hat is.''

Still, he and others are aware that their promotions are granted or denied by
Regular Army commanders who weigh their performances as military men and
officers. Under those circumstances, it can be difficult for a chaplain in line
for promotion to challange the system and press a moral issue or take up what
may be the unpopular cause of a trooper who has been treated unfairly.

Wanted 'Mini-Infantryman'

In everyday practice, abstract ideology and ethics usually yield to practical
diplomacy and some inspired guile. Capt. Johnny Owens, a National Baptist and,
at 28, the youngest member of the advanced class, once served as the chaplain of
an infantry unit training in the United States. The unit's commander, he said,
wanted his chaplain to be a ''mini-infantryman.''

''He wanted me to tag along for the morale of the troops - but that wasn't my
idea of a ministry,'' Captain Ownes said.  Instead of confronting the commander,
he spent hours researching Army regulations and wrote a paper that convinced the
officer that a chaplain's duty was to create a religious program for the troops
instead of grunting up hills behind them.

Colonel Tupy believes ''the pendulum is beginning to swing'' and the Chaplain
Corps is finally finding a way to reconcile its two roles. Others say that with
so many different denominations and personalities, the corps will always have
its prophets and its priests - those who challange the system and those who
prefer to carry out a quiet barracks ministry.

One dissenter, Captain Chomesky, thinks he has found a way to serve both causes.
''If you can't beat 'em, join 'em,'' he says, ''but never join 'em all the
way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Army Chaplain logo photo of Army Chaplain
Center

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Official Leaves Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 65 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 31


Nguyen Van Hao, once Economics Minister in the South Vietnamese Government who
subsequently became a minor official in the Communist regime, has been allowed
to go to France, sources said here today. Mr. Hao flew out of Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon, Thursday on the weekly Air France flight to Paris. His wife and
some family members live in Houston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Dieu-Anh Nguyen Is Married in Paris

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 47, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


Dieu-Anh Nguyen, daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Can Nguyen of Paris, was married there
yesterday in St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church to Lam Nguyen-Phuong. The Rev.
Maurice Gourdon performed the ceremony.

The bride is a student at the University of Paris. Her father, a physician in
private practice, is a former chairman of the pathology department of the Saigon
University Medical School.

The bridegroom is an assistant vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust
Company and is presently assigned in Brussels. He graduated from the Ecole
Centrale de Paris and received an M.B.A.  from Stanford University. He is a son
of Mrs. Thiep Nguyen-Phuong of Dallas and the late Mr. Nguyen-Phuong, was
Ambassador from South Vietnam to West Germany. His mother was a lawyer in
Saigon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
WHERE WRITERS MOLD THE FUTURE OF THEATER

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1824 words


Although I haven't yet found out where drama critics go to die, I do know where
they go to be reborn. The place is The O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford,
Conn., a sprawling complex of stages and dormitories nestled against Long Island
Sound, a few miles from the family home of America's greatest playwright. It is
here each year that critics, among many others, come to see a dozen or so new
plays, mostly by unsung authors, in staged readings performed during a
month-long National Playwrights Conference. And it is here where even the most
hardened theatergoers, beaten down by the disappointments of the previous New
York season, can suddenly be revivified by the sound of a vibrant dramatic
voice, crying out insistently into a midsummer's night.

The Conference is not designed for critics - or for the hit-hungry producers and
agents lurking in the bushes -but for the lucky participating playwrights, who
are selected from roughly 1400 applicants. At the O'Neill, these writers get an
uncommonly good chance to see just what works and doesn't work in their scripts.
They can do so because the Conference stages their plays in a manner that
heightens the audience's awareness of the playwright's words. There are minimal
sets, lighting and costumes - thus insuring that an elaborate production doesn't
obscure either the strengths or weaknesses of the text. Yet, at the same time,
the plays are exceptionally well performed by the top New York actors who lend a
hand at Waterford each summer. Throw in the sensitive audience that attends the
O'Neill's offerings - an audience equally divided between professional theater
people and ticket-buying civilian theater lovers - and it's easy to see why so
many playwrights find the O'Neill an ideal place to let a new play first leap to
its feet.

But if the Conference teaches its playwrights a lot about their embryonic
scripts, it also has many lessons to teach the onlookers in the audience -
critics included. To watch the best of the O'Neill plays-in-progress is to be
reminded what is vital in playwriting and what is not. Because all the
Conference's plays are in a nascent stage - and because some of them are by
relatively inexperienced writers - most of them have structural problems:
they're either too long or not long enough; they have multiple endings or no
ending; they start to tell one story and finish by telling another. And yet one
quickly realizes that these failures of theatrical grammar have little to do
with the intrinsic quality of the work. These flaws can be fixed, and, in part
due to the O'Neill process, probably will be.  The strengths of the better
playwrights, meanwhile, exist apart from, even in spite of, the mechanics of
their plays.

What, then, is it that makes for an exciting new playwright? Lloyd Richards, the
Yale Drama School dean who has been the O'Neill's Artistic Director since its
inception 18 years ago, describes the crucial ingredient as ''an imagination for
the theater.'' By this he means a writer's ability to create a work that can
only exist on stage - one that takes advantage of the special dimensions that
make theatrical writing different from all other forms. ''There are too many
writers who see themselves as theater people,'' Mr. Richards says, ''but are
influenced by television. They write realistic plays when they should start with
the understanding that the theater is not real - that the playwright creates his
own reality and the audience enters it.'' As Mr. Richards further explains,
playwriting is, if anything, more akin to writing for radio than television: the
writer and the audience must meet in an imaginary space.

At a time when television's impact on theater, not to mention the rest of our
society, is all-pervasive, it is no easy task for Mr.  Richards or anyone else
to find playwrights who are willing to leap beyond the confines of the
superficial naturalistic drama that television propogates. These days too many
plays are literal-minded, cut-and-dried stories with spelled-out emotions or
ideas, in the manner of ''On Golden Pond'': the craft is neat and clean, but the
audience is never lifted into the transcendent realm of the theater.  Yet, even
in my all-too-brief weekend of seeing and reading a sampling of this summer's
Conference plays, I could see that the O'Neill has found some playwrights who
are rare exceptions to the norm - and see that these writers, however
undisciplined, are more precious than any number of slicker theatrical
craftsmen.

Take, for example, the case of Susan Yankowitz, who is represented at the
O'Neill by a play called ''A Knife in the Heart.'' Miss Yankowitz has written
about a 26-year-old man, not unlike John Hinckley, who murders a New York
governor and five other people in a vicious, unmotivated knife attack. The
play's narrative opens shortly before the crime is committed and ends with the
long trial.

Given that premise, one might expect Miss Yankowitz to write a courtroom drama,
or something resembling a docu-drama, or maybe a problem play about the
controversial insanity defense that her protagonist pleads in his trial. But
this writer has indeed let her imagination run wild, to the point where ''A
Knife in the Heart'' does create its own, totally theatrical reality, even as it
deals with the issues its subject raises.

Written in an almost surreal, stream-of-consciousness style, the play contains
over two-dozen characters and one unexpected scene after another. The killer's
mother, an all-American woman who loves her son, responds to a reporter's
badgering by reenacting the night when she and her husband conceived their child
- hoping that somehow the seeds of the boy's pathology might be found in the
minutiae of the sexual act that produced him. Later on, she goes to visit the
mother of the murdered governor - in a mad attempt to convince the aggrieved
woman that mothers of killer and victim alike are all sisters under the skin.
Other vignettes are built around trivial episodes that unleash subconscious
terror: When the mother's butcher inadvertently tosses a piece of meat onto the
floor, it induces screams.

In the trial, the playwright not only gives us the testimony of the killer's
psychiatrist, but also the disorienting, contradictory testimony of the
psychiatrist's psychiatrist. The defendant is represented in the courtroom by a
doll-like effigy, which a lawyer splits open to reveal its contents (newspapers,
cigarette butts, batteries, a toy pistol). After the verdict, the murderer, who
once aspired to be a violinist, marries a pianist who had fallen in love with
him from afar after watching him on the nightly news. The couple celebrates by
playing an imaginary duet - the Kreutzer sonata - in jail.

If ''A Knife in the Heart'' finds its dramatic soul in images that bleed as
profusely as its protagonist's victims, other plays at the O'Neill this summer
delight in the uses of theatrical language. Nancy Fales Garrett's ''Playing in
Local Bands'' tells of a confrontation between an aging renegade poet of the
1960s and a blue-haired, teenage punkster who may or may not be his daughter.
Miss Garrett's plot has a bizarre passing resemblance to Neil Simon's ''I Ought
to Be in Pictures,'' but the words take ''Local Bands'' to another plane. The
poet and the girl are hipsters of two different eras, and they speak two
different versions of English. The poet's most famous work, ''Woodstock
Litany,'' evokes the era of Vietnam, of ''Tim Hardin, the Band, Van Morrison.''
The girl's punk band, known as Toxic Shock, sings of ''chain saw massacres,
Agent Orange, people making it with dogs.'' Miss Garrett's dialogue, not her
story, becomes the play's truly theatrical dimension: in the lines' missed
connections and ellipses, we find two alienated outcasts searching desperately
for an elusive common ground, a family tie.

August Wilson's ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' uses language even more
extravagantly. Mr. Wilson, a writer based in St. Paul, begins with a premise
that, like Miss Yankowitz's, could have led to obvious results. His play, set in
a Chicago recording studio in 1927, primarily deals with four disconsolate black
back-up musicians who sit around talking while waiting for Ma Rainey to show up
and make a record. The musicians are all, in varying degrees, victims of racism,
and they hate themselves for their dependency on the white bosses who give them
employment.

The play has all the ingredients to be a conventional, well-made message drama -
but Mr. Wilson, through the sheer force of his theatrical drive, flies higher.
''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' it turns out, has virtually no story, and it has
some speeches that run, I would guess, ten minutes in length. Some of the
speeches deal metaphorically with the blacks' perceptions of their place in
America (''The colored man is the leftover on the white man's plate.''); in
others, the characters recount their busted dreams and their gruesome encounters
with racist violence. None of the speeches could exist anywhere but on the
stage, and they couldn't exist on the stage if Mr. Wilson hadn't the talent to
go all the way and write them like music. In a sense, the monologues become the
blues that the musicians hunger to record on their own - if only they were stars
like Ma Rainey and not menial recording-studio hacks.

There's much more to this play than the speeches, including a shocking flash of
self-immolating violence and a monstrously funny, if ultimately pathetic,
portrait of Ma Rainey herself. But more than Mr. Wilson's tragic vision of black
people driven mad by despair and unearned self-loathing, it is his language that
holds us. While there's nothing novel about rich language in the theater, it is
quite unusual in 1982 to find a playwright who is willing to stake his claim to
the stage not with stories or moral platitudes, but with the beauty and meaning
of torrents of words.

Like most of the audience in the barn theater in Waterford, I was electrified by
the sound of this author's voice. And surely I wasn't the only one who left ''Ma
Rainey's Black Bottom'' with goosebumps brought on by the play's unexpected
esthetic resonance. Mr. Wilson is the kind of writer who fulfills the
Conference's goal to replenish our theater's future - yet, eerily enough, he
works in the same poetic tradition as the man who inspired the O'Neill Center's
mission and who gave American theater its past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COOLING OFF BEIRUT CRISIS MAY HEAT UP MANY OTHERS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1123 words


WASHINGTON Amonth ago, as victorious Israeli forces cornered the Palestine
Liberation Organization in west Beirut, some politicians, columnists and a few
Government officials were tempted to think the Israeli triumph had provided a
dramatic opportunity to move toward a broad political settlement in the Middle
East. The idea gained currency as Secretary of State George P. Shultz canvassed
experienced outsiders such as former Secretary Henry A. Kissinger for their
suggestions on longer-term strategy. Palestinian leaders dropped hints of
concessions and maneuvered for political recognition as a price for evacuating
west Beirut. At the United Nations, Egypt and France circulated an ambitious
blueprint for the future of Lebanon, the West Bank and Arab-Israeli peace.

''You have to have a package'' that would link a solution in west Beirut to
broader political issues, advised Ashraf Ghorbal, the Egyptian Ambassador in
Washington. ''In the Middle East, you have to move when the right time comes.
The world keeps missing opportunities for peace in the Middle East.''

But the hard reality of the impasse in Beirut and the sheer complexity of
finding new homes for the P.L.O. have caused the Administration to sharply
narrow its focus and to leave the future of Lebanon and a Palestinian settlement
for a later phase of negotiations. Early hopefulness gave way to the daily
dogwork of diplomacy.

''Most of the people who were seeing greater opportunities in the Lebanese
situation never had responsibility for dealing with the practical issues,'' a
high State Department official grunted. ''The problem with reaching for the
larger issues is that it turns attention away from the real world, namely that
the Israelis have the P.L.O. surrounded in west Beirut, not vice versa.''

The Arab League's endorsement of a P.L.O. evacuation formula and the willingness
of Egypt, Syria and Jordan to receive portions of the 6,000 guerrillas in Beirut
rekindled hopes last week for long-term diplomacy and ultimately for momentum
toward Palestinian self-rule.  But as always, a baffling cobweb of issues stood
in the way of American ambitions. Americans and Israelis have been operating in
tandem on west Beirut. But over the horizon, substantial differences loom on a
range of issues. These include Israel's use of cluster bombs, its settlement
policy in the West Bank, removal of Palestinian mayors in occupied Arab
territory and annexation of the Golan Heights. Washington and Jerusalem may also
divide over how to deal with the P.L.O., especially if its major component,
Yasir Arafat's al Fatah, renounces terrorism and chooses a political path
involving acceptance of Israel. For while Prime Minister Menachem Begin vows
never to negotiate with Mr. Arafat, the United States is willing to talk with
him if the P.L.O. formally recognizes Israel's right to exist within secure
borders. Some American officials privately regard Mr. Arafat as more responsible
and moderate than he sounds in public.
Rekindling Long-Term Hopes

Even before the hard nut of Palestinian self-rule can be approached, Lebanon
itself poses formidable problems. The Israelis and Lebanese want P.L.O. units
around Tripoli in the North and East and 50,000 Syrian troops to leave Lebanon;
the Arabs are wary of leaving until the Israelis also pledge to withdraw.
Military issues interlock with political ones. American officials talk of the
need for a strong central government, but for years Lebanon has had only a
rickety political balance and minimal military muscle. Moreover, definitions of
''strong government'' differ. As Syrians and Israelis are pressed to withdraw,
each will bargain to retain political influence through friendly factions -
Maronite Christians for the Israelis, Moslems for the Syrians.

Another difficult question concerns security along the Israeli-Lebanese border
and the thousands of Palestinian refugees there. Israel wants the inadequate
United Nations forces to be reinforced by a multinational force and a patchwork
of local pro-Israeli Christian militias. Inexorably, the United States seems
drawn toward an onthe-ground presence. Moderate Lebanese and Israelis want
American forces to bolster the Lebanese Government after monitoring the P.L.O.
evacuation. As Syrian and Israeli forces withdraw, some international force will
be needed to fill the vacuum until the Lebanese military gains authority. For
the moment, Congress has not balked, but American involvement is a touchy issue
that may stir echoes of Vietnam.

From Washington's standpoint, the overall equation will have been significantly
altered if the P.L.O. military arm is forced to quit Beirut and abandon
terrorism. The possibility engenders hope for moderating Israeli policy toward
the West Bank and Palestinian selfrule. As one experienced Middle East mediator
observed, ''The Israelis were constantly talking about their security fears and
that meant the P.L.O.; now they can't make that case any longer.'' Secretary
Shultz, at his confirmation hearings, criticized continuing Israeli settlements
in the West Bank and the dismissal of mayors in the West Bank and Gaza Strip -
part of Israel's crackdown on P.L.O.  supporters and its effort to produce
alternative Palestinian leaders through village leagues. Some American officials
believe that Mr.  Begin is not entirely sure the policy is effective or
credible. A few hope he may sense the moment to back off and even put a ceiling
on new West Bank settlements. Such moves would improve the climate for
negotiations on the Palestinian issue, but they will not come easily.

The critical element, many diplomats believe, will be the Reagan
Administration's willingness to move quickly and forcefully with clear, firm
objectives and a delicate diplomatic touch. Some urge naming a high-level
mediator with Presidential connections and diplomatic clout, like Mr. Kissinger,
to sort out the pieces and get the peace process moving. ''For Shultz himself to
try to do all that,'' one former official said, ''he'd have to give up being
Secretary of State to the world.'' Mr. Shultz has kept mum about the diplomatic
blueprint he will offer the President. Indeed, some who have talked with him say
that the new strategy has yet to be determined.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Habib, Arafat, Begin map of Middle East
backround photo of explosion

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE NAMIBIA

BYLINE: By Joseph Lelyveld

SECTION: Section 6; Page 13, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6098 words


Joseph Lelyveld is The Times's correspondent in southern Africa.

The insurgents of the South-West Africa People's Organization, known as Swapo,
had not been expected to make their annual foray this year into the northernmost
white settlements of the disputed territory that is now commonly called Namibia.
South African forces had supposedly crippled the insurgents last year in a
series of assaults on their bases deep in southern Angola. Only a remnant of the
Swapo command structure had survived, the South Africans boasted, and it had
been forced to flee from the border area. The insurgents, it was claimed, were
getting killed at the rate of about 1,500 a year (more than 10 times the
admitted South African losses) and were having to kidnap schoolchildren to
replenish their ranks.

The one-sided picture the South Africans drew of the situation was the one they
wanted to see. But the Swapo guerrillas never had to be a match for the South
African military machine in the fight for control of what is formally known as
South-West Africa. In the kind of anticolonial struggle they have been waging to
dislodge South Africa from the former German colony it has occupied for 67
years, survival and victory are virtually synonymous. And Swapo had survived.
The proof was in the diplomatic push by a group of five Western nations - the
United States, France, West Germany, Britain and Canada - for a settlement, now
said to be geared to produce a cease-fire and agreement on the phased withdrawal
of the South African military.

More blatantly, the proof of Swapo's survival could be seen in newspaper
headlines in Johannesburg and in Windhoek, the disputed territory's capital,
which once again were branding the white farming
communities of Otavi, Tsumeb and Grootfontein as the ''triangle of death'' (see
map above), since the insurgents had returned to plant land mines on farm roads
and pick off farmers in ambushes. On a recent journey through Namibia, I visited
Otavi, 165 miles south of the Angolan border and about 80 miles south of the
area called Ovamboland, where this obscure bush war has been concentrated.
During my stay, an alarm was raised of guerrilla activity, and a white
counterinsurgency unit zoomed out of town on motorcycles under the stony gaze of
a crowd of blacks. Up the road in Grootfontein, there was even more military
movement.

In Namibia's checkered colonial past, white traders and missionaries preceded
settlers into the territory's open frontier.  Then came the Germans, to
establish the first government. South Africa grabbed the country from imperial
Germany at the start of World War I. But even before the Germans appeared, a
handful of Afrikaners - the white tribe that was ultimately to achieve dominance
in South Africa - had arrived in ox wagons. At what was to be Grootfontein, in a
gesture of pure and stunning solipsism, the band of only 40 families proclaimed
themselves a republic.

That was 111 years ago. Now, with the tide of history flowing the other way,
there is a major South African Air Force base and a massage parlor called the
Camel's Water. More in keeping with the pioneer spirit, there is also a commando
post at Grootfontein, where the district's farmers assemble in battle fatigues
when insurgents are reported in the area.  The renewed military activity carried
a message to Doel Breedt, who claims to be the first white farmer in the
territory to have been ambushed by a Swapo guerrilla. The message was that he
had stayed too long. Mr. Breedt tucked up his checkered shorts to show the scar
left by the insurgent's bullet 16 years ago. It wasn't just ''terrorism,'' he
said, that had him brooding about a move to South Africa, where his family had
not lived since the mid-19th century.  What unsettled him most, he said, was an
intuition that the country was already slipping out of white control. ommunism
is coming down,'' he asserted, meaning down from black Africa - from Angola,
Zambia and Zimbabwe, all indistinguishably ''Marxist'' now in the world view
shaped by South Africa's military propagandists. It wouldn't be so bad to have
blacks in government, Mr. Breedt allowed, so long as whites kept control, but
once whites lost control nothing would stop ''Communism.'' When I asked why, his
son Frikkie, a teacher, stepped forward. ''It's because they don't believe in
God,'' he said.  ''Because they don't have strong characters and because they're
not educated and can't think for themselves.''

His father nodded ruefully. ''I think we've stayed too long,'' he repeated.
P.W. Botha, South Africa's Prime Minister, seemed to be reaching the same
conclusion. A truculent former Defense Minister who personally supervised the
military buildup in South-West Africa, he now has to contemplate the bizarre and
wrenching prospect of having eventually to campaign in South Africa as a peace
candidate against right-wing extremists who are already accusing him of
''selling out'' Namibia's 75,000 whites - mostly fellow Afrikaners. Several
reasons could be traced for Mr. Botha's apparent change of stance: pressure from
the Western nations, which took the lead in searching for a solution that would
head off demands for sanctions against South Africa; the slump in the gold
price, which is dropping South Africa into a deep recession, and the
simultaneous decline of Namibia's economy.

Central to Mr. Botha's calculation was the determination of the Reagan
Administration to secure a cease-fire and settlement. It was the Reagan
Administration that undertook last year to change the tactics of the group of
Western nations, which four years ago had more or less cudgeled South Africa
into agreeing on a plan for Namibian independence only to see the Botha
Government put on a brilliant display of diplomatic filibustering in order to
forestall the deal. Instead of threats, the Reagan Administration had offered
the Botha Government a policy of ''constructive engagement'' which hinted that
South Africa's pariah status in the West could be eased, if not ended, once it
made good on its Namibia commitments.

Initially, South Africa had hoped to persuade the most friendly American
Administration it was ever likely to see to look at Namibia the way it did El
Salvador: to define the issue as one of stopping ''Communism'' rather than of
ending colonialism. But Washington never fell for the idea that the dependence
of the South-West Africa People's Organization on the Soviet bloc for arms meant
it was a ''proxy force'' of the Soviet Union rather than the ideologically vague
African nationalist movement it has always claimed, and appeared, to be.
Instead, in June 1981, American negotiators headed by William P. Clark, then
Deputy Secretary of State, nudged the South Africans around to the view that the
withdrawal of 20,000 Cuban troops from Angola (where they have been since 1975,
when South Africa invaded Angola) could be presented as a gain for South Africa.
Of course, if the Cuban withdrawal could be orchestrated along with a Namibia
settlement, it would also represent a triumph for the Reagan Administration -
its first, by most reckonings, in foreign affairs.

Mr. Botha knows that whatever hopes he harbors for the Reagan Administration to
ease the embargoes on enriched nuclear fuel, perhaps, or even on military
equipment, would be dashed if his Government were held responsible for a failure
on the Namibia plan.  He also has to worry about being able to afford the
Namibian war at a time when his military advisers are pressing ahead with costly
preparations for an expected ''onslaught'' of South Africa's own black
nationalists.

An economic determinist would have no trouble unraveling the tangled diplomatic
history of Namibia. When gold, diamonds and uranium were in demand, South Africa
could afford to call the Western bluff on sanctions. One-sixth of the whole
country - the Namib Desert, from which the territory derives its name - is a
vast diamond concession, and what was produced there underwrote as much as half
the cost of administering Namibia. But now the international diamond cartel,
managed by De Beers, a South African concern, has cut back drastically on
operations and purchases; the world's largest uranium mine, also in the Namib,
is on a tax holiday, providing no revenue to the state; the worst drought in a
generation has done more to hurt ranching than Swapo infiltrators ever have, and
no one is investing a dime in Namibia's uncertain future.

But there is another side to the ledger. Independence for Namibia would deprive
the continent's last white bastion of its last buffer state. In strategic terms,
independence would remove South African forces from bat-
tle stations in Central Africa and almost certainly install the black national
movement that South Africa has been trying to crush for most of two decades.
White power would be unmistakably in retreat, and a message would go out to
black as well as white South Africans that, sooner or later, there would have to
be a deal with the outlawed black movements inside that white republic. That is
why the Botha Government has seemed permanently schizoid on the question of
Namibia and why many analysts still cannot believe in its willingness or ability
to carry out the proposed agreement.

In this overcharged context, one thing often forgotten is the country itself,
the real Namibia that lies under all the layers of argument and obfuscation like
a hidden masterpiece covered with varnish, retouching and grime. While
diplomatic discussions drone on in Washington and at the United Nations, that
suffering country waits to be restored, not only so that onlookers can see it
more clearly but so that it can rediscover itself.  It is a land of harsh beauty
and long vistas, in which the human presence seldom looms large. At midday, the
sky in Namibia is pure glare; after dawn and before dusk, it is achingly blue.
There are flamingos and seals along the coast, zebras and elephants inland,
anthills taller than a man, and plants that seem to exist as monuments to the
tenacity of organic life. On the long drive across the Namib, you may encounter
more kudus and ostriches than people; even on the single surfaced road that runs
down the country from north to south, it is often 100 or more miles between
settlements.  Turn off onto one of the dirt roads that wind toward a distant
horizon and you can drive for 50 miles and pass only a couple of donkey carts, a
herd of goats and a dozen or so hovels built of flattened gasoline cans. Nearly
80 percent of the one million Namibians live in the northern half of the
country, a majority in a flat semitropical sliver that is roughly the upper
tenth, within 80 miles of its long border with Angola.

Most of that sliver is Ovamboland. Its inhabitants, the Ovambos, account for not
only slightly more than half of all Namibians but they are more than five times
as numerous as the next-largest among the various races and tribes that make the
territory an ethnological museum of southern Africa.

For ''Communists'' who don't believe in God, the Ovambos spend a lot of time in
church, most of them as members of a denomination established in the last
century by Finnish missionaries and now known as the Evangelical Lutheran
Ovambo-Kavongo Church. The South African security police, whose authority in
Namibia has yet to be curtailed, tend to regard this church as Swapo's
ecclesiastical arm.

So it was not altogether surprising
tttt that in their hunt for ''terrorists,'' the defense forces had dropped
parachute flares on a church station at Elim the night before I reached
Ovamboland. It was just an accident, the military later explained, that the
parachutes failed to open and the flares landed in the mission-hospital complex,
burning to the ground a building that had housed offices as well as three
families.

In the church at Elim that Sunday morning, the congregation prayed for people in
prisons and those who had ''gone away'' - over the border, to join the
insurgents. One of the pastors had a daughter in Cuba and a son in Zambia. The
prayers were partly for them. Finally, there were thanks that no one had died in
the fire, which was still smoldering.

''The soldiers are supposed to be protecting the people,'' the Rev. Kristof
Shuuya said after the service. ''How do you protect people by bullying them?''
The worst bullying these days, Ovambos say, comes from young Namibian blacks who
are taken into what is called the Territorial Force on wages that cannot
possibly be matched in the declining local economy.

In their wedge-shaped personnel carriers, the South African military may knock
down a farmer's fence or crush his sorghum. They may even knock the farmer down
if they think he has information about insurgents. But not infrequently the
white soldiers are disciplined and polite, especially in comparison with a
special black police unit called Koevoet, or crowbar.

Under a scorching sun, the Rev. Eino Ammambo, the church's other pastor, led the
way to Elim's cemetery, where he pointed out the graves of those who had
recently been assassinated or blown up by land mines. The presumption generally
is that Swapo lays the mines.  But when the victim is a Swapo sympathizer, the
local people often conclude, rightly or wrongly, that the mine was planted by
Government agents. In Ovamboland, the issue of terrorism cuts both ways, but the
army always means Swapo when it speaks of ''terrorists.'' I asked what the
people called ''them.'' They are, I was told, called aamati, which means simply
''the boys.''

At one Ovambo kraal, or homestead, I was told that our host had a son fighting
with Swapo and a nephew with Koevoet. He was obviously proud of the son. I asked
how he felt about the nephew. The man had a long intelligent face that
lengthened as the question was translated. Softly he replied that he didn't dare
say, not even in his own home, because he couldn't run the risk that his
comments would get back to his nephew.

''Communism is coming down,'' the white farmer in Grootfontein had said, but the
only visible contagions in Ovamboland were fear and malaria, which had suddenly
returned in epidemic proportions because the war had virtually halted preventive
sprayings. In two weeks, the Finnish mission hospital at Oniipa and the Roman
Catholic hospital at Oshikuku had seen more than 3,000 cases between them.

The dusk-to-dawn curfew the army enforces means that anyone coming down with an
urgent medical problem would be wise to suffer the attack in the morning.
Pregnant women show up at hospitals days before they are due to go into labor.
The occupying South Africans tell the Ovambos that Swapo is to be blamed for
these conditions, but everything indicates that the local inhabitants believe
that conditions will improve and peace will come only when the South Africans
depart. t is not enough to journey into the country in order to understand
Namibia. To see how white dominance ultimately undermined itself, how it
prompted an impulse to nationhood in a diverse collection of frontier peoples,
it is also necessary to journey into the past. The frontier clashes began back
in the 19th century, before Bismarck gave in to the imperialist fad. Namibia was
then just a big expanse on the map, wedged in between Portuguese Angola and
Britain's Cape Colony.

The main contestants then were the Hereros and the Namas. The Hereros were
blacks with a pastoral culture based on cattle. The Namas - the aborigine people
called Hottentots by whites - drifted north from what is now South Africa in
tribally organized clan groups, as did mixed-race coloreds called Basters, who
spoke Afrikaans, and some white pioneers. The Namas had their own language, but
their clans took Afrikaans names. They were Afrikaners (not to be confused with
South Africa's white tribe), Witboois (literally ''white boys'') and Swartboois
(''black boys''). Guns and horses gave them an edge initially, but the Hereros
had regained an uneasy dominance through the advent of the first German
officials, who included the father of the future Nazi Reich Marshal, Hermann
Goering.

The Herero will to independence made itself felt in a revolt in 1904 that
probably did more to shape the country's future than any other event in this
century. The revolt was crushed with a ruthlessness that can reasonably be
termed genocidal. ''Within the German boundaries every Herero, whether found
armed or unarmed, with or without cattle, shall be shot,'' decreed an infamous
order by a general named von Trotha. There were thought to be more than 70,000
Hereros when the fighting started; fewer than 25,000 when it stopped. The Herero
tribe was then formally dissolved and dispossessed of all its lands. The Namas
met a similar fate when they rose under the leadership of their greatest chief,
Hendrik Witbooi.

Accordingly, the former Herero and Nama lands, representing roughly half of the
country's total area, were made available to be divided into some 7,000 cattle
and sheep ranches, which were then parceled out to whites. The decimation of the
Hereros and Namas had another consequence, one that decisively shaped Namibia's
future: It left the Ovambos as the numerically dominant group, and meant that
they would have to be flushed out into the white economy as migrant laborers on
farms and mines to overcome a dearth of able-bodied males.  South Africa didn't
invent this colonial pattern. It merely perfected it, integrating the modern
sector, centered on Windhoek, into its own economy. The southern boundary of
Ovamboland was legally proclaimed to be a ''red line,'' which no outsider could
cross without a permit. In towns and mining compounds, Ovambo laborers were
systematically isolated in hostels.

Political agitation in the modern sense began among the unbowed remnant of the
Hereros. It was they who in 1951 sent the first petitions to the United Nations,
passionately disputing South Africa's claim that the ''natives'' supported the
idea of merging Namibia into South Africa as its fifth province.

While the United Nations pressed to put the territory under the protection of
its trusteeship system, the successor to the old League of Nations mandate
system, South Africa methodically imposed the racial and political controls of
its own ever-expanding corpus of apartheid and security laws.

In 1966, with the support of the United States, the United Nations General
Assembly voted overwhelmingly to revoke the mandate on the ground that South
Africa had failed to respect the right of selfdetermination of the territory's
inhabitants. As the debate intensified, the South Africans discounted the
Hereros as a difficult people with a difficult history that made them
susceptible to meddling by outsiders. And as recently as 10 years ago, the South
Africans claimed that the Ovambos were ready to accept a bogus ''independence''
in their circumscribed ''homeland'' on the same terms offered to tribal groups
in South Africa.

But then the Portuguese regime in Angola collapsed and Swapo was suddenly in a
position to bring the war for independence home to Ovamboland. There is no
question that Soviet and East German advisers and technicians now sometimes
accompany the arms that flow to the insurgents from the Soviet bloc. But it is
worth recalling that the South-West Africa People's Organization started out as
anti-Communist and nonviolent, and that South African obduracy, as much as any
other force, shaped what it has become. Even now, Swapo hardly fits the
caricature etched by South African military propagandists. Like most African
nationalists, the insurgents call themselves Socialists. But they also indicate
that they would be willing to renegotiate the contracts under which the diamond
and uranium mines are exploited by South African and multinational interests.

The movement has a shadowy legal existence in Namibia, but its above-ground
agents there are effectively immobilized by police surveillance. The real
leadership is either in exile with Sam Nujoma, who resides these days in the
Angolan capital of Luanda, or with Herman Toivo ja Toivo, one of Swapo's
founders, who for the last 15 years has been incarcerated on Robben Island,
South Africa's Alcatraz-style prison.

Oddly enough, the two men have never met. Mr. Toivo was under house arrest when
Mr. Nujoma joined what was then called the Ovambo People's Organization shortly
before
tttt going into exile in 1959 as Swapo's first overseas representative.  His
comrades encouraged Mr. Nujoma to put the title president on his calling card.
Initially, he was just a lobbyist, but later, when the organization and the
guerrilla army were established, he was able to make the title stick.

When I met Sam Nujoma in Geneva at the time of a United Nations conference on
Namibia 18 months ago, he insisted that he and his followers were, ''first and
foremost, Namibian patriots fighting for the liberation of our country.''
Nothing in his conversation suggested that he was preoccupied with the issues a
post-independence Namibia would face. I came away thinking that he had one fixed
idea, which was as much his strength as his limitation. If I read him right, it
was simply the removal of South African political and military dominance.  South
African generals, having read the books on the Vietnam War and watched the
struggle in Rhodesia, studiously repeated the axiom that guerrilla wars had to
be won politically. So the white authorities threw themselves into the
unaccustomed business of mobilizing a multiracial coalition to offset Swapo.
Conceding finally that Namibia could someday be independent, Pretoria's minions
labored to shape a regime that would not be too independent from an economic or
security standpoint, one that would scuttle apartheid without dispossessing the
whites.

This meant getting all the ancient enemies - the Hereros, local Germans and
Afrikaners - into the same government with whatever anti-Swapo Ovambos could be
found or created by patronage and money, along with all the other groups - such
as Basters, Damaras, coloreds and Bushmen - that the South Africans had labored
to keep separate for half a century. It meant, in effect, creating the kind of
national movement Swapo started out to be in order to withstand the force of the
''Communist'' marauders that Swapo had supposedly become.

This anti-Swapo front was dubbed the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (D.T.A.),
after the old German hall in Windhoek where an agreement was reached on an oddly
disjointed form of government made up of three tiers: a multiracial national
tier; a second tier of separate, so-called ''ethnic authorities,'' and a third
tier of municipal governments that has remained in white hands for the apparent
reason that no one has been able to dilute white authority at that level without
destroying it.

It was an imaginative try, in its way. Suddenly, white South African officials
had to enforce laws that made racial discrimination in public places illegal.
But it backfired, largely because white politics in South Africa itself required
that the whites of Namibia - especially the Afrikaner majority among them -not
have a new identity as Namibians shoved down their throats.

To protect them, and to coax them along, the white ethnic authority had to be
given control of its own segregated schools and hospitals.  Then, in order to
run them, it had to be able to claim all the income taxes whites paid, which was
90 percent of the total. The white authority was virtually beyond the control of
the multiracial legislative assembly and council of ministers that were supposed
to make up the new government. The 10 other ethnic authorities got houses and
cars for their ministers, some new schools and not much else.

The blatant imbalance in the distribution of funds inevitably led to tensions
within the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, which has been headed since its
inception by an Afrikaner rancher named Dirk Mudge, who bears a closer
resemblance to a Reagan Republican Senator than to any leader the Organization
of African Unity has seen.

How could a poor country, it was asked, afford 11 different health and education
systems? And who really wanted them, besides the whites? To hold itself
together, let alone bid against Swapo for black support, the Turnhalle Alliance
found it had to speak of national rather than community needs. This amounted to
decrying white privilege, which led the D.T.A. to lose most of its Afrikaner
support and thus undermine its usefulness to the South Africans. It also served
to vindicate Swapo as a movement that had always preached the need for simple
national solutions. Of the 45 political parties and factions that sprouted in
the hothouse politics South Africa cultivated in Namibia, only the white parties
still bother to defend the alliance.

This is the confused and unhappy state Namibia has become as it waits for the
international midwives to deliver it to itself. It is a state of mind that faces
backward and forward at the same time. The South Africans realize there is
something odd, even hallucinatory, in the idea of an independent black state in
Africa with a well-to-do white as its leader, but that was the best they were
able to do.  You heave a sigh of relief when you're waved past the last army
roadblock in Ovamboland and drive back into the tamer ''triangle of death.'' By
the time you reach Swakopmund, a coastal resort, it is as if you have been
transported to another land. Here, the war memorials are dedicated to the
Schutztruppe, the German colonial soldiers who fell in the Herero rising, and to
the Wehrmacht dead of both world wars.

Now that the Turnhalle Alliance has been spurned by most Afrikaners in Namibia,
the local Germans furnish the bulk of its white support.  This is not to deny
that there are extreme right-wingers and even neo-Nazis among the 25,000 or so
southwesters of German origin - in Otavi, there were enough to hold a small
party on Hitler's birthday this year. But leaving aside throwbacks to the
1930's, today's Germans give an impression of being readier than other whites to
try on a new identity as Namibians.

Over coffee at the Cafe Antoine, Matheis Henrichsen said he didn't really feel
German and certainly didn't feel South African. The current head of a German
merchant family that has been in Swakopmund for four generations and now the
town's Mayor, Mr. Henrichsen was one of the few whites I encountered who openly
said that he would try to stay if Swapo came to power.

But he was not optimistic, mainly because he expected a mass white exodus.
Proportionally, the white share of the population is still double what it was in
the old Rhodesia, but it is likely to shrink much faster after independence
since most of the whites are South African nationals. ''The possibility is that
we can become a German colony again, only it would be the Germany we don't
want,'' Mr.  Henrichsen commented in an allusion to the ties the East Germans
have cultivated with the insurgents.

The infamous General von Trotha would be amazed if he could contemplate the
Turnhalle Alliance; analyzed in terms of its real power base, this supposed
alternative to Swapo has now become a German-Herero alliance. ''Well, politics
makes strange bedfellows,'' observes Kuutire Kaura, a Herero politician who
became something of a media star in South Africa last year during the United
Nations Conference on Namibia in Geneva when the state television monopoly made
heavy use of speeches he gave making apocalyptic threats against Swapo and its
leaders.

Yet Mr. Kaura, who returned to Namibia four years ago from Rockland County,
N.Y., where he taught at Nyack High School, obviously isn't convinced that the
Turnhalle Alliance can survive. Peace will come to Namibia, he contends, only
when the ''rapist thugs and killers'' he excoriated during the Geneva conference
reach out to the Hereros in a manner that adequately recognizes their
contribution to the struggle.

Swapo claims to be nonethnic and is not without Herero supporters, but the
breach between the Ovambos and Hereros represents the major failure for the
insurgents in their effort to build a national base - and the major success for
South Africa in trying to prevent that.  Ultimately, the estrangement must be
traced to the fact that the movement of resistance to South African rule has
bypassed the people who started it for reasons that now seem obvious to everyone
but them: The Ovambos, who account for more than 50 percent of all Namibians,
live on the Angolan frontier, which puts them in a position to wage guerrilla
struggle; the Hereros, who account for fewer than 8 percent of the population,
were dispossessed of their land and shoved back to remote reserves.

One of the few who can speak of the rift in the national movement with any
objectivity is a Herero named Fanuel Kozonguizi, who once led an organization
called the South-West Africa National Union, which vied with Swapo for
third-world recognition and then shriveled on the international scene. Not only
can Mr. Kozonguizi interpret the rift, he embodies it.

Years ago, he roomed in Cape Town with Herman Toivo ja Toivo.  Later, he helped
recruit Sam Nujoma into politics. When they all went their separate ways, Mr.
Kozonguizi was the first to advocate armed struggle and the first to seek
Communist sup-port. In the early 1960's, he journeyed to Peking regularly and
twice met with Chairman Mao Zedong. Today, he can be found on the South African
payroll, in an office next door to that of Dirk Mudge of the Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance.

Mr. Kozonguizi seems as mystified as everyone else that he and the Hereros have
ended up where they have. But unlike many other Hereros, he does not fix the
blame on Swapo or Mr. Nujoma, whom he still regards as ''a genuine nationalist,
absolutely.''

''The problem is the Hereros,'' he concedes. ''Even if there were only two, they
would want to dominate.'' He was speaking in the third person, as if to say he
was no longer in the picture, but then suddenly he included himself. ''We should
all get together, Swapo and the D.T.A., and decide things for ourselves.'' He
paused, tucked his chin to his chest with an embarrassed laugh and retreated to
the third person. ''Something is wrong with the Namibians,'' he said.  ''They
don't see what they should see.'' The notion that Namibia offers a metaphor for
South Africa's own racial politics crept up on me as I drove south from the
capital of Windhoek into what, by the old racial stereotypes of the South
African administrators, was supposed to be the nonblack half of the country. In
fact, blacks show up everywhere, for in South-West Africa, as in South Africa
itself, racial and ethnic divisions are never as clear on land as they are on
paper.

If Namibia was a metaphor, it stood for the divisions among blacks and the
whites' rear-guard tactics. First, the color bar was bent, and then whites were
urged to enter an alliance with nonwhite minorities against the main force of
black nationalists. In broad outline, this is what is happening now in the
Republic of South Africa itself as Prime Minister Botha seeks to share power, on
a minimal basis, with coloreds and Indians. What was attempted in Namibia was
far more daring, in that it involved scrapping the pass laws, which control
black movement, and the Group Areas Act, the basis of residential segregation.

But it was not enough, because the whites weren't truly interested in power
sharing. They wanted to remain in control. Peter Kalangula, an Ovambo who was
the nominal president of the Turnhalle Alliance until he quit to form yet
another Namibian party this year, told me that he never could get Dirk Mudge to
tell him anything about the source of the alliance's funds.

The failure of the Turnhalle strategy stands out most vividly in the southern
part of Namibia, precisely because the region is so remote from Ovamboland and
direct Swapo influence. And yet Swapo is expected to do surprisingly well there
when the Constituent Assembly election is held, mainly because the insurgent
organization has the support of the region's most important leader. He is
Hendrik Witbooi, a great-grandson of the legendary chieftain who led the last
Nama rising. The original Hendrik Witbooi wrote to the Herero chief to urge that
they stand together against the Germans.

''In this light, I have to follow the same procedures,'' his namesake says. When
he refused to lend his prestige to the Turnhalle Alliance, the present Hendrik
Witbooi lost his job as principal of a state school. He then started his own
school, where he teaches a version of history in which his ancestor is not
presented as the frontier bandit he is in the South African syllabus still used
in other Namibian schools.

In Gibeon, Mr. Witbooi's followers live in some of the most pitiful shanties in
southern Africa, on rock-strewn land so barren that the word ''lunar'' springs
to mind. What Government housing there is went, it seems, to certified
supporters of the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance. In Keetmanshoop, I saw handsome
new houses under construction for ministers of the Nama ethnic authority. Mr.
Witbooi could have had the best of them.

Will the shanty dwellers vote for the Witbooi tradition of resistance or for the
ministers who got the new houses? Such questions answer themselves in
Keetmanshoop, where at this late date the whites are preparing to dedicate a new
$20 million hospital that will exclude blacks. Like all other towns in Namibia,
Keetmanshoop is still governed by an all-white municipal council, elected nine
years ago and simply never replaced. The council, made up entirely of
Afrikaners, put up an arch on the road into town a few years ago - which is
still there -proclaiming: ''Afrikaans Our Language.''

Perhaps the council thinks that the people who live in the black township don't
mind being excluded. Or perhaps, like most whites in Namibia, they still cannot
believe that South Africa really means to go forward with the withdrawal of its
forces and permit an election under United Nations supervision on the basis of
universal suffrage.  But just imagine that in the next few months they are
proved to be wrong. Then the notion that Namibia is a metaphor for South Africa
could have a powerful impact.

Meanwhile, the blacks and browns of Keetmanshoop would have a triumphal arch
ready-made for the independence celebration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of ethnic Germans in Nam. celebrating carnival of
Wika photo of black volunteers in training as members of security drawing of an
anti-Swapo poster playing on fear of Soviets photo of Swapo T-shirts with black
hand holds torch of lib. photo of South African soldiers on patrol in Ruacana

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FUNNY BOOKS

BYLINE: By DAVID QUAMMEN; David Quammen is finishing a historical novel about
thermonuclear espionage.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words


GANGLAND By David Winn.  226 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $12.95.
THE REPLAY By Michael Curtin.  271 pp. New York: George Braziller. $9.95.
THE MATCH TRICK By Don Zacharia.235 pp. New York: The Linden Press/Simon &
Schuster. $13.50.

THE male characters in David Winn's first novel share abiding memories of a
powerful experience - what one of Mr. Winn's characters continually calls, with
irony to which only he is impervious, ''The Greatest Adventure of Our
Generation,'' Vietnam.  The tone of those memories is less nostalgic than
hysterical, with good cause, yet that doesn't prevent ''Gangland'' from being a
very funny book. At moments, in fact, it is hysterically funny. That it so
steadfastly refuses to come together - into any shape that is meaningful or even
satisfying overall - seems almost an intentional joke on us, the readers, just
as his own buffeted life seems a joke on the main character, Dunkle. But Dunkle
endures his victimization with such endearing good will that it helps us endure
ours.

Dunkle begins his part of the Great Adventure by being shot in the rump by his
own sharpshooter partner during a training exercise in California. Later, he and
the partner (called MCATS, for reasons never explained) find themselves in a
foxhole outside the perimeter wire at Camp Delight in Long Pig Province, where
Dunkle is fiddling with some exotic electronic machinery (his specialty) and
MCATS is taking target practice at Dunkle's helmet, which has been tossed out
into no man's land by mischievous Montagnards. Alas, MCATS is suddenly killed by
an incoming rocket and subsequently memorialized with a small service at the
camp chapel, an observance in which MCATS shares the principal role with an
infantry point man who was carried off by a tiger and a corporal who choked to
death on the pop tab from a beer can.

Dunkle must locate proof of the official order that sent him and MCATS outside
the wire or face ominously unspecified repercussions.  But the record of that
order has been swallowed by a balky underground computer called ANIMA, of which
the chief maintenance technician happens to be Dunkle. Despite Dunkle's efforts,
the computer seems capable only of shutting itself down or telling bad jokes on
the readout screens. ''THERE ARE THESE TWO SETS OF TWINS, SEE? ...'' the
computer flashes. That sort of thing.

David Winn makes the loony Vietnam stuff work generally quite well, at its best
like a frenzied cross between ''Going After Cacciato'' and ''Catch-22.'' He
seems to know the texture of that war, and he has a fine touch for the
half-insane but still plausible comic scene.  Unfortunately, the rest of the
novel - almost two-thirds of the total - has Dunkle caroming around southern
California as a civilian in the mid-1970's. Here too Mr. Winn shows a keen eye
and a good wit, lampooning the indigenous varieties of human and organizational
flakiness: the Fastfood Marxists, for instance, who have a foundation grant to
''simulate an urban commercial cooperative'' and who get rich selling Bukharin
Burritos. Finally, though, the California material degenerates into mere madcap
surrealistic gumbo - frustratingly directionless and without either the force or
the focus of Dunkle's Great Adventure.

But the loss is not total. The best parts of ''Gangland'' are simply much better
than the whole.

* ''The Replay,'' by Michael Curtin of County Limerick, is more Irish than a
pint of Guinness in back-alley Dublin on March 17. That may be the limiting
factor on its appeal to a wide American audience, but it is also the novel's
greatest strength. Though Ireland has produced more than its share of literary
giants over the past century, most of them wrote as expatriates, either viewing
the old sod through a black haze of bitterness or disdaining to glance back that
way at all. On the other hand, Mr. Curtin, by no means a giant, has written an
Irishman's novel of Ireland that is so loyally, exultingly provincial that it
travels rather well. Despite some annoying weaknesses in the contrivance of plot
and motivation, ''The Replay'' has all the energy and concussive comedy of a
fine drunken pub brawl - or a Sunday soccer match between two squads of overage
layabouts.

The book is quite heavy on premise, and the premise is this: A legendary soccer
contest, played 15 years earlier between an upperclass club team and a
working-class pub team in the (apparently fictive) small city of Mellick, is to
be replayed - as a grudge match, and with a staggering side bet of cash - by all
the original participants, decrepit and middle-aged as they now are. Stanley
Callaghan, lately a priggish schoolteacher and family man of fanatical
respectability, earlier the wild chieftain of the pub lads, is the man to whom
this challenge is presented. And Stanley, his ire up, cannot resist. Shucking
away the 15 years of pious stodginess that began the night he met his beautiful
wife (which was also the night of the first match), Stanley returns to the local
pub he has forsworn. He meets the pathetic and disreputable friends he had
deserted and attempts to flog their spirits (if not their bodies) into shape for
the great, dirty, hilarious rematch. Even a midget goalie, recently deceased, is
called on to do his bit.  Obviously this format -broader story converges toward
and hypes the Big Game, the climax of which serves also as climax to the broader
story - is as hackneyed as a narrative format can be. But Michael Curtin
reroasts the chestnut to a new freshness. His big match is a success, and his
book with it, partly because soccer (the fundamentals and the tricks of which he
communicates nicely) is so lively, partly because he has won us to his
characters before they walk onto the field and partly because his powers of
comedic invention are - like Stanley's pub team - up to the challenge.

Forgive Mr. Curtin his creaky plot and read ''The Replay'' for the character
portraits, for the texture of life in Limerick and, most of all, for the laughs.

''THE MATCH TRICK,'' by Don Zacharia, is another comic novel about men who
remember themselves wistfully as sporting heroes, but the athletic nostalgia
remains a secondary theme, never developed to good effect, and the book's chief
concern is, for me, the most tired of all imaginable subjects: marital malaise
and sexual reawakening in a commuter suburb of New York City. Disallow my bias,
posit an insatiable interest in the subject, and Mr. Zacharia's first novel is
still quite disappointing. The problems are narrative aimlessness, confusion of
tone and purpose, unexceptional prose and especially the intrusive sections of
medium-core sadomasochistic pornography treated pretentiously as some sort of
counterpoint. There are also a few moments of real, winning humor, and these
rescue the book's first half. The second half goes unrescued.

Noel Roth is the protagonist here, a successful 36-year-old haberdasher with
nagging memories of himself as a high-school basketball player. Noel is no
Rabbit Angstrom - he was never a star - but he did once, on an evening of good
luck and physical transport, score 15 consecutive field goals without miss. He
can't locate the newspaper clipping, though, and no one else finds that
particular memory plausible.

Noel's humdrum life changes suddenly when his wife is killed by a falling
Westinghouse air conditioner in the course of her first extramarital affair. In
shock, he retires with a lawn chair to the woods behind his house and reads
Nixon's ''Six Crises.'' A nice touch.

But soon Noel becomes the willing love slave of a beautiful and very perverted
woman named Nevers, and from that point the book loses all its loose-jointed,
humorous charm. The Nevers scenes are neither appealingly sensual nor dramatic
nor illuminating of a state of soul. They are just determinedly coarse. And they
feature a 15-year-old black hooker named Melonie, whom Mr. Zacharia burdens with
an ''Amos and Andy'' dialect so ineptly and offensively bogus that for this
alone his typewriter should be impounded.

The match trick of the title, performed by Noel and his best friend at a party,
involves an adolescent enterprise in flatulence. For pages and pages the author
has begged us to wonder: What is it, this match trick? Believe me, you don't
need to know.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of man laughing behind a serious mask

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LEADER OF MINERS FACING OPPOSITION

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 1


Rich Trumka, the insurgent who is seeking to oust Sam M. Church Jr. as president
of the United Mine Workers of America, said today that more than half of the
union's locals had nominated him for election this fall. A spokesman for Mr.
Church said the assertion was ''probably right.''

In the 170,000-member union, nominations for national office are made by ballots
in the 877 locals. The locals vary in size. Mr.  Trumka's listing did not name
the locals supporting him, so his overall strength could not be assessed.

To be placed on the Nov. 8 unionwide ballot, a candidate must have the support
of 25 locals. Both Mr. Trumka and Mr. Church are regarded as sure nominees.  Two
other declared candidates, regarded as unlikely to gain the necessary support,
are Arnold R. Miller, who served as president from 1972 to 1979, and Fred
Miller, a retired West Virginia miner.

455 Locals Said to Back Trumka

At Trumka headquarters in Nemacolin, Pa., Joe Corcoran, a spokesman, said that
Mr. Trumka's tally at the end of the nominating period which closed Saturday,
gave him the backing of 455 locals, compared with 255 for Mr. Church.

Mr. Corcoran said Mr. Trumka had won a majority in ''most of the big working
locals,'' including 74 of the 104 locals in District 17 in central West
Virginia. The district, with 35,000 members, is the largest in the union. Cecil
Roberts, a college-educated Vietnam veteran who is District 17's vice president,
is on the Trumka ticket as candidate for vice president.

The nominating results were a psychological victory for the insurgent, the
32-year-old son of a union miner. Mr. Trumka is a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of
Pennsylvania State University and took his law degree at Villanova University.
He was little known until he began his campaign last winter. The results of the
one-month nominating period were considered likely to help him in raising funds.

Mr. Trumka began his rise in the union last fall with a strong showing in a
campaign for a southwestern Pennsylvania seat on the union's executive board.
Although he is not a Vietnam veteran, Mr.  Trumka's appeal is strongly to a
''new breed'' in the mines, young veterans who may be more skeptical and perhaps
more impatient than their fathers, and, with college training or college
degrees, are considered better educated. Mr. Church, also the son of a miner,
had to leave college for lack of tuition money after one semester.

Trumka Questions Leadership

In a statement, Mr. Trumka called the nomination figures ''a tremendous victory
for the rank and file.'' He said they underlined the members' ''disillusionment
with the reactionary leadership provided by Sam Church.'' There was no response
from Mr. Church.

Eldon Callen, a Church spokesman, said the tally would not be completed until
Aug. 16. ''I can't tell you yet if their numbers are right,'' he said, ''but it
is very unlikely that they are not.''

Mr. Church, 45, is a robust, tobacco-chewing former mine electrician. He has
been the $48,000-a-year union president since November 1979. He was at home in
suburban Virginia today. Mr. Trumka was campaigning.

The campaign issues have been broad. Mr. Trumka has attempted to exploit
dissatisfaction over Mr. Church's role in the 1981 contract with the coal
industry. Mr. Church has declined invitations for a debate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DEFOLIANTS WEIGHED FOR AMAZON DAM

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 963 words


RIO De JANEIRO, Aug. 1 - Brazil is considering the use of toxic defoliants to
clear a wide swath of the Amazon jungle for a large hydrolelectric project, and
the country's environmental chief is warning that the move could create a
disastrous precedent.

Paulo Nogueira Neto, Secretary of the Environment, said such an action could set
a precedent leading to the extinction of the world's rain forests.

Mr. Nogueira sounded his alert in a letter in May that has only recently come to
light. ''If you invent this 'atomic bomb' now,'' he warned, ''no one will come
along to disinvent it and nobody will be able to control it.''

His protest was directed at officials overseeing the contruction of the mammoth
Tucurui Dam, on one of the Amazon tributaries, that requires flooding an
834-square-mile area, creating a body of water nearly twice the size of Lake
Champlain. The vegetation must be stripped in the affected tract to prevent
decomposition of underwater plant from corroding the facility's turbines.

Clearing Is Behind Schedule

The concern charged with clearing the area, a company organized by retired
military officers, fell far behind schedule and posited the use of defoliants
dropped from planes as the only way to get the job done by September 1983, when
the project is scheduled to begin.

The supervisory company, Eletronorte, asked the National Institute of Amazon
Research, a government body that has traditionally studied ways of preserving
rather than destroying the jungle, to explore the consequences. That's when Mr.
Nogueira stepped in.

''As a university professor,'' he wrote, ''I am favorable in theory to the
stimulation of technological and scientific research, but there are projects
that violate ethics and should not be approved.''

His letter was addressed to Henrique Bergamin, head of the Manausbased
institute. Mr. Bergamin argued that such research could in fact ''signify a
rational treatment of natural riches without destroying the outlying forest,''
and he objected to Mr. Nogueira's acting to stifle the inquiry. ''Suppressing
research is the same as burning books,'' he said.

''Let's suppose the results were 'good,' '' said Mr. Nogueira in an interview in
his Interior Ministry office in Brasilia. ''It would constitute a method of
destroying tropical forests, and research should not pursue that.''

Case Reported Still Open

In response to Mr. Nogueira's intercession, the Minister of the Interior, Mario
Andreazza, ordered an end to the study, but Mr.  Noguiera said that the builders
of the dam were pursuing the matter and that the case was still open.

''By and large scientists should feel there should be no prohibitions on
research,'' said Thomas E. Lovejoy, the vice president for science of the World
Wildlife Fund in a telephone interview from Washington. ''An extreme example of
when that doesn't apply, however, would be dropping people out of buildings to
see how different ground coverings affected their falls,'' he said. ''The real
question in this case is the effect of defoliants, and we already know about
that.''

The World Wildlife Fund gave Mr. Nogueira and Maria Tereza Jorge Padua, director
of the country's Department of National Parks and equivalent reserves in the
Brazilian Institute of Forestry Development, its 1982 J. Paul Getty Wildlife
Conservation Prize in March. In statements at the time, the organization cited
the awakening of environmental concerns in the past decade, and especially the
last three years, in Brazil, a country that only recently condemned such worries
as curbs on its growth.

Mr. Nogueira said that three defoliants had been involved, one of which, Tordon,
has a 25 percent chemical resemblance to the highly toxic Agent Orange used by
the United States in Vietnam and now the subject of legal cases over the
permanent damage it may have done to humans. However, Tordon, he said, does not
have the high doses of dioxin that have been determined to be the most
pernicious element in Agent Orange.

Hardwood to Be Marketed

The contractors at Tucurui, 225 miles inland from the Amazon port city of Belem,
are left with the problem of how to step up the pace of clearing to meet the
deadline 14 months hence. ''They need more men and more saws,'' said Mr.
Nogueira.

The problem appears to be larger than that. In the two years the woodcutters
have been at their work, they have managed to extract only 21 million cubic feet
of wood of the 71 million they should have by now. The company's intention is to
market the hardwood here and abroad and sell the less commercially attractive
species in the form of vegetal coking coal.

They have blamed the Government for having taken more than a year to award the
bid, the federal customs authorities for having prevented until recently the
importation of needed heavy earthmoving equipment and the immense size of the
undertaking.

Two ideas reportedly under discussion are attaching buoys to the most marketable
trees for removal after the lake is formed, and a vast clearing operation using
dirigibles.

Delay in Inundation Suggested

Extensive burning, another option, would, said Mr. Nogueira, create mineral
nutrients that would provoke the proliferation of algae on the water's surface.
The other feared chemical process, one that could produce a so-called ''dead
lake,'' is the absorption of oxygen by decomposing branches, leaves and shoots
that would form corrosive gases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
SCHOOLS AN ISSUE IN POLITICS AGAIN

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words


ASPEN, Colo.  ''IT looks as if there is a resurgence of interest in public
education,'' said John W. Gardner, who predicted that education would, after
almost two decades of popular neglect, become a major issue in the 1984
Presidential campaign. At least four of the current Democratic hopefuls appear
to bear out Mr. Gardner's predictions.

Mr. Gardner, chairman of Independent Sector, an organization that deals with
various nonprofit groups, was Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare from
1965 to 1968, and he is widely considered one of the nation's foremost experts
on education and its politics.

''Somewhere in the 60's, the capacity of the public to remain interested in
education seeped away,'' he said in an interview here.  ''For 17 years it has
been off the public agenda.'' Now, he said, it is coming back.

At a recent meeting in Sun Valley, Idaho, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado called
education a top national priority. Inquiries with spokesmen for Senator John
Glenn of Ohio, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale also give substance to Mr. Gardner's forecasts.

The question is: Why now? The two peaks of public interest in public education,
Mr. Gardner said, were reached in 1958, when President Eisenhower responded with
the National Defense Education Act to the Soviet Union's launching of sputnik,
and in 1965, when President Johnson responded with the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act to demands for equal educational opportunities for the poor and
minority groups.

After the enthusiasm and intensity of public feeling about education peaked, Mr.
Gardner continued, people longed for a quiet phase. Moreover, he said, when the
schools became the center of the civil rights battle, particularly because of
busing, other education issues were overwhelmed, and ultimately the Vietnam
issue overwhelmed everything.

''Then, more recently, I began to get visits from people who wanted to do
something,'' he said. ''There's a new cropping up of people trying to find each
other and beginning to succeed.'' There is, Mr.  Gardner concluded, ''a battle
ahead'' over support of the schools, but, he said, ''the people who are
ideologically at odds with the public schools are modest in number. They sound
louder than they are actually influential.'' He said he is worried about people
who ''are ideologically for the public schools but were driven over to the
private schools because of the tumult and the chaos.''

''I think that group can be won back,'' Mr. Gardner added. ''As a politician, I
would count education again as a choice issue today.''

What are the politicians likely to do about education as they prepare for the
next Presidential contest?  Many Democrats appear to agree that they will fight
President Reagan's proposed tuition tax credits for parents whose children
attend private schools. They see the measure as a move to undermine Federal
support of the public schools. They are also agreed that the Department of
Education, which President Carter created and Mr.  Reagan wants to abolish,
ought to be preserved.

But beyond such opposition policies, what can the Democrats be expected to do to
move education back into the center of the national agenda?

Senator Hart is reaching back to past accomplishments of Federal action in
support of education. In May, he fought unsuccessfully for an increase in the
allocation for Title 1, the Johnson program's main vehicle for educational aid
to disadvantaged youngsters. In late June, he introduced the American Defense
Education Act, which would place additional emphasis on an understanding of the
new technology.

Senator Hart argues that the United States is in the midst of a transformation
as fundamental as the Industrial Revolution. The new revolution, he warns, calls
for a nation of ''workers with words and information.''

He says he believes America's economic future as well as its military defense
are in jeopardy unless the public schools can be helped to respond to new needs.
The Defense Department, he said, spends millions of dollars rewriting manuals
for sophisticated weapons at the sixth-grade level.

A spokesman for Senator Kennedy said education would play a major role in
upcoming debates. The Senator is expected to step up his fight to save aid for
disadvantaged pupils and for increased aid to college students. He is ''putting
together an initiative to address the needs of public education,'' the aide
said.

Mr. Mondale, one of his political advisors said, will make a strong case for the
support of education as ''an investment in human capital.''

An aide to Senator Glenn pointed to three bills the Senator had recently
sponsored: one to help the schools improve the nation's manpower pool in science
and engineering; one to provide loans for young people who want to teach science
and mathematics, and another for tax credits to corporations that ''loan'' their
personnel to teach mathematics and science in public schools.

Most of these efforts are reminiscent of President Eisenhower's device to
advance the cause of education by linking it to military strength. The
connection between educational achievements and both economic and military
strength is even easier to document today, and in the case of the economy the
United States faces a long list of competitors.

All this gives added credibility to Mr. Gardner's forecast of an impending
return of public interest in education and the likelihood that such interest
will be reflected in politics.

''There are still a lot of negatives in the public mind,'' he said. ''We've got
to counter the feeling that education is a kind of running sore.'' But he
concluded by recalling that ''when President Johnson made education a top
priority issue, few in Congress dared to vote against it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing (page C4)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 4, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INTREPID'S OPENING REVIVES MEMORIES

BYLINE: By SUSAN CHIRA

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 566 words


Two teen-age Boy Scouts, David Puttre and Robert Fennell, talked excitedly for
more than an hour yesterday as they walked through the aircraft carrier
Intrepid, which was commissioned more than 20 years before they were born.

On the first day the 900-foot ship was opened to the public at Pier 86, ay West
46th Street, the youths from Baldwin, L.I., explained what they had learned
while helping to transform the Intrepid into a sea, air and space museum.

The two detailed the make of the airplanes, the guns and the ship's layout. On
the way to the flight deck, David, who is 16 years old, paused at the C-in-C
room, the control center for wartime operations. ''See, here is where they
analyze messages received from their antennas,'' he said. ''And we polished all
the brass in this room.''

The Boy Scouts first became interested in the project, David said, when they
visited the Massachusetts, stationed at Fall River, Mass., three years ago. They
offered to help restore the Intrepid and have worked on the carrier since last
February, scraping paint and polishing brass.

Many of the people who attended the ribbon-cutting ceremony had been involved
with the Intrepid for even longer than the Scouts, and their sense of pride was
tempered with wonder and some bittersweet memories.

Zachary Fisher, chairman of the Intrepid Museum Foundation, spoke of the
rotting, rusting ship he had seen years ago. And former crewmen remembered those
who had not lived to walk back on board yesterday.

''Right where I'm standing is where the kamikaze pilot landed,'' Robert, 13,
said, referring to a kamikaze attack on Nov. 25, 1944.  ''The 10-inch steel
plates were warped by the heat of the explosion, but they've fixed it up now.''

The attack killed 65 crewmen and destroyed many of the airplanes on board. It
was one of many attacks the carrier sustained during service in World War II and
off Korea and Vietnam. Near the Boy Scouts, a group of survivors of the attack
stood listening to a recorded narrative recount the story of that day. As slides
of exploding planes flashed by, the narrator read out the names of the dead
crewmen.

''We were all 17 years old and we went out to the Pacific and you thought maybe
you might die,'' recalled Edward T. Coyne, a security consultant from Plainview,
L.I., who served on the Intrepid from 1943, when the ship was commissioned,
until the end of the war. ''But you were trained, you had your discipline and
you did the job you had to do. It was difficult to realize that you might have
had breakfast with some of the men, and five hours later they were dead.''

''It brings back memories,'' Mr. Coyne added, ''but it's quite a thing that they
didn't scrap it, that a lot of people will get to enjoy something that was a
part of our lives.''

For other visitors, the Intrepid held no such sentimental attachment. Groups of
children ran through the ship, trying out guns and running their hands over the
airplanes of another era. Jonathan Stuart held his 2-year-old daughter, Kaya,
over his head so she could touch an airplane's propeller. ''Her mother's a
flight attendant,'' he said, ''and it's great to see the planes. But I don't
have any relationship to it - I was a conscientious objector.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of visitors on Intrepid photo of Jonathan Stuart
and daughter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 5, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Technology;
Computerized Job Matching

BYLINE: By Thomas J. Lueck

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


ACALIFORNIA entrepreneur, Tom A. Papke, is convinced that computers w ill soon
play a much bigger role in show business. In early July, w orking with a staff
of five salesmen from an office in his H ollywood condominium, he formed a new
company called International C omputer Casting.

''There's a great need to organize talent,'' Mr. Papke says. ''We intend to
build an international computer network, or a kind of data base for the
industry.''

For a fee, Mr. Papke says, his new company will use a computer to catalogue the
photographs and resumes of actors, models, singers, movie technicians and others
with specialized skills in the entertainment industry. Meanwhile, he adds, the
company hopes to lease more than 1,000 computer terminals, as well as devices
for receiving high-resolution photographs over telephone lines. This equipment,
designed to ''call up'' candidates for a role or job, would be leased to movie
studios, advertising agencies, modeling agencies and other concerns that hire
entertainers.

Mr. Papke's company offers a new wrinkle in a broad trend toward what is called
computerized job matching, a concept that been in the experimental stage for
more than a decade. In theory, job seekers in management, engineering, education
and many other fields could have their resumes, salary requirements and other
information assembled in large computer banks where employers would have instant
access to lists of qualified job applicants.

Many corporations have already automated their personnel records and in some
cases are keeping computerized records on job candidates.  One example is the
Hewlett-Packard Company, the electronics concern, which uses a computer for what
it calls its Potential Employee Processing System. Margo Scott, the company's
manager of staffing systems, said the two-year-old system was being used to keep
track of the job movements, professional accomplishments and other information
supplied by the more than 100,000 applicants that Hewlett Packard had on file.

In the future, Mrs. Scott added, the company hoped to use the system to track a
far larger number of potential employees, sometimes beginning when they are in
their teens and recommended by their high school teachers. ''We feel that most
of the people in the world are potential Hewlett-Packard employees,'' she said,
''and this system could become a kind of head hunter.''

Such extensive use of computers, however, is viewed with skepticism in some
quarters. ''You can't treat job applicants like pieces of inventory,'' declared
Marc Silbert, president of the New York operations of Robert Half International,
a major employment agency.  He added that computers could ''never provide the
subtle nuance of experience and personality.''

The largest use of computers in employment has been by government.  In many
states, job seekers receiving unemployment compensation are offered computerized
job listings. Federal agencies, meanwhile, have increasingly used computers to
screen job applicants.

Margaret Higgins, a spokesman for the Office of Personnel Management, said the
Government's computers now had a catalogue of more than 8,000 applicants for
entry level positions in Washington alone. Computers are used, she added, to
select a small number of the most highly qualified candidates for a job, and
those candidates are then referred to the agency that has the opening.

A more ambitious use of computers - one that was regarded as a disappointing
failure - was attempted by the Federal Government between 1971 and 1975. The
project, with an allocation of $45 million, was intended to help more than
100,000 engineers and scientists find new jobs following sharp cuts in defense
spending as the Vietnam War came to an end.

In the Technology Mobilization and Redeployment Program, as the Labor Department
called it, electronics, aerospace and other high technology companies were asked
to provide information on their job openings. The openings were programmed into
a nationwide data bank in an attempt to match them with the skills and
backgrounds of the unemployed engineers and scientists, who received expense
money from the Government to travel to interviews after an initial match was
made.

After four years, however, the Labor department returned $21 million of its
allocation and scrapped the program after it had matched only a few of the
candidates with employers. ''It fell flat on its face,'' recalled Jack Hashain,
a Labor Department spokesman who worked on the project as a public information
specialist.

Many of the engineers and scientsts in the program, Mr. Hashain said, found
themselves ''matched with jobs in cities they didn't want to move to.'' In other
cases, information about the job candidates failed to provide enough detail.
''The human factor just wasn't taken into account,'' Mr. Hashain said.

Despite the mixed success of early attempts at job matching, Mr.  Papke insists
that the entertainment industry is a field where it will work. His company has
not yet filed for incorporation, and he says he has not secured the financing
neccessary to develop an international network of computer terminals and
photographic transmission equipment. But he maintains that computerized job
matching is an idea whose time has come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONSUMER SATURDAY;
MAGAZINES TO ASSIST DISABLED

BYLINE: By Kerry Gruson

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


MIAMI IN the last 15 years there has been a virtual explosion in publications
for the disabled. Lani Deauville, an assistant director of Florida's Office of
Vocational Rehabilitation, credits the increase to the civil-rights and consumer
movements.

''It became obvious that the disabled were being discriminated against in
employment and housing,'' said Miss Deauville, a quadriplegic since a diving
accident in 1958. ''As jobs and transportation become more accessible, the
disabled are coming out of the woodwork.''

Miss Deauville said she was getting 25 to 30 periodicals a week and that she
believed there were 10 to 20 times that number in the United States.

Gini Laurie, editor of a yearly, The Rehabilitation Gazette, adds that since
1965, when the Government began subsidizing the college educations of the
severely disabled, a pool of potential leaders among the handicapped has been
growing. Also, as a result of the advances in medical technology that
accompanied the Vietnam War, many who would have died of their injuries are
surviving even if severely disabled.

In 1952, when 26-year-old Raymond C. Cheever was released from a hospital after
a bout with poliomyelitis that left him without the use of his legs, he found
that he did not even know where to get a wheelchair. So he and his wife, Grace,
decided to start a publication ''to provide a means for disabled people to learn
about products that were available but hard to find.''

The first 16-page issue of the quarterly, then called Polio Living, came out in
the summer of 1956, relying on $15,000 scratched together from many sources. For
the next few years Mr. Cheever, then an employee of an insurance agency, and his
wife put out the publication at night. Today, having changed its name to Accent
on Living in 1958 to reflect its widening concerns, the magazine contains 148
pages and has a staff of six full-time and four parttime employees.

Recent articles have dealt with planning a wheelchair vacation, divorce,
pregnancy and child-rearing. Each issue includes at least one success story.

Because few towns have good medical-supply stores, said Mr.  Cheever, the
quarterly's most important mission is still information about hard-to-find
products. As requests for information began to pour in, the Cheevers set up an
information bank, Accent on Information, in 1970 to keep track of solutions to
problems.

In 1974 a number of publications began to appear on topics too comprehensive to
fit into Accent on Living. Accent Special Publications' list of available
booklets now runs to 19 titles, 10 published in-house. The most popular booklet
offers suggestions on how to make a home more accessible.

Like Accent on Living, The Rehabilitation Gazette was started because of an
encounter with polio. Mrs. Laurie, its editor, lost two sisters and a brother to
the disease, so when a severe epidemic hit Cleveland in 1949, she heard the call
for volunteers to help in what became the regional respiratory polio center.

In 1958 she began a mimeographed newsletter ''to report how 'alumni' were coping
at home, with attendants, children, hobbies, home adaptions, housekeeping,
families, jobs, recreation, school and spouses - from their wheelchairs, rocking
beds, chest pieces or iron lungs.'' The 1981 issue runs to 65 pages and
circulates in 84 countries.

Paraplegia News, one of the oldest publications for the disabled, has recently
been focusing on specific topics. In June, for example, it concentrated on the
special needs of handicapped drivers.

The official magazine of the Paralyzed Veterans of America, Paraplegia News was
started at the Bronx Veterans Hospital in 1946, predating its parent
organization by a month. While it maintains strong ties with the organization,
the publication has a broader mandate. The masthead states that it is published
''in the interest of and for the benefit of paraplegics, civilians and veterans,
all over the world.''

From four pages of newsprint it has grown to a 70-page glossy monthly
publication with a readership that is nearly 50 percent nonveteran.

The three magazines - Accent on Living, Parapleglia News and The Rehabilitation
Gazette - represent the oldest and most established.  In addition to other
national magazines, with some concentrating on specific medical problems, there
is a large if uncounted number of regional and local offset pamphlets. These
include The Walkie Wheeler Newsletter, a monthly edited single-handed by Sol
Zitter of Miami Beach; HandiNotes, also a monthly bulletin, put out by the
Florida Space Coast Association of the Physically Handicapped, and Mainstream of
San Diego.  Kerry Gruson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JUSTICE SUGGESTS A UNIT TO SIFT HIGH COURT CASES

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 6


Associate Justice John Paul Stevens of the Supreme Court called tonight for the
creation of an intermediate Federal appellate court empowered to choose the High
Court's docket.

He asserted that the Supreme Court was swamped with work in part because it does
''a poor job'' in choosing the cases that it will hear.

Justice Stevens's recommendation was part of an unusually strong and direct
appeal to his colleagues to avoid what he called ''unnecessary lawmaking.''

In a speech to the American Judicature Society, Justice Stevens said that the
High Court was insufficiently selective in exercising its discretionary power
and that the press of other, more important business had made the task of
selecting cases ''second-class work.'' He acknowledged that he delegated much of
the responsibility in this regard to his two law clerks and disclosed that he
looked at less than 20 percent of the petitions for hearings filed with the
Supreme Court.

Too busy to give the petitions the attention they deserve, he said, the Court
elected to hear more cases than it should, ''thereby making our management
problem even more unmanageable.''

Justice Stevens related how the court, at the beginning of its latest term,
agreed to confront the issue of the proliferation of petitions of review, called
certiorari petitions, but had to call off the effort because ''we were too busy
to decide whether there was anything we could do about the problem of being too
busy.''

'Unnecessary Lawmaking'

In his speech to 325 members of the organization of judges, lawyers and lay
people concerned with the administration of justice, Mr.  Stevens said that the
court often exhibited an ''unfortunate lack of judicial restraint'' in deciding
when to review novel questions and what questions need review.

He said the courts could avoid unnecessary lawmaking by entering cases only
where there is a clear conflict between lower courts of appeal, by declining to
rule in matters not raised by the litigants and by avoiding jumping into cases
that are binding in a limited geographical area and in which no conflict exists.

He suggested that the number and effects of unresolved conflicts between the
various courts of appeals was exaggerated. ''The existence of differing rules of
law in difference sections of our great country is not always an intolerable
evil,'' he said. He went on to suggest that decision makers other than judges
could resolve such conflicts where they concerned statutory differences rather
than differences of constitutional construction.

As an example of ''unnecessary lawmaking'' in recent years, Justice Steven said
that the Court had agreed to hear the Island Trees School District case,
involving the removal of books from a Long Island community school library, when
further proceedings in the trial court ''would either have clarified the
Constitutional issue or perhaps have mooted the entire case.''

In other instances, he said, the Court had been unnecessarily unwilling to defer
to state court decisions providing state residents with greater protections than
the Federal Constitution required.

Critical of Snepp Case

He was particularly critical of the Court's handling of a case involving Frank
Snepp, the former Central Intelligence Agency agent who was convicted of
violating a secrecy agreement with the agency for publishing a book about its
intelligence activities in Vietnam.  Though the High Court declined to hear Mr.
Snepp's appeal, it placed restrictions on his right to collect income from the
sales of the book, a remedy, Justice Stevens charged, for which ''there was
neither a statutory nor contractual basis.''

''It would be unfortunate if the function of the Supreme Court of the United
States should become one of primarily, or even largely, correcting errors
committed by other courts,'' Justice Stevens said.  ''It is far better to allow
the State Supreme Courts and Federal Courts of Appeals to have the final say on
almost all litigation than to embark on the hopeless task of attempting to
correct every judicial error that can be found.''

Justice Stevens was careful to differentiate between the new court with limited
functions that he was recommending and a proposed ''national court of appeals,''
which would sit between the various courts of appeals and the Supreme Court. The
latter, he suggested, would simply ''bring a greater volume of litigation into
an already overburdened court system and place additional administrative
responsibilities on the Supreme Court.''

Very Seminal Idea'

''This is a very seminal idea,'' said Wade McCree, former solicitor general of
the United States in the Carter Administration and now a professor at the
University of Michigan Law School.

He referred to Justice Stevens's admission that he reviewed less than 20 percent
of petitions ''an extraordinary expression of honesty.'' Asked if he though
whether or not the proposal for the court to relinquish control over its docket
was a good idea, he said, ''I don't know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ON DEATH ROW, TWO MUSE ON LUCK THAT RAN OUT AND HOPE THAT IS FADING

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1747 words

DATELINE: NASHVILLE, Tenn., Aug. 6


On death row these days, life is a matter of not-so-quiet desperation.  One man
screams through the day, another sings. Guards shout, steel clangs, and from the
6 A.M. sick call to midnight exhaustion, the floor polishers, buzzing fans,
babbling televisions and piercing rock music compose cacophony.

For Wayne Adkins, a tattooed bootlegger who loved silk shirts, pretty cars and
fast women, and who always considered himself lucky, the sounds are a
continuously blaring reminder that ''my luck finally ran out.''

For Richard Houston, a slim, starched former post office employee standing under
a naked lightbulb a couple of cramped cubicles down the corridor, the noises are
a constant intrusion on his introspection and a drain on his slowly leaking
optimism.

'That Hope Dwindles'

''When you first come here, you are still hopeful,'' Mr. Houston said, ''but as
time passes and the years fall away, that hope dwindles more and more.''

The two men are among 28 on death row in Tennessee, and among 1,038 people on
death rows in 31 states, who are still hoping for some miracle as their numbers
grow, their appeals wind down, and the odds against them mount up.

There has been no execution in the United States since Steven T.  Judy, a
convicted murderer, was electrocuted in Michigan City, Ind., on March 9, 1981.
But within a year, a Justice Department official predicted recently, the country
will witness a spate of executions ''without parallel in this nation since the
Depression Era.'' Then, as many as three prisoners a week were put to death.

Neither Mr. Houston nor Mr. Adkins believes he will be among those executed,
carrying the hope common to virtually all condemned men that they will get a new
trial or a commutation or some other kind of last-minute relief.

Contrasting Pictures

In separate interviews inside the maximum security unit at the Tennessee State
Prison, the two men provided contrasting attitudes and styles and not a little
irony. Both are 37-year-old Army veterans, both had other run-ins with the law
and both had served time in prison before their current sentences.

Mr. Adkins is a tall, unkempt, pot-bellied, red-haired bootlegger and bartender
who grew up in Detroit. He is gregarious and his mischievous, crinkle-eyed grin
disguises a mean streak that has, by his own admission, led him to shoot a half
dozen people and stab at least two others, one fatally. He is on ''the row''
because he was convicted of shooting a man to death in order to prevent adverse
trial testimony in another case. That is a shooting Mr. Adkins denies.

Mr. Houston, scrubbed and shined, grew up in a small East Tennessee tobacco
town. He is a quiet and bookish black man, writing poetry and reading
philosophy. He was convicted of killing a service station employee in a robbery
in Knoxville more than four years ago.  He won't discuss his case. According to
the authorities, he is the inmate closest to an execution date in Tennessee, but
it may be a year and a half away depending on legal maneuvers.

Like the other death row inmates, for 23 out of 24 hours a day he is confined to
an eight-by-five-foot cell that contains a built-in steel bunk, sink, coverless
commode and such assorted personal items as a radio and a portable television.

Thoughts to Pass the Time

Perhaps like the others, he thinks about his life and his family, about where he
is and how he got there and what he can do to change things.

''Predominantly, I think about my case all day,'' he said, ''about when and if I
might overcome this situation. When you have no future to think of, you reflect
on your past and try to figure out what hand of fate brought you here.''

And, sometimes, he thinks of death. But he does not think of the condemned man's
last meal. ''I can't see that as an important thing for a man to consider,'' he
said.

''I've thought about all the details of an execution,'' he acknowleged, his eyes
fleeing from a wall to an opaque window and back down to a tabletop under which
his legs began to fidget.  ''Although I've never seen the chair here, I
certainly have thoughts of what it will be like.

'That Desire to Live'

''I've thought about the guards dragging me from my cell to the chamber, shaving
my head and strapping my arms and legs and hooking up the electrodes to me.''
His knees were scissoring.

''I've tried to think about the first jolt of electricity hitting my body. I've
wondered if I would feel it. They said it took three charges to kill that man in
Florida, and I've wondered why so much electricity is needed to kill a man. I
guess the human spirit has that desire to live. Surely he was unconscious after
the first jolt.'' His eyes puddled, but there were no tears.

''I think it will be horrible,'' he almost whispered.  Mr. Adkins, on the other
hand, insisted that he never thought about the electric chair.

'I Don't Worry About Dying'

''I honestly don't feel I'll be executed,'' he said, leaning on the elbows of
arms that identified him as ''Tennessee Rebel'' and bore the names of Christine,
and Dorothy, and Susie, among others, in blue ink. ''I realize the possibility
is there, but I don't worry about dying. If the state don't kill me, somebody on
the street will blow me away.''

Warming to a recitation of his history and an analysis of ''the life that was
handed to me,'' he said he had ''been shot and stabbed, beaten senseless and run
over by a car and left in a coma with a broken back, and a shattered leg.''

''Everything past that is borrowed time,'' he said.  But he added that if
someone was executed in Tennessee, ''I would ask them to put me on another
walk,'' which is what a cellblock is called in the prison. ''They got to come
right by my cell when they take a man to the chair and I don't think I could
stand to watch that,'' he said.

Both Opposed to Death Penalty

Both Mr. Adkins and Mr. Houston, naturally enough, are opposed to the death
penalty and to anyone who supports it. Mr. Adkins said he used to use one of the
two 10-minute telephone calls he is allowed each week to talk, collect, to an
aunt in Detroit. But in one of their conversations, he said, she allowed as how
she thought the death penalty was a good idea. ''So, I quit calling her,'' he
said with a grin.

''See, I believe in revenge,'' he said. ''There is a place in life for revenge.
I would crawl from here to Knoxville to get revenge. I could understand if they
said they don't like me so they was going to kill me, but not because a District
Attorney gives a lot of circumstantial evidence and says I may have killed a
man.''

Mr. Houston, who was convicted by an all-white jury, has a very different
argument against the death penalty.  ''Over all, society looks a people on death
row as being the worst of the worse,'' he said, ''but each year there are
thousands of killings in the country and only a little more than 1,000 people
have accumulated on death row in the past five years. Only a small percentage of
those tried for murder get to death row. You wonder what happened to the other
thousands who were convicted.

'It's All Pretty Arbitrary'

''Being on death row depends so much on class status, economic status, the
ability to get adequate representation, how seriously the prosecutor seeks the
death penalty, what kind of jury you get. It's all pretty arbitrary, really.''

Mr. Houston, the father of three children, said that, besides his case, he
thought a great deal about disappointing his parents, adding, ''Like all sons, I
wanted to succeed in life and give them something to feel proud about.''

He said that after high school he had to turn down two college scholarship
offers because he had got a girl pregnant and had to marry her. Then he was
drafted and completed a four-year hitch in the Army without any disciplinary
problems. He said it was in the Vietnam war and civil rights protests of the
late 1960's that he became angry at society and got into trouble with the law.

''I know I've wasted my youth, my life and I realize that I've missed my
children's lives,'' he added. ''One is 18, one is 16 and one is 12. And I've
been in prison for most of the past 11 years.''

'I Wish I Could Start All Over'

His eyes glistened. ''This is as far down as a man can go, to be condemned to
die. I wish I could start all over.'' Mr. Adkins displays no such remorse.  ''I
always thought I was lucky,'' he said, ''and when the verdict came, the first
thing I thought was that my luck finally ran out. I liked the life of a
bootlegger, the money and the silk shirts and the new cars and pretty women.
Women goes for bootleggers and dogs. I don't know why. And I like the cops being
mad at me because I've got things they won't ever have. That makes me smile.''

Mr. Adkins is the product of an alcoholic father who left the East Tennessee
mountains to work in Detroit's automobile factories and beat his son when he was
drunk. And when Mr. Adkins was free, he too consumed more than a case of beer a
day and got drunk and fought with baseball bats or pool cues or whatever else
was handy, including a gun. He said he had been arrested more than 30 times.

''I'm barred from 15 of the 20 beer joints in Johnson City,'' he boasted with a
smile, ''and I run two of the others. But I liked walking into a beer joint and
hearing the place shut up and people stare at me and whisper my name. I've got
an image to protect.''

Nevertheless, the seemingly endless days on death row bring him to
contemplations of ending it all.  ''You think of suicide,'' he said, the veneer
of toughness cracking slightly. ''I would, except that I can't stand the pain. I
would hang myself in my cell, except that I'm too scared to die. Sometimes I lay
on that bunk and think of the streets and I feel bad.''

Then the engaging grin returned. ''I'll get back out there. I know I will. It'll
just take a little time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Houston photo of Wayne Adkins

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRESSURE FOR TAX RISE INTENSIFIED

BYLINE: By KAREN W. ARENSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6


As the battle over the controversial tax bill intensified today, President
Reagan postponed a two-week California vacation, electing to remain in
Washington to press for passage.

White House aides said the President concluded this morning that his presence
here would underscore the Administration's full commitment to early
Congressional action on legislation he considers vital to his economic program
and to sustained recovery. The bill would raise some $98.5 billion in additional
tax revenues over the next three years.

The President's decision came on the heels of indications that conservative
Republicans and portions of the business community, both key groups among Ronald
Reagan's original supporters, were redoubling their own efforts to try to kill
the bill, and that the battle would be a tough one.

These groups appear to be leaving little room for negotiation, since it is not
individual portions of the bill they are opposing but the idea of any kind of
tax increases.

'Opposed to the Whole Bill'

''We are just opposed to the whole bill now,'' said Hilton Davis, vice president
for legislative affairs for the United States Chamber of Commerce, who said the
chamber had embarked upon a campaign of ''nonstop lobbying.''

''We think that the tax bill represents a broken promise, and is a very
significant retreat from the President's own economic program that will stifle
the recovery,'' he added.

This open split over the tax bill comes just one year after the President and
his supporters pushed through a far-reaching program of tax cuts, both for
individuals and for business. They hailed the tax cuts then as the triumph of
supply-side economics - of the theory that lower taxes will serve as an
incentive to spur more work and greater investment, and reinvigorate the
economy.

But soaring interest rates, unemployment figures that are running at a postwar
high and runaway budget deficits have taken their toll not only on the economy
but also on the President's program and on his party's political unity.

Despite pleas from other Republicans, a band of his faithful followers, led in
Congress by Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican of upstate New York, has
broken openly with the President and appears to be challenging both his program
and his authority.

''I am somewhat distressed to see Republicans leading the charge to undermine
the President,'' Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, said in a speech this
morning. He likened the situation to the Democratic opposition to President
Johnson that split that party during the Vietnam War.

The Senator again emphasized that the tax bill concentrated more on closing tax
loopholes and increasing compliance than on raising taxes. He noted that the
package left the third year of the personal tax cut in place.

But these arguments do not sway the bill's opponents. ''We disagree on what is
compliance and what are loopholes,'' said Mr. Davis of the Chamber of Commerce.
''Some of what they call loopholes are an absolute denial of the incentives they
enacted last year. And the withholding of interest and dividends - there are a
lot of lawabiding citizens who don't think that is fair. It will mean a lot of
people will be overwithheld, and it will be a tremendous burden on banks and
business in general.''

The bill's opponents even disagree with the President on whether this bill
constitutes the biggest tax increase in history. The President is reportedly
''angry'' that it is being portrayed this way, saying the Social Security tax
increases under President Carter and the Johnson surtax were larger.

The Social Security financing bill that was signed by President Carter in
December 1977 was expected to raise $227 billion in payroll tax revenues between
1979 and 1987, according to estimates by the Social Security Administration at
that time. The Vietnam War tax surcharge, of 7.5 percent in 1968 and 5 percent
in 1969, was expected to raise $11.6 billion.

From the perspective of the supply-siders, their efforts are aimed not at
destroying the President but at saving him. When 22 of them gathered at the
Capitol Wednesday evening to discuss their strategy in fighting the tax bill,
''the tone was that we want this guy to succeed,'' said one Congressional
participant at the meeting who declined to be named.

The Republican party is not the only group split over the bill. The business
community is also embroiled in debate. While the Chamber of Commerce has taken a
public stand against the bill, the chamber's chairman, Paul Thayer, who is also
chairman of the LTV Corporation, wrote to President Reagan this week saying that
he disagreed with that position and pledging his personal support.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICANS ARRIVE TO HELP GUARD ISRAELI LINES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 549 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, Aug. 7


American Jews and some non-Jews are arriving in Israel to take up M-16 rifles
and Uzi submachine guns and move into guard posts and other jobs left open by
Israelis serving in the Lebanon conflict.

The first contingent of 230 American volunteers settled in this weekend at a
makeshift camp on the Golan Heights, three miles from the Syrian frontier. The
Israeli military authorities refused to allow precise identification of the
camp.

About 100 to 200 more Americans are expected to arrive next weekend.  Some of
those who will be on guard duty at Israel's isolated frontier settlements said
they wished they could join the Israeli Army.

''When I came home from Vietnam, nobody cared,'' said Alan Forman of New York.
''Here, you're wanted, you're needed. You know you've helped Israel survive.''

Mr. Forman, 32 years old, said he served with the First Air Cavalry in Vietnam.

Most Are From New York Area

The volunteers, almost all from the New York area, include lawyers, teachers, a
medical student and what seemed to be a large number of young men looking for
some excitement. About 80 are women.  Not all are Jewish.

Paul Clines, 21, who described himself as an Irish Catholic from Queens,
accompanied a Jewish friend.  ''I just thought it was important to come to help
Israel,'' said the student at New York State College in Oswego, wearing a
neckerchief and dark glasses against the harsh sun.

The volunteers will replace Israeli military reservists from 20 Golan Heights
settlements called up for the battle against the Palestine Liberation
Organization. The Americans signed up during a recent two-week Israeli
recruiting drive in New York.

Aharon Davidi, a retired army colonel who organized the program, said some
volunteers would help with field work at agricultural settlements and others
would work at army installations repairing backpacks and other equipment.

Some Basic Training in Guns

But most will serve as guards on settlement perimeters, armed and wearing
military fatigues. ''They first will receive basic military training in the use
of the M-16 and Uzi submachine gun,'' Mr. Davidi said.

In their four to six weeks in Israel, the Americans will spend offduty hours at
the camp, sleeping in army tents jammed with 10 to 12 cots each, eating army
meals and getting occasional days off to leave this area - seized from Syria in
the 1967 Middle East war - for visits to other spots in Israel.

A few of the women, who said they were told in New York that they would be
staying in settlement homes, were dismayed by the rigors they faced.

''I brought skirt hangers and everything,'' one said, ''and now it looks like we
have to live out of suitcases.''

Paid $500 Toward Air Fare

Although their stay here is free, the volunteers had to pay $500 toward the air
fare.  ''People are making sacrifices,'' said Mr. Forman, who owns a health food
store in the Bronx. ''I took a chance leaving my shop with friends, but it was
worth it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY OF PROTESTS REPORTED IGNORED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 387 words

DATELINE: TOLEDO, Ohio, Aug. 7


The Central Intelligence Agency told President Johnson in 1967 that there was no
Communist-controlled or foreign-inspired link to the protests against the
Vietnam War but he refused to believe it, a historian says.

A 23-page unsigned C.I.A. report, recently declassified from ''top-secret -
sensitive'' status, was obtained from the Johnson Presidential library in
Austin, Tex., by Charles DeBenedetti of the University of Toledo.

The report, submitted to Johnson in November 1967 by Richard Helms, then
Director of Central Intelligence, stemmed in part from a march on the Pentagon a
month earlier, the historian said.

About 100,000 protesters took part in the demonstration to oppose United States
involvement in Vietnam.

References to Report

Mr. DeBenedetti, who specializes in the history of the antiwar movement, said
the report was mentioned by Congressional committees investigating
intelligence-gathering practices but was never made public before he obtained it
last September.

He said in a paper that the intelligence agency's information to Johnson was
colored by ''the agency's bureaucratic interest in aiding the Administration in
its aim of discrediting the antiwar opposition.''

Among the conclusions reached in the C.I.A. analysis was that while many antiwar
leaders had close Communist associations ''they do not appear to be under
Communist direction.''

''In any case,'' the analysis said, ''their purposes insofar as the war in
Vietnam is concerned coincide with the Communists'.'' Noting contacts between
antiwar leaders and the North Vietnamese Government in Hanoi, the report said
that ''Moscow exploits and may indeed influence'' peace groups through its front
organizations but that indications ''of covert or overt connections between
these U.S.  activists and foreign governments are limited.''

The analysts concluded, ''On the basis of what we now know, we see no
significant evidence that would prove Communist control or direction of the U.S.
peace movement or its leaders.''

The importance of the analysis, Mr. DeBenedetti said, is that Johnson ''ignored
it because it did not suit his political purpose, which was to establish foreign
control of the antiwar movement.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A DEFENSE BUDGET EXPERT WHO WANTS LESS OF IT

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, the Queens Democrat who heads the defense
subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee is something of an anomaly -
a chairman of an important military-affairs subcommittee who opposes much of
what the Pentagon wants. As such, Mr. Addabbo, chairman since 1979, has often
found himself at odds with his colleagues.

For instance, he regards the Administration's military spending plans for fiscal
1984 - reported last week to be in the neighborhood of $247 billion, about 11
percent bigger than the Pentagon budget now pending in Congress - as ''way over
the mark.'' But given the House's recently displayed reluctance to cut much out
of the defense authorization bill for fiscal 1983, he concedes that making deep
reductions will be difficult.

''Members of Congress always talk cut, cut, cut where the Pentagon is
concerned,'' he says. ''But in the end they always support spending. I know it
will be another uphill fight this year. But I hope they'll start hearing about,
and reacting to, the reductions in people programs and not regard military
spending as quite so sacrosanct.''

As his subcommittee winds up work on appropriations legislation for the new
fiscal year, Mr.  Addabbo, something of a dove in a nest of hawks, has his
sights set on such plump, controversial targets. In past years, he has fought
with varying success against the B-1 bomber, the neutron bomb, the Pershing
Missile and nerve gas.

He says he opposes those programs because he believes them to be overly
expensive, ineffective and a poor use of the nation's resources. (Mr. Addabbo
also voted for the nuclear freeze, arguing that ''It makes no sense to kill a
person ten times.'') ''My job is to make sure that the dollars supposed to be
spent on national defense are really spent for that purpose, and you don't fool
the American people,'' he said, adding, ''You can't fool our enemies, either.''

Cambodia Was a Turning Point

By and large, Mr. Addabbo is an old fashioned politician who has relied less on
oratorical skills than on backroom dealings, and the quiet application of his
acknowledged expertise on military matters.  He is, in fact, something of a
Washington rarity - a self-effacing public figure with few enemies. He has
labored in near anonymity for much of his 22-year Congressional career. Perhaps
his best known legislative victory came in 1973, when he sponsored the first
antiwar resolution ever to pass the House, one cutting off funds for the bombing
of Cambodia. It was all the more striking because Mr. Addabbo had at one point
been a strong supporter of United States' military involvement in Vietnam.

But he is apparently so little appreciated back home that state Democratic
leaders drawing up reapportionment plans a few weeks ago placed him in a
district with another Democratic incumbent, who subsequently withdrew to find
another district. ''In no other state in the union would they have taken the
chairman of the defense subcommittee and thrown him in a district with another
congressman,'' said Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, another Queens
Democrat.

New York legislators may believe that it was sheer happenstance that averted the
planned closings of a number of New York military installations, or brought
hundreds of millions of dollars in defense contracts to the state. His
colleagues believe differently.''Joe Addabbo enables us to bring home the
bacon,'' says Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, a freshman
member of the Senate Appropriations committee. (Mr. Addabbo claims to have had
little to do with the Navy's selection, reported last week, of the New Yorkbuilt
Grumman F-14 Tomcat as its principle fighter. But, he says, ''The Navy knows I
regard the F-14 as the best fighter they have.'')

While maintaining that he has declared war on waste and inefficiency, he also
believes that military spending should be used to strengthen the weaker sectors
of the economy. ''I strongly believe that national defense can be used in
helping different parts of the nation,'' he said. ''There's no reason that the
defense industry has to be located in the South and West.''

Along with other Northern members of Congress, Mr. Addabbo has long sought to
modify regulations that direct the Defense Department to accept the lowest bids,
a measure he maintains was enacted primarily to benefit the nonunion South. An
amendment attached to the 1983 military authorization bill provides that bids
originating in areas of high unemployment could be up to 6 percent higher than
the lowest bids.

Sometimes the bacon slips away, however. Mr. Addabbo recently fought
unsuccessfully to have the $500 million refitting of the battleship Iowa
assigned to the old Brooklyn Navy Yard, where the ship had been built. But last
month the Navy awarded the contract to Gulf Coast shipyards, a decision Mr.
Addabbo attributed to the clout of Democratic Senators Russell B. Long of
Louisiana, John C. Stennis of Mississippi and other such heavyweights - and
long-time Pentagon boosters - from the Deep South. That decision, he says,
''shows a total disregard for the welfare of cities.''

The following morning, Mr. Addabbo convened his subcommittee and removed $546
million from the Navy's shipbuilding program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Grumman's F-14 Tomcat fighter plane photo of
Rep. Joseph P. Addabbo

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SOLDIER'S REWARD IN COLLEGE FUNDS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 455 words


To the Editor:

''College: New Way to Pay,'' John V. Lindsay's July 27 Op-Ed article, was a
thought-provoking look at possible future answers to the present problems of
financing a higher education. And much has been written of late about the
growing ''education gap'' in America - that soon only the rich or super-rich
will have the wherewithal to send their children to college.§till, in the search
for college funds an important and highly viable alternative has been
overlooked, an alternative that is immediately available to high-school
graduates.

It is called the Army College Fund, and it carries on in the great tradition of
the Army, which has historically provided for the education and self-improvement
of its soldiers.

The Army College Fund is a program that offers high-school graduates over
$15,000 for their college education in return for only two years of active duty
in the Army. A three-year enlistment will earn an individual over $20,000 for
college.

These amounts are in addition to the normal benefits that accrue with service in
the Army, bringing the total cash value of an Army enlistment to over $36,000
for two years and to over $55,000 for three years. It should be noted that the
Army is the only service that offers a two-year enlistment and these impressive
educational incentives.

Additionally, many soldiers currently on active duty are pursuing associate
baccalaureate and advanced degrees through the Army Tuition Assistance Program
(T.A.P.). The Army pays 75 to 90 percent of their tuition.

The Army College Fund is not a program that is just on the drawing board: it has
been in effect since last October. That it has not received the publicity or
recognition it deserves is perhaps due to the many negative factors with which
the Army has been associated by our society (the draft, Vietnam, drug problems,
racism, etc.).

But the time is here for society to realize that the Army can provide an
important step in the maturation and development of America's youth and
concurrently provide good training in many civilian-equivalent skills.

And it can provide young people with a very substantial amount of money for
their higher education.  Mr. Lindsay asks that we ''enable young men and women
to invest in themselves.'' The Army offers a great opportunity for them to do
just that.  (Capt.) WILLIAM F. REYNOLDS Bronx, July 28, 1982 The writer is with
the Army Recruiting Command.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMORY AND ATTACHMENT

BYLINE: By ALICIA OSTRIKER; Alicia Ostriker teaches at Rutgers. Her most recent
book of poems is ''A Woman Under the Surface.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1338 words


OUR GROUND TIME HERE WILL BE BRIEF New and Selected Poems.  By Maxine Kumin.
224 pp. New York: The Viking Press. Cloth, $16.95.  Penguin Books. Paper, $7.95.

WHY CAN'T WE LIVE TOGETHER LIKE CIVILIZED HUMAN BEINGS?  Stories.  By Maxine
Kumin.  175 pp. New York: The Viking Press. $12.95.

WHICH of her poetic peers does Maxine Kumin resemble? Unlike Sylvia Plath and
Anne Sexton, she keeps her demons bridled. Unlike Elizabeth Bishop or May
Swenson, she is bawdily personal. Like Adrienne Rich, she makes us pay
respectful attention to images of strong female identity, yet she avoids
ideology. And is there another poet who finds or invents such a sweet male alter
ego?

Henry Manley, the country neighbor who is one of several recurring figures in
''Our Ground Time Here Will Be Brief,'' could be the most endearing animus in
the business. ''Last fall he dug a hole and moved his privy / and a year ago in
April reamed his well out,'' though in his dotage. Having had a phone installed,
he tramps two New England miles, ''shy as a girl,'' to ask the poet if she'd be
so kind as to call him one day. Stricken with aphasia, Manley is ''as loose in
his skin as a puppy'' and frightened after dark. But at dawn he gets up,
grateful once more for how coffee smells. Sits stiff at the bruised porcelain
table saying them over, able to with only the slightest catch.  Coffee. Coffee
cup. Watch.

Typical of Maxine Kumin's art are the sensory weight, the play of alliteration
and assonance sliding into the closing couplets, the perfectly expressive
halting and crystallizing rhythms. In another poem Henry breaks his hip, is
taken in by neighbors, loves his new role of storytelling sage. When he goes on
crutches to see his old, collapsing house, presently occupied by porcupines, he
says, ''You can't look back.''

Mirroring his creator, Henry Manley is a supervisor, a capable countryperson of
multiple skills. He will die before the poet does, and he is one of her many
means of studying mortality. He is also what she is not, or can be only through
him: an isole. He is alone, not looking back. For her, not looking back would be
intolerable.

''Our Ground Time Here Will Be Brief'' contains selections from Maxine Kumin's
first six volumes as well as 29 new poems, all but one of them gems; the book
amounts to 20 years' solid work. Her Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Up Country'' comes
just about halfway, both in chronology and in power; rather like Frost's
imagined wanderer to the edge of doom, she is not changed, only more sure - so
that her poems become increasingly unforgettable, indispensable. What drives her
throughout is attachment. If she had her way, no loved (or hated) human or
animal would die unremembered. Thus she writes not only the usual kinfolk poems
but ''Sperm,'' a tragicomic celebration of 17 look-alike cousins.  Since dreams
reinforce memory and reveal the true shape of connection, in ''The Incest
Dream'' a sorrowing hangman brings her beloved dying brother's severed penis,
''pressed as faithfully / as a wild flower'' for the poet to keep ''and lie back
down in my lucky shame.'' When the brother has died, ''Retrospect in the
Kitchen'' tells of the 40 pounds of plums she takes from his tree and carries
3,000 miles to preserve. The making of preserves is a recurring image in these
poems and a beautiful metaphor for what the poet wants to do with the whole
world. Other tricks also work. People fade, but animals ''retrieve'' them:
Ponies begging for apples equal two elderly aunts; a boy once loved, buried at
sea in World War II, reappears in a yearling's gallop. To split wood is to
release the soul of the beech and recall the soul of the lost friend, Anne
Sexton.

Children, especially daughters, keep cropping up, growing as they go, from Mrs.
Kumin's earliest work to her most recent. No poet writes more richly and more
subtly of mother-daughter relations. Or, for that matter, of animal-human
relations, since her attachment and attention extend to the forms and gestures,
the detailed lives and deaths of mice, turtles, frogs, goats, beavers, cows and
calves, sheep and lambs, and - most powerfully - horses. Creatures surround her;
she sees and touches them; she foresees their doom. At times - see
''Woodchucks'' or ''How It Goes On'' - she is their doom's guilty agent. At
times - see ''Thinking of Death and Dogfood'' or ''A Mortal Day of No
Surprises'' - she contemplates the uses of horseflesh and her own potential to
sweeten a crop, and wishes her mare and herself good endings. I believe that
Thoreau would commend her honesty, the precision of her language and her
occasional moral allegory.

Maxine Kumin has been Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress, and the
one ''occasional'' poem arising from her tenure is a somewhat uncomfortable
meditation on literature and history. Like the single wrong bead in a Hopi
necklace, the comparative shapelessness of this poem accents the compact
rightness of the rest. My one other complaint about this volume is that the
selections from earlier books are in reverse chronological order.  What
prankster decided to run the movie backward?

BESIDES the poetry by which she is best known, Mrs. Kumin writes charming
children's books and good readable fiction. Her four novels, thick with human
physicality and human decency, like her poems tend to concentrate on sex and
love. This is also the case in her first collection of stories, ''Why Can't We
Live Together Like Civilized Human Beings?''

The narrator of the title story, a documentary film maker who meets and loves a
colleague at a film festival behind the Iron Curtain, answers the title's
question, to her own unhappy satisfaction, by believing ''in the infinite
depravity of man.'' Another answer is that love sustains civilized individuals
only intermittently. Almost all of Mrs. Kumin's protagonists are reasonable
people in middle life, enduring situations they do not quite choose. A woman's
prim and inhibited mother is dying, while her bright young daughter (who plays a
game called ''abortion'') grows breasts and gleefully approaches menstruation. A
shy professor of mycology has a two-day romance with a dancer. A girl who grew
up in the lower middle class has a love affair during a visit to a friend who
grew up rich and is now living in Vermont, joyously married and a veteran of
noble causes, but who is dying of cancer. Another woman meets and is humiliated
by a man who was her adolescent necking partner. A couple whose son went down in
a helicopter in Vietnam drives 370 miles to Boston to see his widow. On a Boston
street corner the dead boy's father, Alan, vanishes, and his wife suffers a
half-crazed night. In the morning she informs the police that he is a missing
person and begins her drive home in a state of strange euphoria: ''She has
survived her ordeal ... she has coped. She has conquered the subway.  ... She
reviews the extreme and contradictory emotions the sight of Alan's dead,
well-known body will arouse in her.''

High violence and high passion take place offstage in these stories, though
never far offstage. Maxine Kumin's writing emanates from the bodies of her
characters, delivering their senses and sense together as a poet's writing
should, and invites us to recognize our destinies in theirs.

The Envelope By Maxine Kumin

It is true, Martin Heidegger, as you have written, I fear to cease, even knowing
that at the hour of my death my daughters will absorb me, even knowing they will
carry me about forever inside them, an arrested fetus, even as I carry the ghost
of my mother under my navel, a nervy little androgynous person, a miracle folded
in lotus position.

Like those old pear-shaped Russian dolls that open at the middle to reveal
another and another, down to the pea-sized, irreducible minim, may we carry our
mothers forth in our bellies.  May we, borne onward by our daughters, ride in
the Envelope of Almost-Infinity, that chain letter good for the next twenty-five
thousand days of their lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

5 ASIAN NATIONS CALL ON VIETNAMESE TO QUIT CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, THAILAND, Aug. 8


The Foreign Ministers of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and
Thailand issued a statement at the end of a special meeting on Vietnam last
night calling for the total withdrawal of Vietnamese soldiers from Cambodia and
free Cambodian elections under international supervision.

The ministers said that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which
consists of their five countries, would lobby for the continued seating next
month of Cambodia's ousted Pol Pot Government in the United Nations General
Assembly, and that they hoped to see Prince Norodom Sihanouk admitted to the
next top-level meeting of the nations professing nonalignment, scheduled for
next month in Baghdad, Iraq.

Prince Sihanouk, Cambodia's former chief of state, was named president in June
of a coalition government in exile that includes the Pol Pot group. The exile
government was officially formed last month at a site on the Thai-Cambodian
border.

The five Foreign Ministers referred several times to ''Prince Sihanouk's
government,'' a characterization of the coalition that its backers have tried to
promote. Before the agreement by Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann, who served as
Prime Minister under the Prince, to join political forces with the Pol Pot
group, that group's support in the United Nations was reported to be ebbing.

Sihanouk Camps Attract Refugees

An American diplomat said that despite fears that the terms of the coalition's
organization favored the Pol Pot group, many Cambodian refugees in the area
along the Thai-Cambodian border had been flocking to border camps loyal to
Prince Sihanouk.

Several Southeast Asian diplomats have said in recent weeks that the five-nation
group wants to have Prince Sihanouk lead a truly neutral Cambodia, and that the
Prince would win an election if the Cambodians were allowed a free vote.

In their one-page statement the five Foreign Ministers did not mention the
recent tour of Southeast Asian capitals by Vietnam's foreign minister, Nguyen Co
Thach. They appeared to agree, however, that Mr. Thach's visits last month to
Singapore, Burma, Malaysia and Thailand had been useful if unpersuasive.

The Vietnamese ''diplomatic offensive'' was described by Malaysia's Foreign
Minister, Mohammed Ghazali bin Shafie, who said he spoke for all countries of
the association, as having had three aims. First, he said, Mr. Thach has tried
to convince Southeast Asia that China is a threat to Vietnam through Cambodia.
Mr. Thach also tried to ''frustrate'' the Southeast Asian association's unified
strategy, Mr. Ghazali said, and to gain ''sympathy'' among the Western
democracies, all of which have asked that Vietnamese soldiers leave Cambodia.

The Malaysian minister said he thought Vietnam was trying to attract support by
maintaining that its 1978 invasion had saved Cambodia from the genocide of Pol
Pot's Communist regime.

Sihanouk Seeking Support

Prince Sihanouk is reported to be headed for Europe to rally support for the
exile coalition. Mr. Son Sann is already in Europe and is said to be seeking
arms and other support for his faction.  The Pol Pot group within the coalition
is officially led by Khieu Samphan.

Despite the ministers' statement that Vietnam had proposed nothing new, and
despite the dismissal of Mr. Thach as an ''itinerant salesman for communism'' by
Carlos P. Romulo, the Philippine Foreign Minister, both Thailand and Malaysia
are willing to speak with Vietnam again. Sithi Sawetsila, Thailand's Foreign
Minister, accepted an invitation to Hanoi during Mr. Thach's talks with him here
late last month.

Mr. Thach also plans to visit the Philippines and Indonesia soon.  The Foreign
Minister of Indonesia, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, said last night that he hoped the
Vietnamese would come up with something better than the proposal for Cambodia
they offered last month.

Vietnam, Laos and the Vietnamese-controlled regime in Cambodia proposed at a
meeting in Ho Chi Minh City in July that if Thailand abandoned its support for
the Pol Pot forces along the Thai-Cambodian border and if China pledged not to
attack Vietnam, Hanoi would remove its troops from Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Injured Vietnam Children To Get $13.5 Million

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 180 words


By The Associated Press
The Federal Government and the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation have agreed to pay
$13.5 million to 45 Vietnamese orphans now living with American families. The
children suffered brain damage or other injuries in a plane accident in 1975
when they were being evacuated from Vietnam.

The settlement, reached last week, must be approved by the Justice Department
and a Federal District Court.

National news is on pages

A8-13, B5, B10 and D8.
The agreement leaves unresolved nearly 100 lawsuits filed for young crash
survivors living outside the United States.

In the accident, a lock system failed and the doors flew off a Air Force C-5
cargo plane carrying 226 orphans cargo plane carrying 226 orphans at 23,000
feet, and there were insufficient oxygen masks aboard. The plane crash-landed,
and 75 orphans died.

Most of the survivors are now 7 or 8 years old, living with the families who had
agreed to adopt them before the crash. Each child will receive $150,000 after
legal fees are paid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BIG UNDECIDED VOTE PUZZLES DEMOCRATS IN GEORGIA

BYLINE: By REGINALD STUART, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Aug. 8


So many candidates with impressive credentials are on the ballot in the Georgia
gubernatorial primaries Tuesday that the Democratic contenders are already
talking about an Aug. 31 runoff election.

Polls indicate that Representative Bo Ginn, a southeast Georgian serving his
fifth term in the House, is the front-runner in the Democratic race. Other
candidates include a former judge, a Carter Administration official and a former
mayor of Macon.

The Republican field is smaller; the choice is between a State Senator and a
former Congressman.

Undecided Vote Said to Be High

The undecided vote, which, pollsters say, amounts to as much as 20 percent of
the eligible voters, is one reason the Democratic race is considered open. The
same factor has Republicans recalling their upset, in 1980, of Herman Talmadge,
a member of a family that had dominated Georgia politics for decades. Mr.
Talmadge was forced into a runoff, which he won narrowly, then was defeated in
the general election.

With Gov. George Busbee, the two-term Democratic incumbent, ineligible to seek
another term and opting not to endorse any of the contenders, the door was left
open for a free-for-all in a year when there were few burning issues.

Mr. Ginn, who is 48 years old, has a campaign fund of nearly $1 million. His
strong showings in the polls have already led the other candidates to
acknowledge that they are battling for a place in the expected runoff.

His opponents are Jack Watson, 43, who was President Carter's chief of staff;
Norman Underwood, 41, a former judge on the State Court of Appeals and executive
secretary to Governor Busbee; Joe Frank Harris, 46, an 18-year veteran of the
Georgia House and Appropriations Committee chairman since 1975; Billy Lovett,
36, an activist member of the Georgia Public Service Commission, and Buckner
Melton, 58, a lawyer who was Macon's City Attorney and later its Mayor.

Ginn May Have Substantial Lead

A poll in the Democratic race was taken in late July for Mr.  Underwood, who in
the winter was considered the man to beat, but has been slipping. It showed Mr.
Ginn getting 33 percent of the vote; Mr. Underwood, 20 percent; Mr. Harris, 10
percent; Mr. Watson, 10 percent; Mr. Lovett, 7 percent, and Mr. Melton, 1
percent.

Yet many candidates and political analysts say Mr. Melton may be the best of the
lot.  ''The size of the undecided vote is an incredible thing,'' Mr.  Melton
said in an interview after one of the more than 100 candidate forums that the
two Republican and six Democratic candidates have taken part in. ''But you've
got some reasonably attractive candidates,'' he went on, ''and you haven't had a
high-profile kind of candidate who is attracting a lot of opposition or support
as in the Talmadge contest.''

The pattern of endorsements is diverse. Jimmy Carter has endorsed Mr. Watson and
staged a fund-raising dinner for him. Griffin Bell, Attorney General in the
Carter Administration, has come out in favor of Mr. Ginn. Mayor Andrew Young of
Atlanta, the United States delegate to the United Nations in the Carter
Administration, taking the same position as Governor Busbee, has endorsed no
one. Richard E. Raymer, president of the Atlanta school board, has endorsed Mr.
Harris, the most conservative contender, who today won the support of Lester
Maddox, the former Governor.

In the Republican race, Bob Bell, 53, an Atlanta-area State Senator who has
served 14 years in the Legislature, is competing for his party's nomination
against Ben B. Blackburn, 55, who served in Congress from 1967 to 1974.

Mr. Bell has won the approval of educators by championing raises for teachers
but has aroused the ire of organized labor with bills designed to control labor
costs. Mr. Blackburn is highly conservative. His opposition to Federal financing
of many domestic programs dates from the Johnson Administration. He was an avid
supporter of American involvement in the Vietnam War and opposed the Voting
Rights Act of 1965, which banned state voting laws that discriminated against
minorities.

The winner of the Republican primary, the candidates agreed, will be banking on
a replay of the surprise Republican victory in the 1980 Senate race. The air of
corruption or betrayal in office that led to Mr. Talmadge's downfall is not
present in the gubernatorial contest, the Republicans concede.

Mr. Talmadge, elected to the Senate in 1956, was seeking reelection in the face
of formal Senate action denouncing him for improper conduct in office. He had
admitted that he never withdrew cash from his own checking account but relied on
small gifts of spending money from constituents.

---- Redistricting Plan Approved

ATLANTA, Aug. 8 (AP) - The Georgia Legislature today approved a congressional
redistricting plan that increased the black voting population to 65.02 percent
in the Fifth District and left it at 12.9 percent in the Fourth District.

In a 1981 redistricting plan, black voting strength was 57.28 percent in the
Fifth District and 21.19 percent in the Fourth.  A three-judge Federal panel in
Washington, D.C., ordered the two districts redrawn earlier this summer after
upholding a Department of Justice ruling that the boundaries as drawn in the
1981 plan tended to dilute black voting strength in the city.

The proposed change will be delivered to a Federal court in Washington in time
to meet the Wednesday deadline set by the court.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gov. George Busbee

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
Old War, Old Habits

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 182 words


Every so often a news report rereminds us that sizable communities Vietnam War
refugees now in America brought with them customs that war with American law.

In 1980 Southeast Asian refugees were reported poaching and eating squirrels,
ducks and dogs in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park. With their old world hunting
and trapping skills, they were attempting to carry on the way of life they had
known, in a place they did not know.

In 1981, a similar problem confounded wildlife authorities in Utah. Vietnamese,
Cambodian, and Laotian refugees were poaching deer, porcupines, skunks, doves,
woodpeckers, robins, baby birds, duck eggs and fish. Officials translated state
game laws into the refugee languages and even put on slide shows, to no avail.

Now comes news from Seattle that Laotian Hmong refugees have been growing opium
poppies in their vegetable gardens. Someone asked the police to identify the
bright red flowers. Seattle police found more than 4000 Papaver somniferum.

Vietnam remains with us, in odd and unpredicted ways.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 10, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA OPENS ITS DOORS TO SOUTHEAST ASIAN REFUGEES

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words

DATELINE: KUNMING, China


Vivid red flame trees blossom among the teak and eucalyptus in the valley of
Ganba, tucked 2,700 feet high in the rugged green mountains of southern Yunnan
Province.

The isolated valley, situated 45 miles north of China's border with Vietnam and
Laos, has also sprouted settlements of Vietnamese refugees who have been put to
work growing and cutting sugar cane for a refinery on the sprawling Ganzhuang
state farm.

The refugees, often homesick or restless, are among 265,000 Indochinese
resettled by China, usually in state-run farm and fishing communities. China
ranks only behind the United States among countries that opened their doors to
refugees from Indochina. The United States has resettled more than half a
million such refugees.

China has accepted refugees, even as other Asian countries keep turning them
away. There are now 105,000 in Guangdong, 100,000 in Guangxi, 40,000 in Yunnan
and 20,000 in Fujian Province.

85% Are of Chinese Descent

Jacques Mouchet, the Peking-based representative of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, estimates that 85 percent of these are of ethnic
Chinese descent, with the rest being Vietnamese and various Southeast Asian
minorities.

The refugees flooded overland into China, starting four years ago, after most
were expelled from Vietnam because they were of Chinese descent. Instead of
placing them in refugee camps, China tried to disperse them to state farms.

During a visit to Peking last September, Poul Hartling, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, praised China's response as ''unique in Asia.''

But at least some want to move on, ostensibly to join relatives more comfortably
settled in the West, but also because they dislike the bleak rural life,
ideological constraints and spartan conditions in China.

5,000 Have Asked to Leave China

Hundreds of refugees tried sneaking through Canton into Hong Kong and Macao as
illegal immigrants, until the authorities there started repatriating them back
to China. They are no longer considered refugees once they have lived in China
for six months.

At least 5,000 have asked about joining relatives in the West.  About 700 have
been allowed to leave China to do so. Reunions are permitted only for immediate
family members.

The Ganzhuang state farm, which was set up as a home for returning overseas
Chinese, previously absorbed 1,500 ethnic Chinese who were expelled from
Indonesia in 1968. The farm now has another 1,248 refugees from Indochina.

''It happened so suddenly that we were not prepared,'' recalled Li Mugui, the
state farm's party secretary. ''A directive from the Government came quickly
down to us to take the refugees. They came here with nothing at all. We issued
them farm tools and even their bowls and chopsticks.''

Mr. Li said that many of the refugees were farmers who knew how to grow sugar
cane. ''If they don't know, we teach them and then they have to do it,'' he
added.

Monthly Wage of $32

In one such hamlet of small row houses, 287 of the refugees now live while they
work the adjacent canefields.  Hu Yingming, the state farm's deputy director,
reported that they drew a monthly wage of about $32, including bonuses and
subsidies. This would be a good farm wage in China, though less than some
refugees would have earned back in Vietnam.

Ling Wenxing, the deputy leader of a production team, used to own a small
coffeehouse in Vietnam before he was hustled onto a train with his wife and two
children and expelled across the border. A third child has since been born in
China.

''All we could bring with us was the clothes on our backs and our children,''
recalled Mr. Ling, sitting on a bench in his small tworoom home. ''It was very
sad. Everything we brought along was taken away by the Vietnamese security men
at the border.''

His new village includes some farmers, but most, like Mr. Ling, were urban
Vietnamese, including factory workers from Hanoi. Two ethnic Chinese from Ho Chi
Minh City were recently transferred to another production team.

Mr. Ling, who is 42 years old, declared that he was now eating better than he
had back in Vietnam. But, he said, his Vietnamese wife was still homesick and he
implied that others were unhappy as well.

'Lots of Problems'

''Some have brothers or sisters or parents in foreign countries like America or
England and would like to be reunited with them,'' Mr. Ling said. ''Even I have
applied to move out to England, because my sister-in-law and aunt live there.''
He produced a worn letter with a London postmark.

''If conditions permit, we will move out,'' Mr. Ling told two reporters as
Chinese officials listened to the conversation.  ''Otherwise, we will stay
here.''

''We have had to admit that we met lots of problems absorbing them,'' Li Mugui,
the party secretary, acknowledged. ''But the office for overseas Chinese affairs
allocated about a million yuan to this farm for production subsidies and refugee
assistance.'' One million yuan is slightly more than $500,000 at the current
exchange rate.

Mr. Li said that the farm offered school classes, even for some adults,
''because they lost their education back home.'' Material in Vietnamese was
provided for political study sessions. There were also classes in standard
Chinese, because the refugees speak only Vietnamese or Cantonese.

The local hospital director, Li @Huaxian, complained that the refugees balked at
the Government's strict birth control program.  ''They don't like abortions at
all,'' Mr. Li said. ''They want to produce a child in China as a souvenir.''

During China's brief but fierce border war with Vietnam in early 1979, 50
refugees on the farm volunteered to join the Chinese armed forces, and one has
remained in the army, Li Mugui said. Mr. Ling said he joined the army as an
interpreter during the border war.

The refugees at Ganba learned of the plight of the Vietnamese boat people from
Vietnamese-language broadcasts of the British Broadcasting Corporation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vietnamese refugees

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 10, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 488 words


CROWD STONES THE AMERICAN EMBASSY IN SYRIA

DAMASCUS, Syria, Aug. 9 (AP) - Several hundred people protesting the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon entered the United States Embassy grounds today and pelted
the building with stones before staging other demonstrations at the Saudi
Arabian and Jordanian Embassies.

The official Syrian press agency said thousands of people attended the protest
organized by the Palestinian Trade Federation. Witnesses estimated the crowd
that attacked the United States Embassy at 300 to 400 people.

The demonstrators marched first to the American Embassy with a petition against
''U.S. support for Israel in its invasion of Lebanon and the Arab defeatism in
confronting this imperialist Zionist invasion,'' diplomats said.

Witnesses said a United States diplomat agreed to accept the petition. He
retreated after at least one demonstrator tried to hit him.

The press agency said the petition called on President Reagan ''to halt the
Israeli slaughter of Palestinian and Lebanese people in Lebanon'' and appealed
to the American people ''to raise their voice against the slaughter, just as
they did during the war in Vietnam.''

(The demonstrators tore down an American flag atop the building and replaced it
with a Palestinian flag, United Press International reported.)

An American diplomat said Syrian security police who chased the protesters away
with riot sticks ''did not use much force.'' The demonstrators later gathered in
front of the Saudi Embassy 300 yards away and chanted anti-Saudi slogans and
threw stones at the building until the police chased them away.

They then entered the Jordanian Embassy and witnesses said they destroyed a
Jordanian flag and smashed furniture and windows for 10 minutes before police
reinforcements threw them out.

----

Report From Washington

WASHINGTON, Aug. 9 (AP) - The State Department deputy spokesman, Alan Romberg,
said of the demonstration: ''There was an unruly demonstration between 10:30 and
11:30 this morning, Damascus time, of several hundred Palestinians supposedly
representing trade unions.  Some windows were broken, but there were no injuries
to personnel so far as we know.''

----

Jordanians Protest

AMMAN, Jordan, Aug. 9 (AP) - In an official announcement issued here, the
Jordanian Government said it had summoned the Syrian charge d'affaires and
delivered a strongly worded protest against the incident at the Jordanian
Embassy in Damascus.

Meanwhile, leaders of Christian churches in Jordan appealed to the United States
and other nations ''to intervene effectively to end Israeli aggression in
Lebanon.''

The appeal, signed by the heads of the Anglican, Armenian, Catholic and Greek
Orthodox Churches in Jordan, protested ''Arab and international silence in
connection with the extermination war waged by Israel against both the Lebanese
and Palestinian people through the use of various U.S.-made weapons.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 10, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POVERTY: MOTHERHOOD HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH IT

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


To the Editor:

The latest version of blame the victim appears in Robert Curvin's ''Poverty, by
Choice'' (Editorial Notebook, July 27), which claims that young women,
especially black women, ''choose'' poverty by having children out of wedlock.

he fact of the matter is that these young mothers are generally poor before they
become pregnant, and the prospects for their life are that most will remain poor
with or without children, given the 50 percent unemployment rate for black
teen-agers and the low-paying, dead-end jobs a majority of them will eventually
obtain.

Mr. Curvin discovered that much of the welfare population consists of
female-headed families. Perhaps he is unaware that in almost half the states the
major welfare program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, provides
benefits only to single-parent families. In the other states, benefits to
two-parent families are limited to those with the father unemployed.

What this means is that in a poor family it is sound economic policy for the
father to live separately from the mother. Once again Mr. Curvin has it
topsy-turvy - it is the welfare system that mandates single-parent families
because in most cases benefits are paid only to such families.

If birth out of wedlock influenced poverty rates, one would expect a sharp rise
in poverty among blacks between 1970 and 1979, for Mr.  Curvin's figures show
that in 1970, 38 percent of all black babies were born out of wedlock, but by
1979 it was 55 percent, an increase of 47 percent. However, as The Times
reported (also on July 27), the percentage of the black population in poverty in
1979 is 2.5 percent lower than it was in 1970. From 1966 to 1969, the percentage
of blacks with income below the poverty level dropped almost 25 percent. This
sharp decrease can hardly have any relationship to motherhood.  Rather, it
resulted primarily from the economic boom created by the Vietnam war and
secondarily from an increase in transfer payments to the poor during the War on
Poverty.

What ultimately gives people the ''choice'' to end poverty is the availability
of jobs at adequate pay levels. Even Mr. Curvin recognizes this obvious fact in
his closing paragraph, but in a wishful manner. For the economy simply fails to
produce the jobs needed.

The United States has 10 million officially unemployed, and realistically 13 to
15 million, taking into account discouraged and unemployed workers. Whereas 15
years ago unemployment over 3 percent was considered unacceptable, today a rate
twice that high seems utopian in the short run.

Should all the welfare mothers go to work tomorrow, the unemployment rate and
the poverty rate would barely be changed if the total jobs in the economy
remained static; a different group would be working, and a different group would
be unemployed.

For those who wish to avoid the unpleasant facts about the faltering economy and
its relation to poverty, the old saw that poverty results from sexual immorality
provides convenient blinders.  But many who are willing to face the economic
realities see the causes of poverty in an undemocratic economic system dominated
by short-term concern for profits.

Currently, the almost universal answer of business to lowered profits is to
replace American workers with machines or to export their jobs to countries
where workers are paid wages that leave them in poverty while they are working
full time.

Poverty has persisted despite the plenty our country has produced over the years
and is once more on the rise. Anyone thinking seriously about rationalizing our
economic and political system or about ending poverty must address issues of
fundamental change.  Blaming the victims of the economic system will not make
poverty disappear.  HERBERT SEMMEL Professor of Law Antioch School of Law
Washington, July 28, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE VOTES TO LIMIT CUBAN INFLUENCE

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


The Senate voted today to prevent by any means, ''including the use of arms,''
the extension of Cuban influence in the Western Hemisphere.

The action, which had the support of the Reagan Administration, came as an
amendment to a $9 billion supplemental appropriation bill. Later, the Senate
voted that its approval of the amendment did not constitute its approval of a
long-term military involvement. The War Powers Act requires Senate approval of
such involvement.

The amendment, offered by Senator Steven D. Symms, Republican of Idaho, affirmed
the Monroe Doctrine and pledged ''to prevent in Cuba the creation or use of an
externally supported military capability endangering the security of the United
States.''

''That is the only language the Communists know,'' said Senator Strom Thurmond,
Republican of South Carolina and a supporter of the amendment. ''It is the only
language the Soviets know, and it seems to me we ought to take a firm stand
here, not equivocate, not offer some weaker resolution which does not carry any
strength to it and any firmness.''

The Senate Tuesday evening refused to remove $355 million for President Reagan's
Caribbean basin initiative, which is designed in part to counter Cuban-sponsored
leftist movements by helping governments in Latin America and the Caribbean
economically.

Percy Amendment Is Rejected

The Senate refused, by a vote of 52 to 47, to accept an amendment offered by
Senator Charles H. Percy, the Illinois Republican who heads the Foreign
Relations Committee, that did not include the words ''the use of arms.''

The action in the Senate came a day after the House voted 250 to 134 to
authorize a new United States radio station, known as Radio Marti, for
broadcasts to Cuba.

The Symms amendment, which the Senate approved by 68 to 28, is not included in
the House version of the supplemental appropriation bill and thus must survive a
House-Senate conference if it is to be included in the final version. Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, received the Senate's consent
early this evening to change his vote, which had been for the Symms amendment,
to a vote against it.

The amendment also pledges the United States to work with the Organization of
American States and with ''freedom-loving Cubans'' to support self-determination
for Cuba.

The Symms amendment was intended to reaffirm a 1962 law authorizing the
President to use force against Cuban subversive activities and to prevent the
use of Cuba as a base for Soviet offensive weapons.  The Senate tabled the
proposal when Mr. Symms made it in early spring.

'Caribbean Tonkin Gulf' Feared

Critics of the amendment, who were defeated on two bids to sidetrack it or
weaken its language, described the amendment as a ''Caribbean Tonkin Gulf,'' a
reference to the 1964 measure that formed the legal basis for the conduct of the
Vietnam conflict.

''We're all a lot of weak-kneed folks around here, talking in an election year
about how tough we are,'' Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware,
said.

Mr. Biden suggested mockingly that supporters of the amendment direct it at the
Soviet Union. ''We want to get tough?'' he asked.  ''Let's get tough with the
big guys.''

The debate was marked by strident remarks on both sides, with supporters of the
amendment calling for a strenuous response to the ''Marxist Castro regime in
Cuba'' and with opponents voicing the fear that the amendment would provide a
''blank check'' for military action.

''Would anyone want to give a blank check to the President - any President?''
asked Mr. Percy, who expressed concern that the Symms amendment would jeopardize
the prerogatives given to Congress a decade ago by the War Powers Act.

Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, dismissed charges that the
amendment was inflammatory. ''This does not rattle any saber,'' he said. ''It
has America acting like America again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT A POLISH ACCENT DOES TO FOR YOU IN RUSSIA

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 433 words


To the Editor:

The impending expulsion of Andrew Nagorski, Moscow correspondent for Newsweek
(news story Aug. 3), brings to mind my own problems on account of a Polish
accent while in Moscow as an IREX Foreign Language Exchange Scholar in 1971 (not
long after the 1970 disturbances in Poland).

Actually, you don't really have to be a Pole to have a ''Polish accent'' in
Russian (it's a matter of pronunciation of certain consonants and vowels). For
me, it meant that it was absolutely out of the question to visit Wilno, even as
a stopover on my way back by train. The best I was able to accomplish (and even
for this I had to have special permission) was to alter my airline ticket and
return to New York via Warsaw.

There were other problems, but also bonuses. I could not, for example, engage in
conversation with Soviet writers whom I had met earlier in America. Simonov, for
example, turned his back on me; Yevtushenko, always a friendly person, explained
to me Simonov's behavior (it was after an anti-Vietnam-war rally) and advised me
not to approach acquaintances in public.

For one category of Russians, however, my Polish accent was an advantage. These
were World War II veterans who, upon learning that I, too, was a veteran, never
tired of talking about the defense of Moscow, Leningrad and Stalingrad and the
crucial battle of Kursk.  They also insisted on showing me the exact spot of
farthest German penetration within the sight of Moscow. Vodka flowed freely on
those occasions, and with it information strictly taboo without it.

My problems were particularly serious when, during my stays in Mos-cow,
Leningrad and Kiev, I kept searching for, and finding, traces of former Polish
historical and cultural influences in Russia (one of my research specialties).
Since I took copious notes on such occasions, I became even more conspicuous.

On at least one occasion, the confiscation of my notes was prevented by the fact
that they had been made in a Soviet calendardiary, which I still have to this
day and frequently consult.

Upon learning about these notes, editors of two Polish periodicals (one in Paris
and one in New York) have urged me to publish them, but unfortunately the
conditions of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. exchanges forbid for a number of years
publication of materials gained as a result of the fellowship. Accordingly, the
notes were never published, nor were they ever mentioned in print, until today.
FRANK MOCHA, New York, Aug. 3, 1982

The writer is professor of Polish and Russian languages at Loyola University of
Chicago and Polish University Abroad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


By Michiko Kakutani
AMERICA IN THE 20'S. A History. By Geoffrey Perrett. 585 pages. Simon &
Schuster. $20.95.

IN retrospect, we tend to idealize our history, arranging it into neat decades,
each personified by an event or labeled with a pithy epithet. If the 1930's are
nearly synonymous with the Great Depression, the 40's bring to mind World War II
and the 60's Vietnam and social revolution. The 50's remain the era of the
Silent Generation, just as the 70's will be remembered as the ''Me Decade.''

Glamorous, hectic and endlessly commemorated by its writers and its poets, the
20's, however, retain perhaps the most vigorous hold over our collective
imagination, and we recall ''the Jazz Age'' with heightened nostalgia as a time
of flappers and expatriates, get-richquick schemes and land swindles, romance
and disillusion. It is the subject of Geoffrey Perrett's new history published
by Simon & Schuster.

Like William Manchester's ''The Glory and the Dream'' and Frederick Lewis
Allen's ''Only Yesterday,'' Mr. Perrett's book is an informal, narrative history
that achieves fluency through its conversational style and densely detailed
text. Although the book owes a heavy debt in both style and substance to Allen's
celebrated history of the 20's - both illuminate such events as the the Scopes
trial and the Sacco and Vanzetti case through anecdotes and character sketches;
both display a ''Ragtime''-esque penchant for mingling the famous and unknown -
Mr. Perrett claims to have drawn on ''reliable studies of the country's art,
health, education, sex life and cities'' made available since ''Only Yesterday''
appeared in 1931.

In an effort to balance what he sees as Allen's undue focus on ''odd or excited
behavior,'' he has also paid less attention to the antics of the wealthy
highbrows and more to the daily concerns of the populace at large - an approach
that makes for a more judicious, if less lively, book.

As Mr. Perrett sees it, the 20's were an uneasy postwar decade of transition, a
sort of belated twilight zone between the 19th and 20th centuries. The war not
only brought Americans into contact with foreign ideas and international
responsibilities for the first time, but it created cultural reverberations as
well.

The simple experience of the American Expeditionary Force in Europe, Mr. Perrett
writes, ''made it acceptable for a man to smoke cigarettes instead of cigars or
a pipe; to wear a wristwatch instead of carrying a pocket Ingersoll; to use a
safety razor instead of a cutthroat; to have a zipper fly instead of buttons.''

More importantly, the war hastened a change in the moral order - a moral order
already under seige by growing industrialization and new intellectual and
scientific discoveries. Indeed, the 20's became a battleground of sorts between
the old and new - Victorian mores vs.  Freudian dogma, frontier individualism
vs. urban anonymity and Puritan faith vs. modernist despair.

Because so much that we take for granted today had roots in the 20's, the era
seems curiously familiar. It was a decade, after all, that witnessed the embrace
of movies, sports and jazz as national diversions; a decade that saw the
automobile become a necessary luxury and the crossword puzzle a Sunday ritual.
Even three of the country's leading periodicals - The New Yorker, Time and The
Reader's Digest - had their genesis in that one slim 10-year period of time.

Although he does not provide as much analysis of the decade's social and
political dynamics as one might like, Mr. Perrett does offer an impressionistic
slide show of personalities and events - events that underline the period's
relationship with our own. It was during the 20's, for instance, that black
migration to Northern cities resulted in the creation of such neighborhoods as
Harlem and Chicago's South Side, thereby contributing to growing racial
tensions.

The decade's Red Scare presaged the McCarthy witch hunts of later years, and its
concern with the roles of women and young people similarly foreshadowed the
cultural rebellions of the 60's. The complaints of the 20's, too, have an
uncannily familiar ring; then, as now, citizens bemoaned ''the crushing burden
of taxation,'' industrialists worried that ''the United States was fast running
out of oil,'' and a symposium of intellectuals declared that ''the most moving
and pathetic fact in the social life of America today is emotional and esthetic
starvation.''

In the end, though, what probably makes the 20's so distinctly modern is the
fact that it was the first decade in which Americans really began to wonder if
their lives would ever be commensurate with their dreams; their expectations
dwindled in those postwar years as surely as the frontier had receded. As F.
Scott Fitzgerald once wrote of those, who like himself came of age in the 20's,
''the capacity of this generation to believe has run very thin.'' ''The war, the
peace, the boom, the Depression, the shadow of the new war scarcely corresponds
to the idea of manifest destiny. Many men of my age are inclined to paraphrase
Sir Edward Grey of 1914 - 'the lamps are going out all over the world; we shall
not see them lit again in our time.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HENRY FONDA DIES ON COAST AT 77; PLAYED 100 STAGE AND SCREEN ROLES

BYLINE: By PETER B. FLINT

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2642 words


Henry Fonda, who exemplified for nearly half a century a man of honesty and
decency in more than 100 film and stage roles, died early yesterday of chronic
heart disease in Los Angeles. He was 77 years old.

Mr. Fonda had battled heart disease since 1974, when a pacemaker was placed in
his chest. But his dedication to his craft kept him on a strenuous schedule
until last year, when his worsening health forced him to be hospitalized often
and to move about in a wheelchair.

For the last 18 months, breaking a lifetime practice, he was forced to forgo key
appearances, including the ceremony last March at which he won his first Oscar
for best actor, for his poignant portrayal of a crotchety professor facing death
in the movie ''On Golden Pond.''

Mr. Fonda entered Cedars-Sinai Medical Center on Sunday, and his family,
including his wife, Shirlee, and his children Jane, Peter and Amy, were at his
bedside most of the time. A family spokesman said the actor had simply stopped
breathing while asleep.

The actor, who retained a boyish candor and a gentle but firm manner, had long
been a quintessential American hero. His image of a prairie Galahad was enhanced
by his clean-cut features and firm jaw, tall, lean frame, loping stride and dry
wit, expressed with a distinctive Middle Western twang.

'Of the Highest Order'

He was one of the most celebrated and enduring American performers. From 1934,
when he appeared as the hero in the Broadway play ''The Farmer Takes a Wife,''
he was rarely out of the limelight, starring in more than 80 movies, more than
15 plays and in many televised dramas, series and specials.

In ''On Golden Pond,'' Mr. Fonda gave one of his finest characterizations.
Katharine Hepburn, who portrayed his bright, spunky wife of nearly 50 years,
also won an Academy Award for her performance, and his daughter, Jane, who
co-produced the movie, was nominated for an Oscar for her performance as their
anxious daughter.

Vincent Canby of The New York Times termed Mr. Fonda's acting ''of the highest
order,'' seemingly distilled from hundreds of performances. And Mr. Fonda was
the overwhelming choice of the motion-picture academy for the best-acting Oscar.


Early Movie Roles

Mr. Fonda's early movie roles included the backwoodsman in ''The Trail of the
Lonesome Pine'' (1936); the youth driven by poverty into crime in ''You Only
Live Once'' (1937); the dispossesed farmworker Tom Joad in ''The Grapes of
Wrath'' (1940); the upright ordinary man in both ''The Ox-Bow Incident'' (1943)
and ''12 Angry Men'' (1957), of which he was co-producer, and the noble
extraordinary man as both ''Young Mr. Lincoln'' (1939) and Wyatt Earp, the
frontier marshal, in ''My Darling Clementine'' (1946).

The decades transformed his country-innocent image to that of a protective
father figure as the Navy executive officer in ''Mister Roberts'' (1955), the
principled Presidential candidate in ''The Best Man'' (1964), the President
striving to avert a nuclear war in ''Fail Safe'' (1964) and as innumerable
military commanders and guardians of justice.

In 1978 Mr. Fonda received the sixth Life Achievement Award of the American Film
Institute. At the presentation ceremony he was praised by Jack Lemmon as ''the
definitive American actor'' and by Richard Widmark as ''the frontier American -
part history, part folklore, part mythology.''

Stage Commitment, Too

Mr. Fonda was a meticulous and modest craftsman - dedicated and intense - who
thoroughly enjoyed his profession. From the start of his career, reviewers
invariably praised his portrayals as ''refreshingly natural'' and ''immensely
winning,'' and in later years, the consensus was that he was one of the few
great American actors.

He achieved fame in movies, but gained his deepest professional satisfaction in
a careerlong commitment to the stage, keeping his roles fresh for hundreds of
performances.

His plays included the long-running ''Mister Roberts,'' which opened in New York
in 1948; ''The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial'' (1953), ''Two for the Seesaw''
(1958), revivals of ''Our Town'' (1968) and ''The Time of Your Life'' (1971);
''Clarence Darrow,'' a 1974 one-man tour de force, and ''First Monday in
October'' (1978).

'A Minor Miracle'

When ''The Farmer Takes a Wife'' opened, Brooks Atkinson, then the drama critic
of The Times, wrote that ''Henry Fonda, who has his first big opportunity here,
gives a manly, modest performance in a style of captivating simplicity.''

Seventeen years later Mr. Atkinson wrote that the actor, in ''Point of No
Return,'' had given the role of an upward-striving banker ''one of those
unbelievably easy and engaging performances that do not seem like acting at
all.'' Mr. Fonda, the critic concluded, ''is our most ingratiating male star,
and his effortless, modulated style of acting is a minor miracle.''

The role on which he put his most distinctive stamp was that of Mister Roberts,
the avuncular and idealistic Navy lieutenant aboard a cargo ship in the backwash
of the Pacific during World War II. He played the title role for more than three
and a half years on Broadway and on tour, winning many awards, and he repeated
his success on film.

'Dignity and Power'

Citing his ''superb'' acting in the play, Mr. Atkinson wrote that Mr. Fonda
''gives a perfect human performance that in turn gives the whole narrative
perspective as a romantic tale of youth rebelling against boredom.''

In welcoming the film adaptation, A.H. Weiler of The Times wrote that the actor
had given ''a beautifully lean and sensitive characterization, full of dignity
and power,'' adding that ''it now appears as though he is Mister Roberts.''

Mr. Fonda, who never formally studied acting, described his approach to his
craft thus: ''My goal is that the audience must never see the wheels go around,
not see the work that goes into this. It must seem effortless and real. I don't
do anything very consciously except that my end results must never be obvious in
any way.''

Audience as Inspiration

Mr. Fonda acknowledged the ''box-office'' necessity to keep making films, even
potboilers when major vehicles were not available, and to appear often on
television. But he cited the unmatchable rewards of acting on the stage, where a
role can be created and developed ''from beginning to end'' in contrast to the
disjointed, out-ofcontinuity shooting of movies.

''It's as if an artist were to paint different parts of a picture on separate
pieces of canvas and then have someone else fit them together,'' he said to an
interviewer, adding:

''In the theater, the actor does a complete job at each performance, inspired by
the audience, whose response prevents his job from becoming tiresome. For in the
theater the audience is constantly changing, while in pictures the same director
is the only audience and the sole judge of the performance. I prefer acting for
a lot of different people rather than for one man.''

Relations With His Children

In the 60's, Mr. Fonda's two elder children, the actors Jane and Peter,
generated wide controversy, Jane particularly for her assertive advocacy of
liberal and radical causes and Peter for his identification with the drug and
motorcycle cult. The father usually reacted stoically, defending them, but
occasionally expressed annoyance over their flouting of conventions. Their
rebelliousness moderated in the 70's, and his relationship with them grew deeper
than ever before.

''I don't think I've been a particularly good father,'' he conceded, ''but I've
been lucky.'' Mr. Fonda, who said he had often objected more to his daughter's
aggressive activism than her views, described himself as a liberal Democrat but
invariably maintained a low political profile. In 1968, however, he backed the
unsuccessful anti-Vietnam War campaign of Senator Eugene J. McCarthy, Democrat
of Wisconsin, for the Presidency.

Henry Jaynes Fonda was born May 16, 1905, in Grand Island, Neb., to the former
Herberta Jaynes and William Brace Fonda, owner of a small printing company in
Omaha. The youth was brought up there and in the suburb of Dundee and graduated
from the Omaha Central High School in 1923.

Prodded by Brando's Mother

He attended the University of Minnesota, studying journalism while working in
two jobs, as a physical-education instructor at a settlement house and as a
troubleshooter for the telephone company.  In his sophomore year, he later said,
he was exhausted and returned home for a rest.

While supporting himself with a series of unsatisfying jobs, he was persuaded by
Dorothy Brando, a family friend and the mother of the future star Marlon Brando,
to join the Omaha Community Playhouse, where Mr. Fonda acted, painted scenery,
became assistant director - and resolved on his career.

He later recalled the ''breathless'' way he had felt while playing the juvenile
title role in ''Merton of the Movies'' as ''like being 10 years old and playing
cops and robbers.''

After two years at the playhouse, he decided to try his luck in New York - to no
avail. He went on to Cape Cod, Mass., where he joined the University Players,
composed of college students, including Joshua Logan and Bretaigne Windust, who
had founded a summer theater at Falmouth. They were later joined by James
Stewart and Margaret Sullavan, who was to become Mr. Fonda's first wife.

Leland Hayward Was Agent

Over the next four summers and one winter season with the group, Mr. Fonda
played a wide variety of leading roles, becoming a seasoned actor. On Broadway,
meanwhile, he got a walk-on part and bit roles in two short-lived plays, and he
appeared in comedy skits in the 1934 hit revue ''New Faces.''

Those performances impressed Leland Hayward, who became his agent and negotiated
a contract with the Hollywood producer Walter Wanger, providing a salary of
$1,000 a week, 10 times what he had been earning, and permitting time for stage
appearances.

In the succeeding decade, the actor alternated easily between films and the
theater.  He won particular praise in the title role of the movie ''Young Mr.
Lincoln,'' with Frank S. Nugent of The Times concluding that ''his performance
kindles the film.'' Mr. Fonda's stirring characterization in ''The Grapes of
Wrath'' was considered by many critics the best performance of 1940, one for
which he should have won an Oscar, but it eluded him. However, a cascade of
later honors from the motionpicture academy, the American National Theater and
Academy and many other professional organizations more than compensated for the
oversight.

Occasional Comedies

Hollywood first made its amends in April 1981, when it awarded him an honorary
Oscar for careerlong achievement. A thundering ovation by members of the movie
academy seemed endless, and Mr. Fonda - white-haired, wearing thick glasses and
grasping a cane - seemed shaken by its fervor.

''It's been a very rewarding 46 years for me,'' he said, ''and this has got to
be the climax.'' A year later Hollywood underscored its esteem by awarding him
the Oscar for ''On Golden Pond.''

Drama and adventure were his fortes, but he also made occasional film comedies,
including ''The Lady Eve'' with Barbara Stanwyck in 1941 and ''The Male Animal''
with Olivia De Havilland in 1942.

In World War II, Mr. Fonda enlisted in the Navy as a seaman, rising to
lieutenant and receiving a Bronze Star and Presidential citation for his work as
an operations and air-combat intelligence officer in the Pacific.

Worked Despite Illnesses

A capstone of his later stage achievements was his strenuous twohour performance
as ''Clarence Darrow,'' America's great trial lawyer and liberal magnet of
landmark controversies. In The Times, Clive Barnes described Mr. Fonda's
performance as ''consummate,'' and Walter Kerr termed it ''perfect.''

Mr. Fonda continued acting despite major illnesses. After a performance of
''Clarence Darrow'' in 1974 he collapsed from what doctors called ''total
exhaustion,'' and a pacemaker was implanted in his chest because of a
heart-rhythm disorder.

On television, the actor appeared in many specials and in two series, ''The
Deputy'' and ''The Smith Family,'' and he worked for years in commercials for a
manufacturer of photographic and other products. He explained that he had
accepted the ''soft-sell script'' after years of rejecting similar offers
because ''the money is out of sight'' and ''I think good exposure in a
commercial is better than bad exposure in a film or play.''

In April 1980, just before his 75th birthday, he seemed to be more visible than
ever as millions viewed his extraordinarily vigorous portrayals of two aging but
indomitable heroes in the television productions of ''The Oldest Living
Graduate'' and ''Gideon's Trumpet.''

In 1981, despite his increasingly critical heart ailment, Mr.  Fonda, with Myrna
Loy, appeared in a widely praised television movie, ''Summer Solstice,'' a
sensitive study of a long-married couple.

The actor was a gifted, self-taught painter, mostly of landscapes and still
lifes, and enjoyed organic gardening. He also devoted considerable time to
performing in benefit shows without pay for philanthropies.

Married Five Times

His first marriage, to Miss Sullavan, ended in divorce in 1933. His second wife,
the former Frances Seymour Brokaw, who was the mother of Jane and Peter, took
her life in a sanitarium in 1950. His third marriage, to Susan Blanchard, with
whom he adopted his daughter Amy, ended in divorce, as did his fourth marriage,
to Contessa Afdera Franchetti. His fifth wife was the former Shirlee Mae Adams.

Throughout his career he refused to discuss his five marriages with
interviewers, but, in his 1981 biography, ''Fonda My Life,'' written with Howard
Teichmann, the actor disclosed some of his marital turmoil and candidly
expressed regrets over his shortcomings.

In 1970, John Steinbeck, the novelist and close friend of Mr.  Fonda, said of
him: ''He carries with him that excitement that can't be learned, but he backs
up his gift with grueling, conscientious work and agony of self-doubt.''

Mr. Fonda really lived when he was acting, and just existed when he wasn't, many
of this friends agreed.  In 1978 Mr. Fonda said he was early committed to his
profession ''as therapy for a very self-conscious young man.'' Earlier he
remarked to interviewers that ''if I project anything of me into my roles, it's
maybe a man with some dignity who tries to be honest'' and that ''I just want to
be remembered as a good actor.''

Besides his wife and children, Mr. Fonda is survived by four grandchildren and a
sister, Harriet Warren of Omaha.  The actor's wish, a spokesman said, was that
there be no service and that his body be cremated. Mr. Fonda willed his eyes to
the Manhattan Eye Bank. In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to the
Henry Fonda Theater Center Memorial, c/o the Omaha Community Playhouse, 6915
Cass Street, Omaha, Neb. 68132.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Henry Fonda photos of Henry Fonda in some of
his more famous roles (Page A13)

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE FALKLAND SOLDIERS: ARGENTINA FORGETS QUICKLY

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, Aug. 12


Two months after Argentine forces surrendered to the British on the Falkland
Islands, this nation appears to have all but forgotten its nearly 11,000 war
veterans.

It has done little to eulogize its 600 dead or console its 1,300 wounded. There
have been no medals awarded to any survivors. Few veterans' benefits are
available. And the army is still studying the matter of compensating those who
suffered crippling wounds.

The psychological effects on many of the soldiers, most of whom were teen-agers
drafted for the cause, have been apparent since the day they came home from the
10-week war, according to psychiatrists.

Parallels to Vietnam

The psychiatrists say they have detected parallels in the reception received by
United States veterans of the Vietnam War, but have found that the Argentine
experience is worse in many ways. This country is smaller, the war was closer,
and the cause, however brief, was more nationally heartfelt.

''Instead of being received as heroes, they are told the defeat was their
fault,'' Humberto Mesones, a psychiatrist doing volunteer work in military
hospitals, said in an interview.

''It helped that this war did not last so long,'' he added.

Democratic and Undemocratic

The draft here is democratic, an honest lottery, but the assignments afterward
are not. Many of the white sons of the middle class draw office jobs. But most
of the fighting men for the Falkland war were one-year conscripts from poor and
working-class families.  Many came from the provinces, their dark, straight hair
and wide cheekbones revealing their Indian ancestry.

Without a war tradition to draw on -the Falklands was Argentina's first war in
this century - many of the young men went not knowing what to expect and came
back shellshocked and traumatized.  Psychiatrists and parents report that many
of the veterans are plagued by nightmares of British shelling and of comrades
being killed or mutilated. One survivor of the torpedoed cruiser General
Belgrano committed suicide.

The cold shoulder that the veterans have received has been part of the larger
mood of a defeated country trying to forget the war altogether. Renewed concern
about the economy, with its growing recession and triple-digit inflation, has
replaced the Falklands, or the Malvinas as they are known here, as the subject
overheard in buses, on elevators and along this city's busy cosmopolitan
streets.

'They Feel Shame'

''People are not talking about the Malvinas and its consequences because they
feel shame,'' former Foreign Minister Oscar Camilion said in an interview.

At a recent mass for the survivors, the officiating monsignor compared the
ordeal of the Argentine prisoners-of-war following their surrender to the ordeal
of Christ bearing the cross.  The pews were half-empty. Only one television crew
rattled around inside the church.

A navy officer, standing on the almost empty steps of the church after mass,
shrugged wanly and said, ''It appears that we have been forgotten.''

There have been some small gestures of support. The City of Buenos Aires
recently announced that veterans of the war would be exempt from city taxes for
the next five years. The army also awarded a week's leave to each of the
soldiers who fought on the Falklands.

But the lack of concern for the veterans is seen in many ways.  There have been
no hometown dances and ceremonial barbecues, for example. There is not one
national war hero, not even among the daring pilots who fearlessly attacked
Britain's superior fleet and sank six of its warships.

Questions and Anger

Many Argentines contend they were misled by the military to expect victory. They
question now whether the Government should not have been more conciliatory in
negotiations with Britain in the early weeks of the crisis.

If there is any public emotion it is anger against the military, an anger
enhanced by returning soldiers' tales of food and ammunition shortages and some
cowardly officers.

A recent cover of Siete Dias, a popular weekly magazine, showed a dead Argentine
soldier lying on the Falklands with his helmet on a stick beside him.

''Whose fault was it?'' the cover asked, showing in a small inset a picture of
the Argentine commander on the islands, Brig. Gen. Mario Benjamin Menendez.

General Defends Surrender

General Menendez, a soft-faced man of 52 years, has been mostly silent since
returning as a war prisoner one month ago. He and a number of other senior
officers who fought on the islands have been relieved of their posts. They have
been put on standby while a commission of five generals conducts an inquiry into
the war.

However, in recent army-approved interviews with Argentina's three leading
weekly general-interest magazines, the defeated general praised the British
commanders and defended his own actions.

He declined to discuss tactics but said he had made the decision to surrender on
his own, without consulting Buenos Aires. He also said that he remained
convinced it was the right decision and that he did not feel a sense of guilt or
a slur on his professional capacity.

'Tell Me What We Did Wrong'

But for all the general's apparent certainties about what happened and why, many
of the conscripts remain confused and anguished.  ''Nobody has explained to us
why we lost,'' Juan Guerrera, an 18-year-old who fought on the islands with the
air force, recently told Argentine reporters.

''I think they should tell me what happened. Maybe I was a bad soldier. I don't
know. But I need somebody to tell me what we did wrong.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of scenes in the Falkland Islands

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 14, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CANADIAN MINING TOWN HITS BOTTOM

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: SUDBURY, Canada, Aug. 13


The Manoir Bar sits on the floor of a valley that was gouged out by a meteor
millenia ago. Until two months ago the men drinking in the Manoir worked for two
large companies and earned some of the highest industrial salaries in Canada
digging and processing the ore churned up by that meteor.

Now, over beers, they tried to explain to themselves and to a visitor how this
recently prosperous city had become the place with the highest unemployment in
Canada, in the northern hemisphere and, some said, in the industrialized world.

Last month the two giant nickel and copper companies around which this city of
135,000 grew, shut down operations and furloughed their workers because their
stockpiled supplies far exceeded the demands of industrial users in the United
States and Europe.

The 1,250-foot stack at Inco, which in flush times propelled acetic smoke all
the way to Nova Scotia, now stands dormant like a stele from a lapsed
civilization. The 13,000 miners and mill workers who in recent years have earned
salaries averaging from 20,000 to 40,000 Canadian dollars a year, or about
$16,000 to $32,000, are either using up the last of their vacation pay or are
living on $200 a week in unemployment benefits, so called poky checks.

The Problems Are Awesome

In statistical terms, the problems here are awesome. The datacollecting branch
of Government reports that unemployment in Sudbury stands at 2l percent of a
workforce of 62,000, compared with the national figure of 10.9 percent. But Mel
Soucie, the chief regional economist for the Employment and Immigration Division
of the Federal Government, says that since this tabulation does not count those
who are still technically receiving vacation pay but who are jobless and without
immediate prospects of work, the real figure is 40 percent.

''I can see it going to 50 percent before the enc of the year,'' Mr. Soucie said
in an interview in his office, ''and the only thing that can reverse the trend
is a drop in the interest rate in the United States, which I can't see taking
place no matter how much we might wish it.''

But in contrast to the dismal statistics, the mood at the Manoir Hotel was
surprisingly jubilant if a bit bewildered.  ''Hell man, its still summer and
most of the men are enjoying their fishing and their beer,'' said John Gignac, a
young miner and former labor leader who was being kidded for having bought a new
video recorder last week. Like many people here, Mr. Gignac is a
secondgeneration miner and has pride in his community.

''We're kind of a joke in Canada with a lot people coming and writing things
about the desolate moonscape and the slag heaps like we were the armpit of the
continent,'' said Mr. Gignac. ''This is a fine place with all kinds of people
cooperating - Italians, Ukrainians, French Canadians, Finns - and I like living
here and I hope my three kids will live here when they grow up.''

'Nothing Wrong With Sudbury'

''There's nothing wrong with Sudbury,'' he said. ''What's in a mess is the
economy, not just here but around the world.'' ''You blame the world economy but
I got to blame the companies and the Government,'' interjected Andy Artindale,
who has worked for the last 14 years for Inco, the larger of the two companies.

''I know they're in trouble and had to shut down but they invested a lot of
millions in operations in Guatemala and Indonesia that they've had to put in
mothballs,'' Mr. Artindale said. ''They made the money here and they made stupid
investments elsewhere. They should have put the money back here where it was
made and doing something to diversify away from this one-industry situation.''

''You know I don't exactly love management, Andy, but how does the guy who
miscalculated the world metals market differ from one of our sucker friends who
went ahead and signed a mortgage that he won't be able to meet now?'' asked Mr.
Gignac.

Bad to Worse to Awful

''The difference is that the guy that miscalculated on the mortgage only hurts
himself and his family while the company's mistake hurts all of us and the guys
who made it are probably still going to be eating pretty good restaurant food in
Toronto,'' replied Mr.  Artindale.

''You got a point,'' said Mr. Gignac.  Actually, both Inco, which for years
dominated the world nickel market, and the somewhat smaller Falconbridge Nickel
Mines Limited have suffered cuts in their administrative staffs as things turned
from bad to worse to awful.

Not only has the worldwide recession cut the demand and the price of nickel and
copper, but in the case of Inco the at least temporary writing off of its
investments in Guatemala and the losses from a venture involving the manufacture
of batteries in the United States resulted in the company reporting a net loss
in 1981 of $469.5 million, the first loss in 50 years. The company's debt has
grown to $1.35 billion. Falconbridge, which used to employ some 4,000 workers
here, is losing less but also has enormous fixed costs while earning no income.

One of those sharing the beers was Mick Loewe, a Nebraska native who came to
Canada to avoid military service in Vietnam and stayed on to become a citizen.
He lives in Sudbury where he works as a freelance writer. ''You know,'' he said,
''Sudbury is really a microcosm of the Canadian economy. Sudbury is what people
mean when they tell you that Canada is part of the third world, exporting raw
materials to markets whose prices fluctuate beyond our control or influence.''

No Remedies Seem Possible

Mr. Loewe, who calls himself a Marxist, echoed the views of Sid Forrester, a
spokesman for Inco, and Mr. Soucie, the Government economist. Mr. Forrester
emphasized that in the current crisis there was nothing either management or
labor could do to improve the situation.

''The point is,'' said Mr. Soucie, ''that here in Sudbury we are far more
integrated with the U.S. economy than with the Canadian economy. In Canada
generally we can't have any monetary policy of our own that could offset or
counteract the decisions of your Federal Reserve Board.

In the suburban tavern, the conversation was clearly less pessimistic. The men
conceded that they were protected to a large extent by the cushion of social
welfare benefits that are far more extensive than in the United States. Almost
all the idle workers are entitled to at least 52 weeks of unemployment checks of
$200. In addition, Inco and Falconbridge are paying about $50 a week in
supplemental payments to the furloughed workers. Then there are the child
welfare payments that are payed by the Government to all parents. A family with
three children may receive as much as $100 a month in such grants. For the old
and the poor there is a system of rent subsidies and the elderly have their
municipal taxes paid by the Federal Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of part of Inco plant in Ontario, Canada

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 14, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
FEAR OF POST HOLES

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 964 words


NEWS ITEM: The Postal Service has promised Congress it will continue delivering
mail despite a nuclear war. Although ''all-out preemptive'' atomic war could
undo the system, deliveries would be effective in a limited nuclear war,
according to the Service's civil defense planner.

I never worried about getting the mail until the Pentagon started planning for a
prolonged nuclear war.  ''This is a horse of a different color,'' I said to
myself, after reading Secretary of Defense Weinberger's explanation how nuclear
warfare might drag on and on after the opening volley. ''If it's not going to be
all over after the first pop, I could have serious problems getting my mail.''

I took it up with Riley the mailman: ''I've been thinking about the headaches we
could have if there's a prolonged nuclear war, Riley.''

''You don't say.'' ''Suppose it went on for a year or two.'' ''That's the breaks
of the game,'' Riley said.  ''Suppose it dragged on forever, like the Vietnam
War.'' ''Worst mistake we ever made,'' said Riley. ''If we get in that pickle
again we'll have to nuke 'em. If we'd nuked 'em in Vietnam we'd have been out of
that mess 10 years earlier.''

''But in a prolonged nuclear war, we will be nuking them,'' I said. ''What's
more, they'll be nuking us. Day after day, year after year, there will be
incessant nuking going on.''

''It makes you think,'' Riley said.  It made me think about my mail, I
explained.  ''Speaking of which,'' said Riley, ''you've got the usual today.
Eleven bills, four mail-order catalogues, six requests for money from assorted
charities and a very brief note from one of your children in Venice. Probably
wants you to send her some money right away.''

I was deeply moved.  ''What are you crying for?'' Riley asked.  ''Riley,'' I
said, ''suppose at this moment we were already in the third year of a prolonged
nuclear war.'' ''Sometimes everybody does their best, but the worst happens
anyhow and you've got a mess on your hands,'' he said.  ''And I wouldn't be
here, would I, Riley?'' ''Well, you know what they say: absence makes the heart
grow fonder.'' ''In prolonged nuclear war,'' I said, ''absence makes morale grow
stronger. To maintain my zest for continuing the war, I would have to evacuate
from a lively target like New York to a relatively safe bucolic hideaway like
Morrisonville, Va., where plenty of fresh air and the constant display of honest
yeomen toiling with their oxen in the fields would reinforce my determination to
resist the Red hordes.''

''Speaking of Red hordes,'' said Riley, ''here is an envelope I overlooked.
Looks like the Red Cross wants money again.'' ''Imagine prolonged nuclear
warfare in progress and my poor child in Venice, desperate for money, writing me
here in New York and getting no reply because I had evacuated to
Morrisonville,'' I said.

''Every cloud has a silver lining,'' said Riley.  This insensitivity to my fears
revealed a brutish streak in Riley that I had never suspected, though I should
have, I suppose. What could you expect of a man willing to spend a lifetime
shoving bills through mail slots?

''I will come right to the point,'' I said. ''I want your pledge that, if
prolonged nuclear war breaks out, you will see that my mail is forwarded.''

''Neither rain nor snow nor gloom of night ...'' ''I don't care about rain,
snow, hail, fog, fast-moving cold fronts or gloom of night, Riley. It's nuclear
warfare that interests me. I want a promise that prolonged nuclear warfare will
not stay you couriers from the swift completion of your appointed rounds.''

Riley gave me two cards to fill out. Fill in the Virginia address, leave it at
the post office after the nuclear onset began and couriers would do their best
to bear it swiftly on their appointed Morrisonville rounds, he said.

''Of course you realize, Riley, that since New York may be a prime nuclear
target, you may have to make unusually intense efforts to prevent my mail from
being lost.''

''You know how it is,'' said Riley. ''Lose a few, win a few. Don't forget to
drop a card to the post office as soon as the first bomb goes off.''

His cavalier attitude - lose a few, win a few, indeed! - was infuriating. Here
was a sample of that bureaucratic indifference to the taxpayer that even
President Reagan, despite heroic efforts, had failed to obliterate.

''Riley'' - I spoke with the voice of an outraged citizenry - ''I want my mail
forwarded faithfully until the prolonged nuclear war is over and we have won the
inevitable victory.''

''You really want to get all these bills, come holocaust or high water?'' ''And
so does every American patriot,'' I explained. ''If we don't receive our daily
bills, how can we pay them? And if we don't pay them, think, Riley, of the
consequences. We could come out of the war with our credit ratings in ruins.''

''Lie down with H-bombs, you'll get up with fleas,'' he said. I worry about his
loyalty to his job.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Sydney H. Schanberg is on vacation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THRUSTON B. MORTON IS DEAD AT 74; SERVED AS SENATOR FROM KENTUCKY

BYLINE: By DOROTHY J. GAITER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 815 words


Thruston B. Morton, a former United States Senator, member of the House of
Representatives from Kentucky and national chairman of the Republican Party,
died yesterday at his home in Louisville after a long illness. He was 74 years
old.

Mr. Morton, a descendant of Kentucky pioneers, represented the Louisville area
in the House from 1947 to 1953, when he declined to seek a fourth term and
became an Assistant Secretary of State, a post he held three years. His job was
to win support for the Eisenhower Administration's foreign policy.

In 1956 he was elected to the Senate, defeating Earle C. Clements, the
Democratic former Kentucky Governor who was then acting Senate majority leader.

Mr. Morton's brother, Rogers C.B. Morton, was a Congressman from Maryland,
Secretary of the Interior in the Nixon Administration and Republican national
chairman. He died in 1979.

Declined to Run in 1968

Thruston Morton, a Congressman of considerable prestige and fortitude, was at
the peak of his influence after more than a quarter of a century of public
service, when, in 1968, he abruptly decided not to seek re-election.

''To use an old Kentucky expression, I suppose I am just plain track sore,'' he
said. It was later learned that he was in ill health. A close associate
described him as profoundly depressed by the combination of the Vietnam War,
urban violence and what he regarded as insufficient national leadership and the
failure of the Republican Party to rise to the occasion.

Although Mr. Morton could be ferociously partisan, he lined up at times with
liberal Democrats on Vietnam and the civil rights movement.

At first he had embraced the Johnson Administration's Vietnam policy, but his
views moderated as the war eroded the national pride and prestige.

In 1968, when such critics of the war as Senators Robert F.  Kennedy, Democrat
of New York, and Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, suggested in
speeches that corruption and lack of dedication in South Vietnam were reaching
the point at which the South Vietnamese Government no longer warranted the
support of the United States, it was Senator Morton who introduced the speeches
into the Congressional Record.

Cautioned Johnson on Running

He also suggested that President Johnson decline to seek reelection. ''But,'' he
said, ''I do not expect a man so mesmerized by power to relinguish it
voluntarily.''

When Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota campaigned for the Democratic
nomination for the Presidency that year, he included Mr.  Morton among people he
would consider naming as Secretary of State because of the similarity of their
outlook.

For his part, Mr. Morton helped the reluctant campaign of Gov.  Nelson A.
Rockefeller of New York for the Republican nomination. He toured the country,
trying to generate enough popular interest to lead Mr. Rockefeller to declare.
He felt that the Republican Party was risking extinction unless it turned to
imaginative leadership.

He later became a co-chairman of Mr. Rockefeller's campaign. After his
candidate's loss to Richard M. Nixon at the national convention in Miami Beach,
he joined the Nixon campaign. His brother, Rogers Morton, had been Mr. Nixon's
convention floor manager.

In February 1968, the month he announced his retirement, he joined the
bipartisan coalition of Senate liberals that won a first round in the difficult
Senate debate on legislation to provide Federal protection to people seeking to
exercise their civil rights.

He was understood to have argued that in an election year, Republicans should
not seem to align themselves with Southern conservatives by voting for a
Southern substitute bill that would have limited Federal protection.

Thruston Ballard Morton was born in Louisville and was graduated from Yale
University in 1909. He joined the family business, Ballard & Ballard Flour
Milling, and worked his way up to become chairman of the board. The company was
later sold to Pillsbury.

Mr. Morton served in the Navy from 1940 to 1945 in the Pacific.  After his
retirement from active politics, he became a vice chairman of Liberty National
Bank in Louisville, president of the American Horse Council and chairman of the
board of Churchill Downs.  He also served on the boards of directors of
Pillsbury, the Pittston Company, a coal mining corporation, and Texas Gas.

He is survived by his wife, the former Belle Clay Lyons, two sons, Clay Lyons
Morton and T. Ballard Morton Jr.; a sister, Jane Morton Norton, and five
grandchildren, all of Louisville.

Services have been scheduled for 11:30 A.M. tomorrow at Christ Church Cathedral
in Louisville.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Thruston B. Morton

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
Debating What To Tell Havana

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Katherine J. Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 360 words


Congress last week indulged in some verbal Cuba-bashing. The Senate voted to
prevent by any means -''including the use of arms'' - the creation in Cuba ''of
an externally supported military capability'' endangering United States
security. The House voted to authorize Radio Marti, a broadcasting facility some
proponents hoped would ''destabilize'' or ''dislodge'' Fidel Castro.

''That is the only language the Communists know,'' said Senator Strom Thurmond,
Republican of South Carolina, a supporter of the Senate action. Opponents called
it a Caribbean Tonkin Gulf, recalling the 1964 measure that became the legal
basis for American military buildup in Vietnam.

Supporting the $7.5 million radio authorization, Representative Edward J.
Derwinski, Republican of Illinois, said the station would ''give the people of
Cuba the truth, which they have been denied for 22 years.''

But Iowa Congressmen feared that broadcasting on an AM frequency also used by
station WHO in Des Moines would provoke Cuban jamming that would zap WHO's early
morning farm news. And Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas, said
that programs increasing tensions with Havana were bad policy in Latin America
and contended, ''We're headed straight for an electronic or a radio Bay of
Pigs.''

Turning to Cuba's neighbors, House and Senate conferees approved $350 million
for President Reagan's economic and military aid program for the Caribbean
basin, part of $9 billion in supplemental appropriations. But the conferees were
skeptical about Administration involvement in El Salvador; they sliced 40
percent from $128 million originally earmarked for that country and voted to
exclude it from an additional $52 million of worldwide military aid.

But in El Salvador, as American-supplied planes bombed guerrilla encampments and
American-trained troops exchanged fire with residents of slum districts in the
capital, Col. Jose Guillermo Garcia, the Defense Minister, told visiting
Congressmen more aid would be welcome. ''Give me the means and I will solve the
problem,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'NONALIGNMENT' POLICIES ARE WEARING WELL IN INDONESIA

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words


Amid the fading modernity of the Savoy Homann Hotel on Asia-Africa Street in
Bandung, the dining room is still so optimistically spacious, the jazz so cool
and the dusty veranda - with its huge mural of the Indonesian people - so
amazingly 1950's that it is easy to picture oneself at the Afro-Asian Conference
of April 1955.

Nehru of India, Nasser of Egypt, Zhou Enlai of China and dozens of other
potentates went to Bandung as guests of Sukarno of Indonesia.  The conference,
which virtually launched the nonaligned movement, has helped keep Indonesia high
on its lists.

In a recent reminder, a delegation of Iranian mullahs arrived in Jakarta seeking
support for moving next month's nonaligned summit meeting from Baghdad. A few
days ago, their Iraqi enemies came by to lobby for keeping the meeting as
planned. President Suharto's responses may not have tipped the balance of war,
peace or even the venue of the nonaligned leaders' meeting. But it must have
been gratifying to have been entreated.

Like other nonaligned countries, Indonesia has its diplomatic leanings. Yet
unlike many of them, its international likes and dislikes haven't changed much
since General Suharto came to power in the mid-1960's. The country's movement
toward deeper economic relations with the United States, Japan and the West has
been steady but as deliberate as a Javanese dance.

Dumping President Sukarno's theoretical attachment to Communism and his active
attachment to Peking, Mr. Suharto's military Government ''suspended'' relations
with China 15 years ago. They are still suspended. Rumors that ties may soon be
resumed have been fed by statements by high officials that resumption is ''only
a matter of time''; but they are still just rumors.

Relations with Moscow had cooled even under Sukarno and remain cool. But Moscow
didn't censure Indonesia's invasion of East Timor in 1976; Jakarta didn't
condemn the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.  (Nonetheless, possession of
Communist literature is punishable by lengthy imprisonment.)

Longstanding ambivalence toward Vietnam also continues. Leading Indonesians see
Vietnam as a Communist threat of sorts. Differences over ownership of a stretch
of South China Sea-bed north of Indonesia's Natuna Islands raise fears of a
Soviet-Vietnamese takeover of the islands. But multiple dangers from Vietnam's
enemy, China, still get priority; the Indonesian military recalls that Vietnam,
like its own ''class of 1945,'' overthrew a colonial power.  A high Indonesian
official said the military's sympathy for Vietnam ''is partly a certain
admiration for military prowess, or achievement or stature - for history. It is
an admiration among professionals, like some people have admiration for
Israel.''

A Shrug for Vietnam

Despite Jakarta's staunch disapproval of the Cambodia invasion, Vietnam is still
viewed by many Indonesian generals and other nationalists as having been forced
into the Soviet liaison by Chinese hostility. Indonesia and Vietnam both have
deeply distrusted ethnic Chinese minorities. Foreign Minister Mochtar
Kusumaatmaja said of Vietnam's objectives in Indochina, ''They want to be a big
power in the region. (But) I don't think they went about it in the right way.''
Other strategists added that Vietnam is nice to have between Peking and Jakarta.

One policy planner privately shrugged at the prospect of permanent Vietnam
dominance in Indochina. ''Let them have it,'' he said.  Regional stability, not
Cambodia, is his concern, along with keeping the great powers out of a desired
''Zone Of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality.''

But policymakers say they want the American Navy to stay in the Pacific because
China and the Soviet Union are already there. For reasons of principle as well
as economic development, Indonesia says it wants to be friends with everybody.

Indonesia gets along fine with the neighboring Australian Government, despite
nonstop Australian press attacks since the East Timor takeover. Indonesia is
Australia's second largest aid recipient, after Papua New Guinea, a former
Australian possession.  (An Australian diplomat smiled at an Indonesian
official's private comment that Australia is a small, strike-torn, insignificant
country compared to 154 million Indonesians. The two countries, the Australian
said, seemed to be moving in opposite directions, with Australia becoming more
open and Indonesia ''more repressive.'')

With Japan, Indonesia has had serious difficulties. Grudges remain from the
World War II occupation, face-to-face encounters are sometimes troubled, and
Indonesians fear Washington is making Japan the policeman of Southeast Asia.
Resentment of Japan's huge investments may eventually produce a backlash.
Rumblings about growing domination by Tokyo (and Washington) have been frequent
for years. ''It's the general impression that it's in the United States
Government's interest to support this repressive and corrupt Government because
of global strategy,'' said a Moslem intellectual.

Other Indonesians agreed that Jakarta was slowly moving closer to Washington -
despite assertions of nonalignment, a notable absence of kind official words for
the United States and recent tensions over economic policy and the rejection of
an American ambassador.

But nonalignment is still a serviceable doctrine. The elite, for or against the
regime, sees the country as unusually independent.  Nonalignment cuts across the
country's own regional, political and religious divisions. It distinguishes
Indonesia from its much smaller fellow members in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, where the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand are vocally aligned
with the West. And it possesses ritual magic - important especially in Java
where successive faiths have tended to blend rather than displace each other.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Colin Campbell, The New York Times correspondent in Bangkok, recently spent
three weeks in Indonesia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Indonesia Photo of President Suharto

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
New Man for NATO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


With tensions between the United States and its European allies at their highest
in years, the new American representative to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization Military Committee is likely to face some interesting challenges.
But with two shooting wars behind him, Lieut. Gen. Roscoe Robinson Jr., whom
President Reagan nominated for the NATO job last week, would seem up to them. A
decorated command veteran of Vietnam and Korea, General Robinson will get a
fourth star with his new job, making him the first black to hold that rank in
the Army and the second to hold it in any of the services.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Roscoe Robinson Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY MAN MAKES GOOD

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; FOR Foreign Desk  NAT  National DeskMET
Metropolitan Desk     EDT

LENGTH: 1180 words


HAIG The General's Progress.  By Roger Morris.  450 pp. New York: Playboy Press.
$13.95.

By NICHOLAS LEMANN

LATE in the gloomy May of 1974 Alexander Haig, then the White House chief of
staff, called together a large group of high officials of the executive branch
for a pep talk, in the course of which he predicted that Watergate ''will be a
very long footnote'' to history. It didn't turn out that way, but the same
remark might be made today about Mr. Haig himself. Just months ago he seemed to
be one of the handful of major figures in American politics - at the beginning
of what could be eight years of redefining American foreign policy, and beyond
that, his Presidential ambitions were no secret. Since his resignation on June
25, it's far more difficult to place him in his proper context. He has the
distinction (shared only, perhaps, with Edith Wilson) of having been for a time
unelected, de facto President of the United States. As a short-tenured Secretary
of State, he certainly had strong ideas, but whether through some fault of his
own or that of his many bureaucratic enemies, he had trouble implementing them.
If he is going to be a chapter, not a footnote, in our history, it will be by
virtue of things he has yet to do.

On the other hand, purely as a story - a success story, Army-Man-Reaches-Top -
Mr. Haig is fascinating, and it is this aspect of him that most interests Roger
Morris, author of ''Uncertain Greatness: Henry Kissinger and American Foreign
Policy.'' Mr.  Morris's view of Mr. Haig is entirely unflattering, while very
much giving the general his due as a skillful climber. He introduces Mr.  Haig
in language that recalls a 1950's horror movie (''One by one he has watched his
patrons fall, until little more was left of their power than to anoint him for a
new, higher position. Still planning, waiting... Soon it will be his turn.''),
and in the course of the book Mr. Haig does nothing that is remotely noble,
kind, selfless or forward-thinking. Mr. Morris's Haig-as-the-Thing is a
primordial figure of the era of American decline, rising inexorably through
rotting, fetid bureaucracies, his ascent proving the emptiness of our society.

Alexander Haig grew up in Bala Cynwyd, an upstanding suburb of Philadelphia, the
son of a lawyer who died in 1935 at the age of 38, when Alexander was 11. He
went briefly to Notre Dame and then transferred to West Point, where he was
graduated in 1947, 214th in a class of 310. His third assignment as a young
officer was to Japan, and there he married the daughter of General Alonzo Fox,
Douglas MacArthur's deputy in postwar Tokyo. In 1950 he followed MacArthur to
Korea (Mr. Haig says he carried MacArthur's sleeping bag ashore at Inchon),
served in the advance to the Yalu River and subsequent retreat and returned to a
series of career-advancing peacetime jobs in the United States. In 1963, in the
Pentagon, he was discovered, almost Lana Turner-style, by Joseph Califano,
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Nicholas Lemann is executive editor of Texas Monthly.
then general counsel to the Army, and chosen to work in the Army Secretary's
office for a time. After service in Vietnam and in the administration at West
Point he was discovered again, by Henry Kissinger, and given the job of Mr.
Kissinger's military aide at the National Security Council. From there he began
his direct accession to the top staff job in the White House.

It was at this point that Mr. Haig's path crossed that of Roger Morris, who was
also a member of Mr. Kissinger's brand-new N.S.C.  staff. Their paths stayed
crossed for a year and a half, until Mr.  Morris resigned in protest over the
bombing of Cambodia. Given the fact that Mr. Morris did no original research for
this book (he says in the preface that he had intended to do interviews, but
found his would-be sources willing to speak about Haig only ''vapidly or
obsequiously''), it is only in covering this period that Mr. Morris brings
something more than a vivid writing style and an admirable familiarity with the
public record to his subject. For much of the rest of the book, Mr. Haig's
scheming side is his only side; here he comes much more fully to life as a
slightly naive military man newly adrift in a sea of foreign-policy sharks - ''a
forty-four-year-old lined, ruddy, and leathery colonel in tweedy hat, trench
coat, and new dark business suits with trousers slightly high-water.''

Mr. Morris's recollections of life at the N.S.C. made headlines when they were
quoted by Seymour M. Hersh in an article on Mr.  Kissinger excerpted from Mr.
Hersh's forthcoming book that appeared in The Atlantic last spring. Mr. Morris
has Mr. Kissinger referring to President Nixon behind his back as ''our meatball
President'' and ''my drunken friend,'' making policy while the President sleeps,
''bellowing for staff attention'' as one of his aides, having collapsed from
strain, lies on a couch awaiting an ambulance. It is presented as the most
poisonous working atmosphere imaginable. For his part Mr. Haig, while the
perfect aide to Mr. Kissinger, also was careful to establish a separate channel
of communication to President Nixon, who had taken a shine to him. And just as
Mr. Kissinger was privately contemptuous of the President, so too was Mr. Haig,
in Mr.  Morris's account, privately contemptuous of Mr. Kissinger, telling aides
at certain moments that his boss was ''weak,'' ''crazy,'' or ''having one of his
fits.'' As time went on and his status rose, Mr.  Haig began to accord the same
treatment to his Commander in Chief.

For his account of events after 1970 Mr. Morris is forced back onto a vigorous
reading of the printed record, but it doesn't make him bird-dog Mr. Haig any
less ardently. He tracks his quarry through such debacles as the secret war in
Cambodia, United States plotting against Salvador Allende in Chile, the
wiretapping of Washington journalists and White House aides, the attempts to
resist making public the White House tapes, the Saturday night massacre, even
Gerald Ford's pardon of Richard Nixon. In each of these cases Mr.  Morris is
convincing on the point that Mr. Haig knew what was going on and was a
transmitter of orders, but he never quite completely undercuts Mr. Haig's own
contention that he did not personally make illegal or justice-obstructing
policy.

Still, if you believe that Mr. Haig was the one great hero of the Nixon
Administration, the architect of the resignation and the preserver of political
order, Mr. Morris forces you to reconsider.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MEXICAN OFFICIALS OBTAIN U.S. PLAN FOR REGION

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Aug. 15


The Reagan Administration believes it has arrested the trend to the left in
Central America, but says that it must ''keep pressure'' on Cuba and Nicaragua
if its policy is to succeed, according to a confidential State Department paper.

''Assuming that Cuba and Nicaragua do not substantially increase the stakes in
Central America, the secret to success will be a steady and sustained effort,''
the paper said. ''Barring serious miscalculation by the other side, there will
be no opportunity for quick decisive action to end the problem.''

The three-page document, which is circulating within the Mexican Government and
was made available here, noted with satisfaction that ''the situation has
deteriorated'' in Nicaragua and that ''the greater effectiveness of
anti-Sandinista groups operating along the country's borders has increased the
pressure on the Nicaraguans.''

Hondurans Termed Cooperative

Listing other developments viewed as positive by the Administration, the
document said that the new civilian Government in Honduras was ''willing to
cooperate in the struggle against guerrillas in El Salvador and against
antidemocratic forces in Nicaragua,'' while Costa Rica's new administration
shared the conviction ''that Nicaragua must be dealt with firmly.''

The briefing paper, dated June 26, was drafted by L. Craig Johnstone, the head
of the Central American desk in the State Department, and cleared by the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, Thomas O. Enders. It
was not known how the document came into the possession of the Mexican
Government or why officials here decided to share it with the press.

But the paper makes a passing reference to Mexico's support for sweeping change
and its criticism of United States policy in Central America when it notes that
''Mexico's unhelpful role is diminishing as that country focuses more on
domestic economic concerns.''

The paper's emphasis was on what it calls the need for ''a stronger
constituency'' on Capitol Hill for the Administration's policy in key votes on
economic and military aid.

''Human rights concerns, diminished but still-present fears of a Vietnam-style
escalation and other competing concerns are all obstacles,'' the paper said.
''If we are unsuccessful in these votes, we will face increased chances of a
political/military debacle in Central America, with grave national security
consequences.''

The document said that ''the use of U.S. combat forces would be
counter-productive (and unacceptable here).'' Instead, it went on, the
Administration seeks to improve the military abilities of ''friendly nations.''

''If Nicaragua and Cuba decide to increase the stakes substantially, more
dramatic measures will be required,'' the document said. ''This is a
possibility, there being some indications that such an escalation may already be
under consideration.''

To support its case that ''the trend of events in Central America is now running
in our favor,'' the document asserted that the Administration inherited ''a
chaotic situation'' in the region, with Cuba and Nicaragua supporting
insurgents, Guatemala trying to crush guerrillas ''through self-defeating
brutality'' and El Salvador's junta under challenge.

But El Salvador's military abilities have improved, while the March 28 elections
for a Constituent Assembly were ''a psychological and military disaster'' for
the rebels, the paper said. It described the Government ''of National Unity''
headed by President Alvaro Magana as a ''quantum step forward.'' .

Referring to Guatemala, the paper argued that the March 23 coup that installed
Gen. Efrain Rios Montt in power had brought human rights improvements and opened
the way for ''a more effective counterinsurgency effort.''

The document said that Honduras and Costa Rica faced economic crises that made
them vulnerable to ''social instabilty and subversion.'' But a dictatorship has
been replaced by a democratically elected Government in Honduras, it said, while
an ineffective Government in Costa Rica has been replaced by a stronger one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 17, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDE CITES WAR MISSING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 386 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


President Reagan's national security adviser said today that the Administration
did not rule out the possibility that some Americans still are being held
captive in Southeast Asia nine years after United States troops were pulled out
of the Vietnam War.

''We have no confirmed evidence, but we have enough information not to rule out
the possibility that some of our unaccounted-for servicemen could still be held
alive in Indochina,'' said William P.  Clark. According to various estimates,
nearly 2,500 Americans remain unaccounted for.

''One of the greatest tragedies of Vietnam,'' he said, ''was that the United
States cannot be certain, even to this day, that the treaty we signed to
disengage ourselves from the conflict was fully complied with in regard to our
prisoners of war and missing in action.''

Mr. Clark, speaking to the national convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars
in Los Angeles, pledged that the Administration would ''use all means available,
including the full intelligence apparatus of the United States, to get to the
bottom of this matter.''

'To Take Appropriate Action'

''Should we find these reports are true, we are prepared to take appropriate
action to insure that no American remains a captive,'' he said.
''Simultaneously, we are continuing our efforts to insure the remains of those
American prisoners still in Indochina are returned home.''

A copy of Mr. Clark's speech text was released by the White House.  The deputy
White House press secretary, Larry Speakes, said Mr.  Clark's statement did not
suggest that any new evidence had been uncovered and that his remarks reflected
a previously held policy not to write off the possibility that Americans were
still being held captive.

''But we're leaving no stone unturned to try to find out if there are,'' said
Mr. Speakes. He noted that there were unconfirmed reports from time to time that
the missing have been sighted in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Speakes said Mr. Clark's statement had not been enunciated previously.
''That is a new statement; we have not made that statement'' publicly, he said.
''We have previously made those statements to M.I.A. families.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 17, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Measuring the Size of the Tax Bill

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 16, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


There is little disagreement that the $98.3 billion tax bill is immense.  But is
it the biggest ever? It has frequently been called that in recent weeks, but
Administration officials reject the title. They argue first that only a small
amount of the total will derive from actual tax increases, the remainder coming
from stricter enforcement of the tax laws and the closing of loopholes. They
also say the Vietnam surcharge begun in 1968, the Social Security tax increase
of 1977 and the oil ''windfall profits'' tax of 1980 were larger.

Resolving the issue depends in part on how revenue increases are counted. The
Vietnam surtax raised less than $25 billion between 1969 and 1971. If it were to
take effect now, it would raise an estimated $75 billion.

The Social Security tax increase of 1977 was expected to raise $227 billion
between 1979 and 1987. Looking just at 1983 through 1985, the bill was expected
to raise $69 billion at the time it was passed.  Now, however, it is expected to
bring in $112 billion over the next three years.

As for the windfall profits tax of 1980, it was originally expected to raise $68
billion over three years. But because of the decline in crude oil prices, the
Government now expects the figure to be lower.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 18, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Memorial Dedication Delayed Because of a Statue

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 145 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 17


The memorial honoring Vietnam War veterans and victims will not be dedicated
this year because an accompanying statue is not finished, a spokesman for the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund said today.

The memorial, under construction near the Lincoln Memorial, was to have been
dedicated on Veterans Day. But the spokesman, Ruth Murdock, said it might not be
dedicated until November 1983 at the earliest, when the statue is expected to be
completed by Frederick Hart, a Washington sculptor.

The memorial will be open to the public in mid-November, however.  The statue is
an addition to the original V-shaped, black granite memorial designed by Maya
Ying Lin, a Yale undergraduate, which was criticized because it did not include
traditional symbols such as a statue and flag.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 19, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Judge Upholds Charge On Registration Failure

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 64 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Aug. 18


A Federal district judge today refused to dismiss a felony charge against
Benjamin H. Sasway, a student accused of failing to register with the Selective
Service.

The defense had moved for dismissal on the ground of ''selective prosecution''
of Mr. Sasway, the first American indicted for failure to register since the end
of the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 19, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vietnamese in Texas Kills Four and Himself

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 118 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 18


A Vietnamese, refugee bitter about separating from his wife, shot to death his
18-month-old son and three other relatives before killing himself today, ending
a 12-hour rampage, the authorities said.

Neighbors told investigators that Hai Viet Do, 26 years old, was distressed
because he did not want a divorce.  The victims were identified as Mr. Do's son,
Johnny, who was shot five times; his father-in-law, Khoa Ta, 45, shot in the
head; his mother-in-law, Chut Ta, 46, and his brother-in-law, Nahn Ngoc Ta, 12.

The gunman's wife, Thao Thi Ta, 22, who was shot seven times, was repported in
serious but stable condition at a Hospital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 19, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
COLLECTORS OF MEMORABILIA

BYLINE: By Neil Amdur

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 997 words


M y 10-year-old son was distressed to read about the thieves who recently made
off with $10,000 worth of baseball cards at a shopping mall in upstate New York.
The thought of someone stealing his collection of airline pins, Richie Rich
comic books and baseball cards was chilling enough for him to revise security
procedures in his room.

Collecting is supposedly a sign of the gifted, or at least that's what some
psychologists keep telling us. If so, millions of Americans no longer have to
apologize for filling up basements, cellars, attics, garages and rooms with
boxes of books, programs, pins, photographs, games and cards.

The scope of sports collecting is wider than a football field. Jon Kessel, a
38-year-old high-school English teacher from Selden, L.I., has all 23 books in
the Chip Hilton sports series, the once-popular fictional collection for
children written by Clair Bee. How much is the series worth? Historians at the
Strand Book Store on Broadway and 12th Street say they don't know; neither do
the publishers, Grosset and Dunlap.

''Nobody's offered me anything and I don't think there's ever been any monetary
value attached to it,'' Mr. Kessel said from his home the other day. ''But I
don't think I would ever sell them anyway.''

Sam Elfand of Tamarac, Fla., owned every set of teams from the APBA major league
baseball board game, which began in 1950 with only 150 sets sold. He sold his
collection ''for four figures,'' he said, ''on the same day that Neil Armstrong
walked on the moon.''

L ike their art, stamp and coin collecting colleagues, sports collectors have
been known to go to unusual lengths in pursuit of their objectives. Bill
Schulman, an airport security employee from Commack, L.I., once heard about ''a
little old lady from Woodhaven, Queens'' who suddenly discovered old baseball
cards in her house, apparently left by her father. Mr. Schulman drove to the
house; the ''old cards'' turned out to be two Honus Wagners and assorted other
golden oldies that cost him ''in the neighborhood of $7,000.''

Many American men, and a fair share of women, probably have collected baseball
cards at one time or another. Baseball cards dominate most collectors' shows,
and the equivalent of a national circuit exists for the thousands who follow
prices, trends and new discoveries in such periodicals as the Baseball Hobby
News, The Trader Speaks, or the Sports Collectors Digest. Last weekend, there
were 15 card shows throughout the country for dealers, traders and novices. This
weekend, the action will be in Las Vegas, Nev.; Philadelphia, Atlanta, Toledo,
Ohio; Somerset, N.J., Flint, Mich., Fort Mitchell, Ky., Richmond Hill, Queens,
and on Cape Cod. Next weekend will be the biggie - the third annual national
convention in St. Louis.

But baseball cards are only the most publicized phase of sports collecting. Mel
Purcell, the pro tennis player, collects batting helmets and wears them at
tennis tournaments. Bert Sugar, who is updating the fourth edition of his book
''The Sports Collectors Bible'' has the original cornerstone from Yankee Stadium
in the driveway of his home, Babe Ruth contracts from 1918 and 1932 and the
first bell ever used at a championship prize fight (John L. Sullivan versus
James J. Corbett). He says he also has $300,000 worth of baseball cards stored
in a bank vault.

Mr. Sugar, the editor and publisher of Ring magazine, used the sale of some of
his cards to pay for the college education of his children. ''To me, they're
better than stock,'' he said.

Collectors, like stock traders, try to capitalize on hot items in a bull market.
World Series programs have ''gone through the roof,'' according to Mr. Sugar,
with programs from 1903 now worth about $2,000 apiece if you can find them.
Douglas Bolton, the president of Cadaco, which manufactures the All-Star
Baseball board game, recently received a call from the West Coast: Someone had
been offered $450 for a minted 1942 edition of the game. Was the price fair, the
caller wondered?

John Rose began collecting player disks from All-Star Baseball, which first came
on the market in 1941, because he says ''baseball cards got to be too rich for
my blood.'' Mr. Rose, a 38-year-old Federal Government employee from
Fredericksburg, Va., now owns every set of disks and publishes the All Star
Baseball News four times a year. Circulation: 300.

Would Mr. Rose part with his collection for $5,000? ''I'm sure I wouldn't,'' he
says.

C ollectors enjoy the recognition they receive, but sometimes pay for the
publicity and generosity. Mark Draper, who lives in Greece, N.Y., agreed to put
his extensive baseball-card collection on display, along with six other dealers,
at a neighborhood mall last month, but his complete display case was stolen
after closing hours.

''They got 99 percent of what I had,'' said the 30-year-old Mr.  Draper, a
Vietnam War veteran, who had used his cards to trade for shoes, a sheltie puppy
and canary and still has no leads on the theft. ''It's kind of discouraging.
Even if I had some money now, I couldn't buy some of those cards because so many
people are into it, it's hard to buy a whole collection.''

Years ago, collectors of sports memorabilia were looked upon as somewhat
eccentric. After all, unlike vintage wines, what could you do with a 1910 Eddie
Plank tobacco card, or a misprinted 1965 All-Star Baseball disk of Bernie Allen
who actually hits more like the great Eddie Collins?

''My wife's been very, very good about it,'' says Jon Kessel, who also collects
Yankee yearbooks and sports books (''only in hard cover''). ''She humors me.
There are times when she wishes I'd do other things, but, in general, she's very
supportive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of collector Joseph Amir

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

300 LEGIONNAIRES GIVEN SEND-OFF FOR BEIRUT

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 19


About 300 members of the French Foreign Legion left a military base in Corsica
today to serve as the first contingent of the multinational peacekeeping force
in Beirut.

The departure was widely heralded and included a review of the troops by Charles
Hernu, the Minister of Defense, and Gen. Janou Lacaze, the army Chief of Staff.

''Everything must be done to avoid lapses in discipline and excesses, and you,
legionnaires, I count on you to demonstrate the professionalism of French
troops,'' Mr. Hernu told the men as they lined the runway.

Five planes - a DC-8 marked with the French presidential seal, three Transall
transports and an Air France 747 cargo jet - carried the men and equipment from
the Corsican base at Calvi to Larnaca in Cyprus, where they will transfer to
three French warships for the rest of the journey to Lebanon.

Expected Early Saturday

The contingent is expected to reach in Beirut early Saturday, several hours
before the first group of Palestinian guerrillas are to depart.

A larger contingent of about 500 men from the Third Marine Parachute Regiment
will be leaving from Carcassonne in southern France. The regiment is a
descendant of the old Third Colonial Army.

Both groups going to Lebanon are part of France's 11th Parachute Division, a
rapid assistance force designed for quick action in troublespots.

''These are crack troops, probably the best that France has,'' said a military
expert here. ''It was completely logical to send them.''

In Lebanon the 800 troops will be joined by a like number from the United States
and by about 400 Italian soldiers, who are volunteers from the Governolo
Batallion of the elite Bersaglieri Regiment. The Italian troops were sent to
Brindisi in southern Italy a week ago and are waiting for Italian Navy frigates
to take them to the Middle East.

Italian Pride Stirred

The Bersaglieri - the word means marksmen - is an armored infantry unit that won
fame in the 19th century wars for Italian unity. The troops wear distinctive
black helmets with long flowing plumes and march in a double-time step.

Far from being controversial, the Italian decision to send troops seems to be
sweeping the country up in a sense of pride that it would be called upon in such
a delicate situation. The decision is also in keeping with the emphasis in
Italy's foreign policy of a more aggressive role in Mediterranean affairs.

For France, participation in the peacekeeping force is seen here as reflecting
both the country's desire for a large international role and the historical ties
with an embattled former mandate in Lebanon.

Only support is evident for France's participation. In a rare television
interview Tuesday night, President Francois Mitterrand proudly emphasized that
the French would be the first foreign forces to enter Beirut.

''The mandate of these multinational forces - each of which will remain under
its own command but under the authority of the Lebanese Government - will last
as long as the negotiations indicate,'' Mr.  Mitterrand said.

Lebanon was a French mandate from 1919 to 1943, and there are still considerable
linguistic and cultural ties between the two countries. In recent weeks a strong
sense of anger and sadness over the virtual destruction of Beirut has gripped
France.

French Favor Palestinians

French sympathies have been overtly with the Palestinians. Some military experts
here say the choice of France, Italy and the United States for the force was
designed to reassure the various parties in the dispute. The United States is a
longstanding supporter of Israel, and Italy is viewed by experts here as
neutral.

Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel initially objected to the use of French
troops but accepted them as part of a three-nation force.

The French armed forces have been active in peacekeeping roles in recent years
but principally in Africa, where France has three bases. French troops have
served in Zaire, Chad and the Central African Republic, where 1,000 French
infantrymen are still stationed. France also had troops in Lebanon as part of
the last United Nations peacekeeping force stationed in the south before the
Israeli invasion on June 6.

The French troops going to Lebanon are all army volunteers because French law
prohibits sending conscripts without their consent. The troops, who are trained
for urban combat, are lightly armed with assault rifles and antitank weapons.

Even today the Foreign Legion consists almost entirely of non-French enlistees
who are commanded by French officers. The legion, officially created in 1831,
served in dozens of troublespots around the world, including Algeria and
Vietnam, from 1945 to 1954.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of French Foreign Legionaires

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY'S SPECIAL FORCES TRY TO REBUILD IMAGE BY LINKING BRAINS AND BRAWN

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2162 words

DATELINE: FORT BRAGG, N.C.


The Army's ability to fight guerrillas is being rebuilt at the Special Forces
center on Smoke Bomb Hill here after an increase in insurgency and terrorism in
Asia, Africa and especially Latin America.

Twenty years ago, President Kennedy made respectable what the military calls
counterinsurgency, a mixture of political and military tactics to combat
guerrillas flitting through the night to strike where least expected.

But a decade of struggle with meager success in the jungles of Vietnam gave
counterinsurgency a bad name, and the Army's ability to do battle with
insurgents nearly disappeared in the late 1970's.

Today the Special Forces, better known as Green Berets, are rebuilding with an
emphasis on training foreign armies to cope with insurgents that threaten their
nations. Although the Green Berets are capable of fighting, their primary
responsibility is to devise strategies for other governments on how to defeat
insurgents.

''We have a very viable mission today,'' said Brig. Gen. Joseph C.  Lutz, the
commanding officer here. ''We kind of feel we're on the upswing.''

Unit on the Upswing

That upswing is supported by the Reagan Administration, where the policy on
unconventional warfare is laid out in the classified fiveyear plan called
Defense Guidance. The document says, ''We must revitalize and enhance special
operations forces to project United States power where the use of conventional
forces would be premature, inappropriate, or infeasible.''

The Special Forces are made up of both experienced leaders and young, perceptive
students of unconventional war. A Special Forces research unit has delved into
the lessons of Vietnam and other insurgencies of the last 40 years to distill
their causes, strategy and tactics and to devise basic principles for fighting
them.

In the field, the Green Berets have gained fresh experience by training a
battalion of Salvadorans here, a battalion of Liberians in their own country and
other foreign armies as members of teams that teach the use of American weapons
and equipment.

But that may be as far as their ability goes at this time. Whether the United
States itself could mount a serious and effective counterinsurgency mission in,
say, El Salvador, is open to question, according to military planners in
Washington.

''Too Much Macho''

The Green Berets are authorized to have 8,600 soldiers but are shy of officers
and experienced sergeants. Also, many officers here said, they suffer from a
poor image remaining from Vietnam. ''We're seen as either snake-eaters or mafia
in uniform,'' said one officer. ''We've had too much macho.''

Moreover, according to officers in Washington, the Army emphasizes preparation
for a massed land war in Europe and considers counterinsurgency out of the
mainstream. Army officers normally receive little instruction in unconventional
operations, and regular Army units get little training in the dispersed,
small-unit tactics for fighting guerrillas.

Political constraints may be greater than military weaknesses.  President Reagan
and Congress may be reluctant to deploy the Green Berets in any sizable force
for fear the move will be considered a prelude to the commitment of regular
divisions, as in Vietnam, according to senior officers in Washington.

At bottom, Americans may not have the patience for fighting a guerrilla war.
Military strategists from Sun Tzu in China, 2,500 years ago, to Vo Nguyen Giap
in Vietnam in this century have proclaimed that insurgencies will almost always
be protracted before they are successful.

No 'Stomach for Long Wars'

''But Americans like neat, quick solutions and don't have much stomach for long,
drawn-out wars,'' said an officer here. Douglas S.  Blaufarb, a specialist in
guerrilla war who is retired from the Central Intelligence Agency, may have put
it best in his book ''The Counterinsurgency Era'' when he said that effective
counterinsurgency ''is a complex and difficult manuever for which the United
States has shown no talent.''

Even so, the Reagan Administration has begun to revive the Army's ability in
counterinsurgency. Administration officials in Washington said that the Special
Forces would be enlarged in the next few years, although by how much and in what
units has not been decided. They said that more money would be spent on
sophisticated but compact communications equipment, on air transport for
infiltration, and especially on training, not only here but with similar units
in the Navy and Air Force.

The Green Berets are also working on their image. ''One of my goals is to
improve our image by our behavior,'' said General Lutz, a muscular, articulate
man with a master's degree in human relations.  ''We are demonstrating to the
Army and the other services that we are, in fact, mature professional
soldiers.''
Tactics

Maj. Thomas J. Kuster Jr. of the Bronx speaks fluent Spanish, has served with
Special Forces in Panama and can quote from such insurgent strategists as the
famous Ernesto (Che) Guevara of Cuba and the little-known Carlos Marighella of
Brazil.

Major Kuster is among a dozen specialists inhabiting small offices on the sixth
floor of the Institute for Military Assistance here, where they have scrutinized
the guerrilla operations of the Vietcong of Vietnam, the Maquis of France in
World War II, the Irgun in Israel, the Hukbakhalahaps of the Philippines, the
Chinese in Malaysia, Fidel Castro in Cuba and guerrillas he has backed elsewhere
in Latin America, and the ''wars of national liberation'' supported by the
Soviet Union in Africa.

At their disposal is a flow of intelligence reports, analyses written by
civilian specialists on guerrilla warfare and a library stocked with treatises
on insurgency. Ho Chi Minh's thoughts are expressed in the book ''On
Revolution'' and Che Guevara's in his ''Episodes of the Revolutionary War.''

From those sources, the analysts in camouflaged jungle uniforms have concluded
that in countering an insurgency strategy and tactics must be fitted to the
circumstances. ''There is no immediate, automatic response where you just plug
in and go,'' Major Kuster said.

Will of the Government

Before the United States offers to help counter an insurgency, General Lutz
said, it is vital to determine the will of the government under attack. ''If
that country doesn't have the will and wherewithal to meet the insurgency,'' he
said, ''the United States cannot do it.''

Close behind that, Major Kuster said, is the need to catch the insurgency as
early as possible. Then the insurgency must been seen in all of its political,
economic, social and military parts. General Lutz quoted Mao Tse Tung: ''You
must take care of the people.'' Major Kuster added: ''We just can't say, 'That
man has military problems so he needs military help.' ''

To assess an insurgency and devise a counter, the Green Berets have adapted a
five-phase scheme worked out by Brian Jenkins of the Rand Corporation in
California, an authority on terrorism and insurgency.  Unless the insurgency is
stopped at one stage, this plan holds, it moves on to another and can then be
beaten only with a greater, most costly effort.

In the first phase, insurgents often seek publicity, for example, by blowing up
power stations or assassinating politicians. Stopping that is primarily a job
for the police, but political aims of the insurgents must be battled with
psychological and civic programs.

Road Checks and Curfews

In a second phase, the insurgents may rob banks for money and raid army outposts
for weapons. They recruit vigorously and begin to organize. Propaganda becomes
more virulent. The government must begin to control the movement of people with
road checks and curfews but must blame that imposition on the insurgents.

Next the insurgents, in a phase common to nearly all insurgencies, challenge the
government for control of the streets or parts of the country with ambushes,
raids, sabotage and bombings. They seek legitimacy by collecting taxes and
combating crime. ''This is the point,'' Major Kuster said, ''where the
government has to respond, not react.'' It must make cities secure, persuade
citizens to rally and undertake economic programs to remedy ills the insurgents
have played on. Among the military responses could be a request for the Special
Forces to train the army to search out and destroy the insurgents.

In the fourth phase, the guerrillas normally seek to mobilize the masses with
general strikes. As the economy is paralyzed, more unemployed workers take to
the streets. By this time, the government may have to resort to martial law.

In the final phase, the guerrillas go over to direct assaults, as they did in
the 1968 Tet offensive and the 1975 final offensive in Vietnam, when regular
forces overran the country. That can be countered only by regular forces with
massed firepower. ''He's coming at you,'' said Major Kuster, wryly. ''You don't
have to go looking for him.''
Teachers

The art of teaching takes high priority here at Fort Bragg. ''We make a big
point of this,'' General Lutz said. The practice of teaching goes on all over
the world in several different forms.

Capt. Bradley W. Miller and Capt. Thomas W. Grace returned to Smoke Bomb Hill
recently from four and a half months in Liberia, where, with 10 senior sergeants
in an ''A Team,'' the basic unit of Special Forces, they trained a Liberian
battalion of 600 officers and soldiers.

From the beginning, the Green Berets had to improvise. ''When we got there,''
Captain Miller said, referring to an abandoned air base, ''all we found were
empty buildings and a big rock pile.'' They had to build firing ranges and get
living quarters and dining areas set up and a medical room open.

Liberians speak English but their phrasing is different, and many of the men
could not read. So the Green Berets relied more on showing than telling.
''They're going to do what they see you doing,'' Captain Grace said. ''You
always make sure that you can do it better than they can.''

'Shoot, Move and Communicate'

In training, Captain Miller, the team leader, worked with the Liberian battalion
commander and his company commanders; Captain Grace, then a first lieutenant,
advised the battalion executive officer and the staff, particularly on
logistics.

Two of the Green Beret sergeants taught marksmanship; another pair instructed in
tactics; two more taught radio operation. ''We kept it simple,'' Captain Grace
said. ''Shoot, move, and communicate.''

Two engineering sergeants taught field fortifications while the two medical
sergeants may have been the busiest of all, teaching first aid and operations of
the medical platoon and battalion aid station. They also had to treat the
Liberian families who tagged along, including the delivery of a baby.

The Liberians were trained for conventional operations. But Captain Miller said
the instruction would have been the same had the Green Berets been assigned to
teach counterinsurgency, other than teaching dispersed rather than massed
tactics and more night operations.

Gaining experience on missions the size of that in Liberia is rare. But Special
Forces have contributed about 25 percent of all the Army's mobile training teams
dispatched across the world in recent years to provide instruction on American
weapons, vehicles, radios, and engineering equipment. Four years ago, 53 of
those teams, numbering one to nine soldiers, were dispatched; this year, about
130 will go.

Accepted as Instructors

Col. Donald J. Soland, the officer who assembles and deploys the teams, said the
first place he looked for members was the Special Forces because they were
trained to teach and wanted the experience.  He said that ''Special Forces
sergeants are accepted around the world as instructors'' even when teaching
foreign officers.

Col. James H. Morris, director of the Special Forces school, said, ''Every
Special Forces individual who goes through our training from the very first day
is put in a position where he must tell or demonstrate something to everyone
else.''

They are taught how to work through interpreters and officers are instructed on
the cross-cultural aspects of dealing with foreign officers who are often senior
to them in rank. ''We tell them to be sensitive,'' Colonel Morris said. ''Our
business is sensitive in nature.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. Special Forces soldier instructing photo
of Brig. Gen. Joseph C. Lutz photo of Maj. Thomas J. Kuster Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 668 words


Books of The Times Vietnam Experience By ANATOLE BROYARD
THE 13TH VALLEY. By John M. Del Vec- chio. 606 pages. Bantam Books. $15.95.

Because we may never know what Vietnam meant in the perspective of American
history, we may have to content ourselves with simply learning how it felt to be
there, and this is where ''The 13th Valley'' is at its best. How a soldier sees
a beautiful landscape in terms of the protection it affords or the threat it
conceals, or how to read it as a field of forces; what various weapons can do
and how tactics resemble an aggressive dance; the feel of your equipment, the
bite of your pack against your shoulders and back; the sounds of fear and of
hope; the elation and fatigue of the body and its vulnerability to an unfamiliar
climate; the ''oceanic'' lift that teamwork gives you; the immense gratitude you
feel toward a reliable man and the rage toward an unreliable one.

How a banana spider moves; the sense of invasion or rape when you find leeches
on your body; your self-disgust when you're covered with sores you can't scrub
away; the treachery of your bowels when you need every ounce of strength; what
your thoughts revert to when nobody's trying to kill you or you them.

The nagging, ever-recurring ''What am I doing here?''; the shame of shooting at
someone and the insane pride of hitting him; the knowledge that you're
deliberately brutalizing yourself day by day in self-defense; the soft,
suspended emotions of the civilians who have nowhere to go except into drinking,
whoring, drugs and letters to or from home. The mysterious love-hate
relationships of men without women; the arbitrary rituals that substitute in the
Army for ordinary social life.

Mr. Del Vecchio knows all these things and more. He even knows how to conjure a
gourmet meal out of Army rations by juggling equivalent flavors and cooking them
over a chemical fire extracted from ammunition. He is a passionate enthusiast of
the concrete detail. If he had confined himself in ''The 13th Valley'' to
straight reporting, the book might have come as close as we will ever get to
what is awkwardly called ''the Vietnam experience.''

As a novelist, though, he makes just about every conceivable error. His
characters are out of a Sears, Roebuck catalogue. As in old war movies on
television, every soldier is a homespun philosopher with a theory about the
causes of war, about government, about aggression, about ethnic relations and
about manhood. Almost everyone has a woman back home to serve as counterpoint,
to prove that beneath this rough exterior there beats a bleeding heart.

Every character speaks in what sounds like a garble of black English, and this
peculiar dialect is so heavily loaded with obscenity that the reader becomes as
tired as a foot soldier with a full pack. Then suddenly, without warning, like a
sneak attack, they will all start talking jargon: political, psychological,
medical, historical - you name it. In a love letter to his wife, Lieut. Rufus
Brooks refers to a bad period they passed through in these terms: ''However, it
need not be paramount to our every decision, it is something I believe we can
cope with, can live beyond and can reduce in the future to relative
insignificance.'' A soldier nicknamed El Paso says, ''Every year we descend into
history we find not just a greater lineal understanding of today's events but we
also find these events inseparably tied to other events.'' Writing about men
waiting to move into action, the author himself says, ''Their actions were the
blossoming of the past, blooming continuously from the humus of decayed
antiquity.''

War is such a large and vehement subject that it tempts all but the best
draftsmen to overwrite, to turn their novels into a kind of rhetorical
fire-fight. Much of ''The 13th Valley'' is like the spraying of an automatic
weapon. But just as their must be discipline in war, there must be discipline
too in writing about war. If you don't keep your rifle clean, it may backfire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John M. Del Vecchio

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Observer;
RATTLING THE CHAINS

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


Politicians remind me of Marley's Ghost. Clanking about in Scrooge's bedroom,
miserable and gloomy, the Ghost lamented, ''I wear the chain I forged in life.''
Reflecting on President Reagan's present troubles, I fancy him roaming the White
House moaning, ''I wear the chains I forged in the campaign.''

Most Presidents acquire chains in their campaigns, of course, and so do less
exalted politicians who find that happy talk has suddenly transferred them from
the lecture podium, where everything sounds easy, to command centers where
nothing seems to work. As a class, politicians are usually quick to shake off
the shackles they forged to win votes, but Mr. Reagan has been slower than most.

Twenty months after his campaign ended he was still acting like a man who
believed his own campaign promise to produce milk and honey by firing the
beekeeper and cutting the milkmaid's salary. ''Voodoo economics,'' George Bush
called it before a timely conversion to Vice President stifled his talent for
snappy phrase-making.

Now that the President has done his best to make powerful juju, found that the
magic doesn't work and done a backflip on tax policy, his conservative followers
who believed in the magic are furious with him for trying to shed those campaign
chains. Here is a fine example of what can happen to a politician lacking the
quick-change artist's skill at slipping out of his campaign promises and into
something more comfortable.

Cannier politicians junk their campaign malarkey as soon as possible after
taking office. This allows the people who believed it ample time to get over
their pique before the next campaign begins.  It also affords time to compensate
for any permanent loss of true believers by gathering new support among people
who opposed your campaign promises and think you've finally come to your senses.

The best politicians tend to be mas-ters of unshackling themselves from their
campaign promises while the votes are still being counted. We've had a lot of
Presidents in the last 50 years who could have given Mr. Reagan a lesson in how
to do it. Franklin Roosevelt - one of Mr. Reagan's idols, we are told - was one
such.

Roosevelt, believe it or not, campaigned on a pledge to balance the budget. A
hundred days after taking office he had firmly cemented the base for his future
reputation as the father of deficit financing.  The case of Lyndon Johnson is
even more startling.

After a campaign in which he successfully slandered his opponent, Senator
Goldwater, as a dangerous warmonger and presented himself as the father and
mother of peace, Johnson waded into the Vietnam War on a scale that was to make
it the longest and one of the nastiest in the country's history. An innovator in
politics, Johnson didn't even wait until the votes were counted. While
campaigning as the angel of peace, he was clandestinely approving expansion of
the war.

By the Roosevelt and Johnson standards, Mr. Reagan has been an arthritic
slowpoke about shedding his campaign chains. If there were fairness and decency
in politics, the conservatives now vilifying him for betraying his promises
would be prais-ing him for having stayed so long on a rough course.

But politics is not about fairness and decency; it is about getting elected and
staying elected, and staying elected is about finding yourself in a command
center where nothing seems to work and making a few things seem to work anyhow,
at least for a little while.

It's this last requirement that compelled Mr. Reagan to try his belated backflip
on economic policy. With things going badly, the conservatives were shouting,
''Don't do something - just stand there!'' Nobody gets re-elected by following
that advice. Presidents, who tend to worry about such things, don't even get
well reviewed in the history books.

At the moment Mr. Reagan may sense some danger of receiving poor notices from
the historians because of the inflexibility with which he stuck to a radical
economic idea that was powerful campaign medicine but always struck a lot of
economic traditionalists as rhetorical snake oil.

The astonishing thing about the President is not that he changed course but that
it took him so long. One has the impression he came to office so persuaded the
policy would eventually work that he was willing to risk disaster to see it
through. For faith-in-owncampaign-oratory, his was a remarkable performance.
Contrast it with John Mitchell's advice to the press - watch what we do, not
what we say - when Richard Nixon took office in 1969.

Even the Nixon people, who knew that campaign guff became disposable junk on
Election Day, lacked the forthright approach of the late Gov. Earl Long of
Louisiana, though. A.J. Liebling reports that Long, immediately after being
elected on a promise to cut taxes, sent the legislature a bill calling for a tax
increase.

When an aide protested that it was outrageous and reminded him that he had
promised a tax cut, Long explained, ''I lied.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Senate Confirms Ex-P.O.W.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 20


Everett Alvarez Jr., whose eight and a half years of captivity made him the
American held prisoner longest in the Vietnam war, won Senate confirmation today
as deputy chief of the Veterans Administration. The 44-year-old Mr. Alvarez, who
had been deputy director of the Peace Corps since April 1981, succeeds Charles
T. Hagel, who resigned in a policy dispute with the agency's administrator,
Robert P. Nimmo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEING PATIENT BRINGS HABIB FINAL VICTORY

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1538 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 21


Over the 10-week stretch of negotiations that many felt would never work out,
Philip C. Habib, in private sessions and in late-night phone calls to
Washington, pushed, cajoled and kept driving toward a settlement.

The agreement - the withdrawal of Palestinian and Syrian forces from Beirut, the
end of the destruction - bears his name, the Habib plan, and in this city not
known for its political generosity, no one begrudges him the credit.

State Department officials in touch with their counterparts in Beirut and Tel
Aviv describe the typical evening scene.

'I Have to Do All the Work'

It's 2 A.M. in Lebanon. ''Phil,'' as almost everyone calls him, is on the secure
telephone to Washington, shouting. Everyone else in Mr. Habib's residence is
either asleep or drifting off.

''These young guys here don't know how to do any work,'' Mr. Habib says in his
normal shout. ''I have to do all the work.'' According to officials with access
to the transcripts of the telephone calls, the above was often followed by:
''Just do what I say. Don't give me a hard time. It'll work out.''

Low Point in Early June

The officials said there was only one point where it seemed that Mr. Habib did
not believe it would all work out. That was a few days after President Reagan
summoned him to the Versailles summit meeting on June 6, the day Israeli forces
struck into southern Lebanon. It was when the Syrians and Israelis went at each
other with full force, and it appeared that the fighting might spread throughout
the region.

But apart from that occasion, no one recollects a moment when this Damon Runyon
diplomat, Lebanese son of a grocer from the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn,
believed he could not get the job done.

While experts in Washington were formulating intricate plans for controlling the
rising action in Lebanon and thinking of schemes on how to link events in
Lebanon with broader moves in the Middle East, Mr. Habib was said to have
characteristically cut throught the verbiage with his simple and
straight-forward goals and strategy.

His goals were to stop the fighting and get Palestinian forces out of Beirut and
Lebanon. His strategy was to let all the parties know that the United States
meant business.

Those who read the accounts of his conversations with Arab and Israeli leaders
said that his points were always unmistakably clear.  To the Lebanese
intermediaries with the Palestine Liberation Organization, he would say, ''If
you don't get the P.L.O. out of the city, the Israelis will come in and get you
all, and it will be on your heads.''

To the Israelis, who often told him that his mediation efforts were not working,
and who pushed another alternative, more force, Mr.  Habib is quoted as having
said: ''No. There is no other possibility because it is unacceptable to me.''

Exchanged Words With Haig

Mr. Habib often had similar exchanges in the first weeks of the war with the
then-Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig Jr. According to Administration
officials, Mr. Haig strenuously maintained that Mr.  Habib's negotiating efforts
were ''premature,'' that more Israeli military pressure was required before the
P.L.O. would bargain in good faith. Mr. Habib, never known to be less strenuous
in advocacy, would reply: ''You don't know what you're talking about, you're
wrong. I'm here. I know what can and can't be done.''

About two weeks ago, when the P.L.O. made clear that it was prepared to leave
the city and when Israeli pounding of the city increased, Mr. Habib did not
hesitate to tell the White House that the President had to get tougher with the
Israelis. According to officials involved, Mr. Habib was convinced that all the
pieces were ready to be put into place, if and only if Mr. Reagan would make
plain that he would not tolerate further Israeli cease-fire violations or
Israeli military action out of proportion to Palestinian cease-fire violations.
Mr. Reagan took the point, as he had from Mr. Habib all along, and went public
with his line about running ''out of patience.''

By all accounts, Mr. Habib not only shaped the overall policy, but indulged in
his obsession with details. He and his team essentially formulated the mechanics
of the P.L.O. withdrawal and the international peacekeeping force's entry. They
worked out the details of which countries would receive the withdrawing
Palestinian troops.

'He Hit Me Like a Sledgehammer'

His colleagues repeat the same list of adjectives about him: indefatigable,
determined, abrasive, irreverent, funny, optimistic, blunt and scatalogical. It
was typical of him, officials recounted, to pour forth a stream of invective on
the telephone, and then say, ''I sure hope there are no women at the other end
of the line.''

Dozens of people in Washington, high and low in Government, call him one of
their closest friends.  ''The first time I met him, I was completely taken
aback,'' related one former subordinate. ''He hit me like a sledgehammer. But in
30 seconds I was his friend.'' No matter what his message, the word was always
that the Israelis and the Arabs kept trusting him and liking him.

Presidents from Lyndon B. Johnson to Ronald Reagan and Secretaries of State from
Dean Rusk to George P. Shultz always trusted him, not because he told them what
they wanted to hear, but often because he was the only one in the room who told
them what they did not want to hear.

A graduate of Idaho University, an Army captain in World War II and the
recipient of a Ph.D. from the University of California at Berkeley, Mr. Habib
entered the Foreign Service in the mid-1950's and quickly rose to the position
of Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.

'Be Patient'

In March 1968, President Johnson gathered up a glittering list of former high
officials, the Wise Men they were called, to review American policy toward
Vietnam in the light of the devastating Communist Tet offensive. Mr. Habib was
one of the few Government officials who told them the unvarnished facts, even
though he remained a supporter of the American effort there.

In Saigon in the mid-1960's, Mr. Habib came to his office as political counselor
earlier than his aides, left later, then usually went out for a night of poker.
It was known as the highest stakes game in Vietnam. Mr. Habib was a consistent
big winner.

''He was very bold,'' recalled Barry Zorthian, a Government colleague who also
played in the game. ''He was good at bluffing and even better at calling other
guys' bluffs.''

In good part, this is what the 62-year-old Presidential envoy has been doing in
the Middle East for the last 10 weeks.

Dire Warnings

Neither the P.L.O. nor the Israelis chose to challenge Mr. Habib's dire warnings
in the end. The Israelis could never be quite sure that the Reagan
Administration might not take strong action against them if they went any
further militarily. And Mr. Habib always made plain to the Palestinians that he
might not be able to restrain the Israelis next time. None of the parties were
sure that Mr. Habib could deliver, but none wanted to challenge his hand.

Mr. Habib gained a good deal of weight during the last 10 weeks.  But he was
always prepared. ''He has three ever-pressed sizes of tuxedos -healthy, round
and rounder,'' recalled one former colleague.

His colleagues like to repeat the few repeatable ''Philisms.'' ''Be patient.''
Said to foreign service officers who were getting mauled in their careers by the
politicians. ''I'll take care of you.''

''You guys.'' Said at almost every meeting as introductory to the equivalent of
''You don't know what you're talking about.''

'Pump Himself Up'

''Amateurs.'' The ultimate Habib putdown, usually reserved for non-Foreign
Service officers.  Those who worked with him these last weeks were struck by how
he readied himself to meet with his interlocutors. ''He would gather us around,
practice what he was going to say, pump himself up,'' one recounted. ''By the
time he got into the negotiating session, he was sailing. You could see and feel
the impression he was making. He spoke with force, conviction and sincerity. It
was high theatre.''

It was also his practice to stay clear of the news media, and his colleagues
believe, concentrate on substance in the actual negotiations. ''Unlike others,''
one State Department official related, ''he did not have to force the pace,
spend most of his time preparing for the press, figuring out how to make it
appear that progress was being made.''

Mr. Habib had two massive coronary attacks, in 1972 and 1977, both after he had
been taken to Walter Reed Hospital. It was luck, his friends like to say, the
kind of luck that attends people of optimism and energy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of relatives of departing Palestinian fighters

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WITHDRAWAL LEAVES MANY QUESTIONS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. FARRELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Aug. 21


The beginning of the Palestinian guerrilla withdrawal from Beirut today has
prompted many unanswered questions among foreign diplomats and Palestinian and
other Arab officials over the future of Lebanon and the rest of the Middle East.
Some of the questions focus on the fear that major military actions may occur
over the next few weeks, before the evacuation is completed.

''The danger potential of the next few weeks cannot be underestimated,'' a
Western diplomat said here today as he noted that the potentially fragile
withdrawal plan devised by the special United States envoy, Philip C. Habib,
could fall apart for any number of reasons.

In Egyptian circles there is a commitment to the policy of President Hosni
Mubarak to press the United States into accepting a new approach toward the
Palestinians, specifically trying to move the Reagan Administration toward
accepting the idea of Palestinian self-determination.

New Israeli Attack Feared

These are some, but no means all, of the other questions:

- What will happen to the Palestinian guerrillas entrenched in northern Lebanon
around Tripoli and in the central Bekaa Valley; particularly, will the Israelis
strike at them after the Palestine Liberation Organization has left Beirut?

- How long will the Israelis continue to occupy large sections of Lebanon?

- Will the Lebanese political situation, marked by dissent and conflict, permit
the early election of a new President who will be palatable to factions in the
country that, even during the two and a half months of the Israeli invasion, did
not completely halt their fratricidal battling?

- What kind of pressure, if any, will the international community attempt to
bring to restore calm to Lebanon and assure that the Israeli presence, and
perhaps the Syrian as well, is diminished and finally ended there?

- What - and this is particularly important to the P.L.O. - will the United
States approach be in the weeks and months ahead? A number of Palestinian
officials feel that a change in American policy toward the guerrilla
organization may be forthcoming but only if other Arab nations, and Western ones
as well, present convincing arguments, coupled with pressure tactics, to the
Reagan Administration.

'The Next Phase' for the P.L.O.

Other questions center on what the Arab governments will do now in terms of
assisting the P.L.O. There is residual, often strong, resentment among P.L.O.
leaders at the inaction of the Arab countries during the siege of west Beirut.
But as a pragmatic matter the Palestinian leaders are now making overtures for
Arab support and cooperation in what officials call ''the next phase'' of the
P.L.O.'s existence. This includes Egypt, which the Palestinians denounced
strongly for the peace treaty it signed with Israel in 1979.

Another major question is whether there has been a shift in the balance of power
in the Middle East. If one has occurred, officials wonder, how major has it been
or will it be? What is the possibility of a divided Lebanon, one part under the
thrall of Israel, the other under the domination of Syria?

Another source of uncertainty is the fate of the more than 600,000 Palestinians
still in Lebanon. In addition, officials are concerned about whether the fears
of Moslems in west Beirut of reprisals from the Christian Phalangist militias of
east Beirut, which have had Israeli arms and support, will be realized after the
departure of the Palestinian guerrillas.

Resentment Against U.S.

Here in Egypt, officials and the press have expressed strong disenchantment with
the role the United States has played during the Israeli invasion that began on
June 6. The disaffection ranges from bitter editorials in the
Government-supervised press to dismay at the grass-roots level over the United
States' actions despite the fact that Washington is Cairo's chief provider of
military and economic aid.

Some recent editorials in Egypt's press sound very similar to Palestinian
criticisms of the United States role, including the part played by Mr. Habib.
While the American envoy is reaping praise in some quarters for the painfully
executed evacuation plan he worked out, he is regarded with suspicion in some
quarters here.

This is because of growing criticism that the United States was not a genuine
mediator during the Lebanese crisis but, as one Palestinian official put it, was
''a representative of one of the sides involved - Israel.''

''It was not a clean kind of negotiation,'' the Palestinian said, referring
specifically to Mr. Habib's refusal to deal directly with the P.L.O., which was
apprised of his proposals through intermediaries.

Referring to the evacuation plan, The Egyptian Mail, an Englishlanguage
newspaper that is normally quite placid editorially, said today: ''Can this be
the 'success' that in some absurd manner justifies Lebanon's two and a half
months of horror? Are those who declare that a solution has been found in the
transfer of P.L.O.  headquarters-in-exile from one Arab capital to another
pulling our legs?''

'Mideast Vietnams' Foreseen

''Mr. Reagan,'' the paper said, ''appears to need convincing, one way or
another, that the Palestinian nation cannot simply be made to vanish through
successive dispersals. If he does not understand this soon, America may find
that Mr. Habib's 'wonderful solution' has spawned for it not one, but half a
dozen, Middle Eastern Vietnams.''

There is here, and elsewhere in the tortuous maze of Middle Eastern politics and
conflicts, a lingering concern, even fear, that the Palestinians, spurred by a
dispersed P.L.O., might again take up terrorist tactics, such as plane
hijackings, in the Middle East, in Europe and in the United States.

Even the best-informed diplomats and officials are adopting a nervous ''wait and
see'' as the evacuation from Beirut begins.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ariel Sharon, Col. Yves Lebeque

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WOULD EXPAND COMBAT STOCKPILE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 21


The Defense Department has begun a five-year, $100 billion program intended to
enhance the ability of the armed forces to sustain themselves in combat,
according to senior department officials.

Today, military leaders said, the armed services could fight for about 30 days
before starting to run out of ammunition, weapons and crucial supplies.
Moreover, the services lack the planes and particularly the ships to deliver
sufficient supplies to combat zones.

''If we had to go to war this afternoon, even a war the size of Vietnam,'' said
an officer with long combat experience, ''I don't see how we could do it.''

In a global war with the Soviet Union, several senior officers said, the
President might be confronted within a month with the choice of surrendering or
resorting to nuclear weapons.

Doubt on Achieving Goals

Despite their ambitious plans, the Defense Department officials doubted that the
goals could be reached because the rate at which supplies were used in battle
had skyrocketed and because buying supplies lacked the political appeal of
ordering ships and planes that conspicuously create jobs. Congress would have to
approve each annual request for funds for the program.

Recent Pentagon studies show that the American forces consumed an average of 65
tons of materiel a day in World War I, 675 tons a day in World War II and 1,000
tons a day in the Vietnam War. In the Middle East war of 1973, Israel used 2,000
tons a day.

About half of the consumption in modern warfare, officers said, is in fuel for
mobile forces in armored personnel carriers, tanks and aircraft. More comes from
higher rates of fire in most weapons and from the increased destruction caused
by more lethal weapons.

The military officers pointed out that the relatively small British campaign
against Argentina in the Falkland Islands took 98 ships to sustain. They noted
that the battle was 8,000 miles from Britain, the same distance from the East
Coast to the Persian Gulf through the Suez Canal.

Logistics, 'Where Wars Are Won'

''In making war, amateurs talk about tactics,'' one general said.  ''The real
professionals talk about logistics and sustainability, because that's where wars
are won.''

The Reagan Administration has doubled its requests for ammunition since it took
office. For 1981, Carter Administration orders for $2.2 billion worth of
ammunition were authorized. For 1983, the Reagan Administration requested $4.4
billion for ammunition, and most of that money was approved by Congress last
week.

Much of it was for newer precision-guided munitions, or ''smart bombs.'' They
include laser-guided missiles, cluster bombs such as those used by Israel
against Syrian missiles and tanks in Lebanon, and artillery projectiles that
disperse mines over wide areas.

The Administration, continuing an effort by President Carter, has doubled the
capacity of American ships to transport weapons, fuel, food and supplies to the
Persian Gulf.

Faster Cargo Ships Coming

That capacity will triple, officials said, in the next few years as new, fast
cargo ships come into service. But they warned that the military forces would
still be unable to sustain full-scale combat in that region as military planners
have revised their estimates. New plans, for instance, call for five Army
divisions there instead of three.

Beyond increasing the stockpiles of war materiel, the Administration also plans
to encourage the military industry to enlarge its capacity so it could surge
into wartime production if necessary. Stockpiles would cover military needs
until industry could turn out materiel at the same rate it was being consumed on
the battlefields.

After the Vietnam war, budget cuts precluded rebuilding exhausted stockpiles.
The Carter Administration's military strategy, therefore, was based on the
theory of a short conventional war in Europe that would escalate to a nuclear
exchange within weeks.

In contrast, the Reagan Administration bases its planning on a protracted
conventional war against the Soviet Union. Military strategists think that
Russian military planners believe the United States would run out of ammunition
in a war of attrition and would quit rather than use nuclear weapons.

Sustaining Ability 'Far Short'

The policy on sustaining a conventional war was outlined in a Defense Guidance,
a classified five-year plan intended to provide strategic direction to the
military services. It said the Defense Department ''is currently far short of
sustaining capability in either manpower or materiel to support, without
unacceptable risk, the policy, strategy and force planning'' for conflicts in
Europe, the Persian Gulf and Korea.

The document, signed by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, instructed
the services to build up ''a minimum of 60 days of combat sustainability in all
theaters and at sea by the end of fiscal year 1987.''

But the Defense Guidance said the objectives were ''probably fiscally
unattainable'' within the next five years. Thus the services were instructed to
set a balanced set of minimum goals.

The document also said the industrial base that produces munitions and supplies
must be rebuilt. It said that by 1985 American industry should be able within a
year to raise the stockpile of munitions to cover 60 days of consumption and of
other war supplies to 30 days' consumption.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CALIFORNIANS, AS IN 1960'S, LEAD IN RESISTANCE TO SELECTIVE SERVICE

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Aug. 21


Leaders of the antidraft movement in California, backed by veterans of the
movement of the 1960's and by people active in antinuclear, environmental and
feminist groups, say they will make a stronger showing than ever in the 1980's.

Much of the leadership of the movement, whose impetus in the 1960's was largely
from those who were facing a draft, has changed hands. In this state, where the
rate of compliance with the law requiring registration is the lowest in the
nation, draft counselors say they are more likely to get anxious phone calls
from parents than from young men. They say that more people are volunteering as
draft counselors than there are young men seeking guidance.

Jon Landau, a San Francisco lawyer for the Central Committee for Conscientious
Objectors, based in Philadelphia, assessed the situation.

''The bulk of the reaction has been from people who are anxious to support the
nonregistrants, people prepared to counsel,'' he said.  ''The attitude of the
young men themselves is wait and see. They don't want to register, but they're
waiting to see what sanctions the Government is imposing.''

Response to Prosecutions

The movement in California has been gathering force since the resumption of
draft registration two years ago. It began reorganizing in earnest this year
when the Reagan Administration started a crackdown on those who did not
register. The law requires each young man to register in a 30-day period before
or after his 18th birthday.

Those who have counseled youths of draft age here tell of these other departures
from the Vietnam era:

- Because of disillusionment over United States participation in Vietnam, they
perceive a stronger opposition to what some term ''interventionist'' actions by
the nation's military forces in third world nations, particularly in Latin
America and the Middle East. An early slogan of the new movement was aimed at
what many saw as President Carter's motive when he reinstituted draft
registration at a time of crisis in the Middle East. It went, ''Hell, no; We
won't go; We won't fight for Texaco.''

- Troubles in the national economy have created a backlash in the antidraft
movement against ''the poverty draft.'' Leaders argue that those most likely to
be mustered into service today, whether through mandatory registration followed
by a possible draft or through voluntary enlistment, are unjustly those with
little hope of jobs or education in the current recession.

- While the antidraft and peace movements of the 1960's were almost solely
products of the white middle and upper classes, there are efforts now to promote
involvement by lower-income or minority groups.

California on the Cutting Edge

Fifteen years ago, many California campuses, most notably Berkeley and Stanford,
were in the vanguard of draft resistance. Now, as registration emerges once more
as an issue, California is again in the spotlight. Last week Enten Eller, a
Californian, became the first person convicted for failing to register, in a
Federal District Court in Roanoke, Va. A second Californian, Benjamin Sasway,
faces trial in San Diego Tuesday. A third, David Wayte, has been indicted in
Pasadena and is awaiting trial.

According to Joan Lamb, a spokesman for the Selective Service System, only 83.4
percent of the eligible registrants in California had signed up in the most
recent tally, in March. She contrasted that rate with 86.6 percent for New York,
92.3 percent for New Jersey and 93 percent for Connecticut. The General
Accounting Office, an auditing and investigative arm of Congress, estimates
compliance to be somewhat lower.

Selective Service officials assert that the lag in registrations has been caused
by problems in informing young men of the law. Some antidraft activists also say
it reflects a belief that if thousands fail to respond, the Government will not
be able to track them down.

Many Are Not Vocal

''For every one of those who openly say, 'I'm not going to register,' there are
probably 50 to 100 who are doing it privately,'' said Fred Moore of the National
Resistance Committee in San Francisco.

Judy Newman, the founder of Parents and Friends Against the Draft, another San
Francisco group, was one organizer who said that the current resistance movement
had emerged at an earlier stage than in the Vietnam era. She attributed this to
opposition to American overseas intervention and to fears of nuclear war.

''There is an organized opposition before a draft law has even been passed,''
she said. ''There is no war and there is no actual draft.'' She assessed the
opposition as an outgrowth of the war in Vietnam.  ''A very large percentage of
young men,'' she said, ''perceive that war as a disastrous involvement for the
United States. There is concern about third world intervention, also about the
danger of nuclear warfare and the presence of nuclear weaponry.''

Counseling Network Forms

Some feminist organizations are attracted to the issue. After many women's
groups opposed President Carter's unsuccessful proposal for registration of
women, they have tended to line up against the peacetime draft of men, too.

''We feel the young men are being victimized by this,'' said Mary Clarke of
Women's Strike for Peace, which provides ''nonadvisory'' draft counseling in Los
Angeles. ''Everybody's exposed and there are no boundaries.''

A network of draft counseling and antidraft groups has formed here. In San Diego
the National Lawyers Guild took up the case of the 21-year-old Mr. Sasway. Kathy
Gilberd, a staff member, said the guild would represent others.

Counseling for Minority Groups

Several groups are working to make advice readily available for members of the
black and Mexican-American communities.  A year ago the American Friends Service
Committee, the Quakers, assigned a coordinator to counsel blacks in south
central Los Angeles. Pat Brown of the Friends' office in Pasadena said the
program taught that the more the Government spent on ''militarism,'' the less
was available for social justice issues.

In Mexican-American neighborhoods of Redwood City, Calif., and San Jose, the
Draft Information Alliance furnishes street-corner counseling by Hispanic
veterans of Vietnam, according to Andrea Carmen, an alliance official.

''We tell people what their options are,'' she said. ''It's clear the military
is not about job training. If the Government had wanted to maintain training for
young people, it would not have cut back CETA,'' the Federal job-training
program, ''it would not have cut back educational grants.

Mr. Sasway, in an interview, mentioned the ''poverty draft'' as a basis for his
dissent. ''There are people today,'' he added, ''who are only in the military
because they can't get any other job, like a guy off a farm in Oklahoma.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Army Seeks to Increase National Guard Units

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 33, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 236 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 21


The Army is proposing the first increase in the number of National Guard
divisions since the late 1960's as a way to strengthen its fighting ability in
the event of a war.

The proposal, under study by senior Pentagon officials, calls for organizing two
additional Guard divisions in 1984-85 to provide what the Army terms ''minimum
essential reinforcements to sustain combat'' until total mobilization, including
a revived draft.

This would give the Army 10 Guard divisions to back up the 16 regular divisions
in the event of a war emergency.  In 1967 the Pentagon disbanded 15
understrength Guard divisions.  Since then the National Guard has had only eight
divisions, and even these had trouble maintaining their strength since the
Vietnam War.

But the Army's latest move suggests a growing confidence in the ability of the
Guard to fulfill its wartime mission.  Army officials say they are not yet ready
to decide where to place the two additional Guard divisions if they are finally
approved. They would probably be built around existing independent brigades.

According to the most recent Pentagon report, the Army National Guard totaled
402,500 men and women, about 50,500 below wartime levels. Guard officials say
they can reach full wartime strength by the fiscal year 1986.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Leigh Grant, Illustrator, Has Nuptials

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 61, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


Leigh Grant, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John Barrett Grant of Greenwich, Conn.,
was married yesterday to John Antony Doumlele Jr., son of Mr. and Mrs. Doumlele
of Richmond. The Rev. Walter Wagoner of the Round Hill Community Church in
Greenwich performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the home of the bride's
parents.

Ann Louise McDonnell was the maid of honor, and the bridegroom's father was the
best man.  The bride, who will keep her name, is an illustrator of children's
books and greeting cards. She is an alumna of the Greenwich Academy, Hollins
College and Pratt Institute. Her father is senior qualitycontrol auditor of
Richardson-Vicks Inc. in Wilton, Conn. Her mother is a member of the planning
and zoning board in Greenwich.

Mr. Doumlele is a corporate economist and director of corporate relations for
Moore McCormack Resources Inc. in Stamford, Conn. He is also president of the
board of the Child Care Center of Stamford Inc. and a director of the New York
Investor Relations Institute. Mr. Doumlele, who was an Army lieutenant in
Vietnam, graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy and Yale University and received
a master's degree from the University of Virginia Graduate School of Business
Administration. His previous marriage ended in divorce. His father is supply
manager in the Defense Logistics Agency of the Defense Department in Richmond.
His mother is assistant vice president and business manager of the Neighborhood
Communications Corporation in Richmond.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Leigh Grant

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NO GOAL TOO OPTIMISTIC FOR MARVIN POWELL

BYLINE: By GERALD ESKENAZI

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1955 words


HOUSTON MARVIN POWELL'S destiny is greatness, and it always has been. He knows
only that it is fate -''events just follow me.'' So millions of viewers should
not be surprised today when Powell, who describes himself as a laissez-faire
capitalist, leads the Jets in the unionsolidarity pre-game handshake when the
Jets face the Oilers on national television.

Powell is probably the best offensive tackle in pro football. He also is the
Jets' player representative. Yet, he once told Ed Garvey, the union head, that
player salaries should be cut if the N.F.L.'s Nielsen ratings slip.

Once, he would meditate at his locker while all around him players jostled and
joked. In this preseason, though, he exhorts his teammates and has virtually
demanded a role as leader.

Contradictory? Perhaps. But it's all part of the Powell Plan and he accepts
these aspects of his life as much as sailors accept the tide.  Marvin Powell
looks at what has been in his life and sees it as an inevitable accession to the
Presidency of the United States. He is very serious about this.

Being an all-pro football player is wonderful for the political image, he
concedes. That is why Powell, who will turn 27 next Monday, also expects the
following to happen to him:

- Receive his law degree by the time he is 31.

- Make the Hall of Fame after retirement.

- Use the law degree to go into the Marine Corps as a military lawyer.

- Follow that by returning to Long Island, where he now lives, and run for a
local judgeship or elected office.  Perhaps his route to pro football and the
Oval Office - he cannot separate the two jobs - began in the family den that New
Year's Day in 1967. He was in Fayetteville, N.C., near Fort Bragg, watching the
Rose Bowl with his mother and stepfather, who was a career soldier, just as
Marvin's father was. It was the first time 11-year-old Marvin Powell had seen
the University of Southern California and O.J. Simpson.

Traveler I, the horse that symbolized the U.S.C. Trojans, charged onto the field
and young Marvin's heart leaped.  ''I was always a heavy child,'' he recalls.
''I was in the seventh grade, and I said, 'I'm going to So. Cal.' And my
stepfather started laughing at me and I cried. By the time I was a high school
senior I was the best offensive lineman in the country.

''I used to go around saying, in the seventh and eighth grade, 'I'm going to be
all-American in high school I'm going to be all-American in college. I'm going
to be all-pro.' And their taunting made me more determined. Now I hear the same
taunting when I say I want to become President. People tell me, 'Marvin, you're
a black man in America.  Marvin, you've got a white wife. Marvin, you can't be
President.' ''

Or perhaps Marvin Powell's remarkable desire to work hard, and his belief that
fate has something special in store for him, goes back even before that Rose
Bowl game. Perhaps it hinges on a memory that evokes the ''Rosebud'' scene from
''Citizen Kane.''

Just recently, his mother reminded him: ''Marvin Junior, the first gift you ever
received when you were a little baby was a football that read 'All-American
1977.' ''

Powell says of that ball: ''It just stuck. I don't know if it was destiny. I
remember I was 5 years old and leaving for overseas and I saw them packing it in
a box. The last thing I remember before leaving home was them putting that
football into a box.''

Indeed, 1977 did become important in his life. That year, the first of the Walt
Michaels regime, the first player the New York Jets drafted was Marvin Powell,
all-American tackle, from U.S.C. The Jets planted him at right tackle.

It took until his third season, and in 1979 he was voted to the Pro Bowl by his
peers. He has now been an all-star in three straight years. Last season,
measurably, was his best.

Offensive linemen don't accumulate yardage statistics the way runners do, or
sacks the way defensive linemen do. The offensive lineman's satisfaction is
cerebral and also comes, says Powell, ''in the meeting room, when Richard Todd
says you did a good job protecting him.''

But coaches must measure performance somehow. Bob Fry, who is the Jets' senior
assistant coach, is going into his ninth season as head of the offensive line.
Fry, a former lineman for the Los Angeles Rams, grades his players on such
factors as mental errors - did he miss an assignment? Or on successfully helping
a running play or passing play. Or on how often a player is penalized.

In Powell's early seasons he was erratic. But in 1981 Powell was extraordinary:
A successful performance record of 92 percent; one penalty every 476 plays. One
mental error every 95 plays.

There is a natural-selection factor at work in Powell. Most offensive linemen
are sort of squat - which helps them plant their feet to pass-block - but Powell
is almost rangy.

He stands 6 foot 5 inches and weighs about 270 pounds. He has the strength to
stand his ground and halt marauding defensive linemen, and he also has the
agility to flare out and block for runners.

''He has great mobile strength,'' explains Fry. ''He may not be the strongest in
the weight room. But he's probably the strongest guy on the team when you're
talking about playing football.''

Mark Gastineau, the Pro Bowl defensive end, works out opposite Powell every day.
Gastineau recorded 20 sacks last season, half a sack less than his
league-leading teammate, Joe Klecko.

''Marvin is just so strong, so quick,'' says Gastineau. ''Do you know how much
it's helped me going against him every day?''

Powell describes his job on the line as ''like a chess game between Fischer and
Spassky.'' ''I could be lined up nose to nose with the guy opposite me,'' he
explains. ''Then the guy might shift from my nose to my eyes. That will change
the whole play, the direction we block. So it's not unusual to hear us
audibilize on the line even after Todd audibilizes.

''You might get a situation where they have a 3-4 defense and at the last moment
the defensive end jumps over the guard instead of me. ''We call 'slip' and we'll
double-team the end.''

Joe Fields, the center, has compassion for the offensive tackle.  Fields
explains: ''There's one official whose job is to see that no one touches the
quarterback. So the official takes a position on the side, lined up with the
quarterback. But then he also has an unobstructed view of the tackle, and he can
see if the tackle is holding while no one can see if the interior line is
holding.''

And Fry adds that the offensive tackle, more than any other position on the
line, must be manned by a clear-headed warrior.  ''He's all alone on the
flank,'' explains Fry. ''He's exposed.  Marvin doesn't get nervous.'' Privately,
the offensive line likes to think of itself as the most brainy unit on the team.
Their job is based in anonymity, absorbing punishment. When they work on
techniques, they often are on another part of the field, far from the passing
drills which elicit the ooh's and ah's from fans who attend the workout.

Fry has been observing Powell in this milieu from the player's first day. One
side of Fry's mouth bulges with chewing tobacco, which he spits out an average
of three times a minute.

It used to be an almost laconic atmosphere around the offensive linemen: Fry
chewing and spitting, players moving their feet, Fry quietly and patiently
explaining techniques.

But it is a little different these days: Powell is screaming, exhorting, taking
charge.  ''You've got to love it! It's nothing but a gun fight, baby!'' You look
up and you see it is Marvin Powell addressing the troops.  Stan Waldemore, the
left guard, is practicing against John Roman, a back-up lineman. They bang into
each other.  ''Mr. Reagan and Pope John!'' says Powell in what must be a private
joke.  ''Yeah - but they're all-Americans,'' replies Fry.  The players laugh -
it is humor only an offensive lineman can love, and Powell has become the chief
stand-up deliverer.  ''Three things have changed him this year,'' says Fry.
''First, he gave up smoking. He must have smoked four packs a day. But a couple
of weeks ago a doctor told him he had a sore throat and he better stop. Marvin
tells me since he stopped smoking he's been hyper and the screaming gets it out
of his system.

''Secondly, Joe Fields got hurt and Joe was always the guy who led the yelling
and I guess Marvin felt he should pick it up.  ''And third, the players made him
player rep and he's taken an active role.'' Although Marvin has always contended
that he is opposed to unionism, that election hardly was a surprise, he now
admits.  ''Before the election I talked it over with my wife. I knew they would
call on me and we decided that I would take it.'' Some Jets were afraid of the
role because they thought it would cost them their jobs as players. But no one
on the team is more secure than Powell.

''I see my role as keeping a sense of unity,'' says Powell. ''Of bringing a
championship back to New York.'' But the night he was elected he says he told
the players, ''I am an industrial capitalist.''

His politics were shaped on Army bases here and in Europe. His father, who had
put in 27 years in the service before retiring, suddenly came out of retirement
at the height of the Vietnam conflict and re-enlisted - volunteering for
Vietnam.

Marvin Powell describes his father as ''a conservative Democrat - he came out of
the Great Depression. A Roosevelt man. I think that we as a race are coming out
of that now. We're no longer automatically going to vote Democrat.''

At U.S.C., where he says he maintained a 3.1 average, he majored in political
science. He married while in college.  ''I went to S.C. with the idea of being a
lawyer, but my divorce set me back,'' he explains. He was remarried in 1980.  He
started going to New York Law School in the spring of 1981. He recently
completed his second semester there.  Since he only goes to school in the
spring, he expects the degree by the time he is 31.  ''Next summer I hope to go
to the Marine Corps Reserve,'' he says.  ''When I finish with Officer Candidates
School, I'll be a few years from finishing law school. And when I finish that I
can get a waiver on my age and get into the Marine Corps on active duty. But I
may just stay in the reserves if the private sector opens up. It's part of the
road to the Presidency. If I go active, I'll return to Long Island and run for a
judge's seat or the State Assembly.''

So on his desk in the training camp dormitory room it is not surprising to find
fat books marked ''Torts'' and ''Basic Contract Law'' placed alongside the Jets'
playbook.

Marvin Powell smiles sweetly when assessing his future and says, ''America is a
great dream machine.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Powell graph of Powell's stats

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT RESISTANCE, 80'S STYLE

BYLINE: By David Harris

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4023 words


David Harris is a regular contributor to this magazine and author of the
recently published book ''Dreams Die Hard: Three Men's Journey Through the
Sixties.''
In June 30, in San Diego, Benjamin H. Sasway, a 21-year-old politicalscience and
philosophy student at California's Humboldt State University, became the first
person to be indicted for violation of the Selective Service Act since the
revival of draft registration in 1980.  It has been almost 10 years since that
kind of crime was last arraigned in an American court, and just its mention
summons up the almost-forgotten language of an age when it seemed such crimes
would have no end: registration, classification, re-classification, deferment
and induction; 1-A, 2-S, 3-A and 4-F; hawks, doves, pigs, gooks, straights,
freaks, frags and dodgers; General Hershey and general strike; ''Not With My
Life, You Don't''; ''Hell No, We Won't Go,'' and ''You don't need a weatherman
to know which way the wind blows.'' They are not easy things to forget and it
isn't surprising that to many Americans Ben Sasway's current legal situation
seems like a reprise of the 1960's. It resounds with echoes of the past.

I confess that I hear most of them. When I was 22, nearly 15 years ago, I, too,
was indicted for violating the Selective Service Act.  In 1968, as Stanford
University's ''radical'' student-body president and one of the nation's
principal antidraft agitators, I was convicted and eventually spent 20 months in
Federal prison. For me, Ben Sasway's case is an opportunity to observe from a
distance a familiar passage out of my own youth and to examine the re-emergence
of Selective Service.

Obviously, one thing that has not changed in a decade is that young men are
still disobeying the Selective Service Act. After it was discontinued in 1975,
registration at age 18 again became mandatory two years ago for every male born
after 1960. Since then, Selective Service estimates 675,000 young men have
violated the law by failing to register. In addition, a recent survey by the
General Accounting Office estimated that more than a million of the 8,365,000
who did register have since changed addresses without making their present
whereabouts known to the Selective Service, and hence are also in violation of
the law.

This is the kind of behavior that might have been expected from the turbulent
60's. The news is the extent to which it is happening again. The youth culture
that produced these current figures has consistently been typecast as a
political void in which little in the way of rebellion could be expected. The
statistics of the last two years seem to confound the stereotype in no uncertain
terms.

Selective Service officials have testified before Congress that at no time
during the Vietnam era did compliance with the registration system ever sink
below a rate of 98 percent. Their most optimistic calculation of the current
rate is 93 percent. Other observers have estimated it to be as low as 80
percent.

Thus far, Selective Service officials have discounted this seemingly anomalous
wave of disobedience as a misleading statistic that reflects only the confusion
involved in restarting the system.  They maintain that most of the violators are
uninformed or careless and cannot be used as a barometer of political dissent.
Before registration began, Selective Service officials testified that a
compliance rate of less than 98 percent would make it impossible for their
system to operate in an equitable and effective way. In 1980, they predicted 98
percent of those eligible would be reached within three months of starting up.
Now they say that goal will be reached ''eventually.''

The situation was discussed at an April 12 meeting of the Military Manpower Task
Force, and, according to a report in The Washington Post, Maj. Gen. Thomas K.
Turnage, director of the Selective Service, suggested that bringing ''a few
cases will get the word out there that we mean business,'' an impression that
would in turn yield compliance. Ben Sasway became the first of those ''few
cases.'' His trial is scheduled to start on Tuesday, though a motion filed by
his lawyer to dismiss the case on grounds of selective prosecution may affect
its start. Since his indictment, four more young men have been charged and 160
indictments are being prepared. Through a cross-check with Social Security
records, Selective Service has been identifying violators and notifying them
that they are liable for prosecution unless they register by return mail. The
assumption is that this squeeze will reverse the trend and keep violations to a
manageable trickle.

If that assumption proves wrong, however, and the numbers do not recede, the
Reagan Administration may very well find itself stuck in a political dilemma.
Failure to register is a felony punishable by up to five years in jail and a
fine of not more than $10,000. The current mass of violators is already at least
20 times as large as the entire capacity of the Federal prison system. Thus, the
President may be forced either to admit that mandatory registration is
unenforceable, except in a selective way, or to oversee a system that puts young
people in jail and that is, by its own definitions, unfair and ineffective.

How this episode turns out will depend on the people all these numbers
represent. Ben Sasway, for one, is perfectly clear about his motives.  Sasway's
journey into legal jeopardy began when he wrote a letter to then President Jimmy
Carter on July 24, 1980, some six months after Carter had proposed the
resumption of draft registration as a sign of disapproval to the Soviets after
their invasion of Afghanistan. Sasway wrote his letter as ''a symbolic statement
of my opposition'' on ''the day I'm supposed to register for the draft.''

''I feel compelled by my conscience,'' he wrote, ''to state honestly and openly
that I am not registering for the draft. I am obligated to protest even simple
registration since I feel the spirit of this mandate, like actual conscription,
is immoral and incompatible with a truly free society. ... To deprive people of
their basic rights, freedom of choice, freedom of speech and freedom to be who
they want to be is a callous erosion of the American Constitutional Heritage.
... I love my country and would defend it in a time of crisis. Under the current
circumstances, however ... it seems equally important to the Pentagon that
military forces also defend business interests abroad, an antiquated Soviet
containment policy, the mythical American honor, and just generally the military
status quo. These are not natural extensions of the American defense. These are
wrong and I cannot allow myself to be a tool to such misdirection.''

Though it was almost a year before Sasway's four-page missive was acknowledged,
it was nonetheless the first link in the chain of evidence leading to his
indictment.

I, too, started with a letter, but remembering it now I am struck by the
difference in the mechanics of our respective violations. My letter was written
in the summer of 1966, after I had already been registered with Selective
Service for more than two years.  Registration had been a constant in American
life since 1940, and, like the overwhelming majority of my peers, I initially
took it as a given. Consequently, my resistance started with a struggle to
repudiate something I had always accepted. Ben Sasway and his peers simply
refused to accept it in the first place.

Most of us were charged with ''refusal to submit to induction''; most of them
will be prosecuted for ''failure to register.'' I wrote my letter to Local Board
71, Fresno, Calif., enclosing the draft card the law required I carry on my
person at all times and a note informing Board 71 that I would no longer
cooperate and planned to disobey any future orders they might send me.
Currently, no one is actually being inducted into the armed forces. The new
Selective Service has not yet established local draft boards and has no plans to
issue draft cards. At the moment, all that is required of those eligible is a
trip to the post office to fill out a form.

There was little in Benjamin Sasway's background to hint that he would, at age
19, be prepared to refuse even that seemingly innocuous demand. He was born and
raised in Vista, Calif., a conservative suburb in the part of San Diego County
dominated by the Marine Corps base at Camp Pendleton. Both of his parents are
publicschool teachers.

At Vista High School, he was a student representative to the school district's
board of trustees and an editor of the school newspaper.  At Humboldt State, he
was a bright but uninspired student who liked backpacking and being outdoors.
Prior to his decision to risk a felony conviction to protest draft registration,
his most serious political involvement was some high-school precinct work and
attendance at several rallies against nuclear power. Religion played no part in
Sasway's decision.

Yet, ''registration sounded like something I knew I couldn't do as soon as I
heard about it,'' Sasway explained. ''The myth they perpetuate is that it's only
a trip to the post office. They've already picked draft boards in San Diego;
they've spent millions on registration; they're tooled up to go. Every term in
Congress, they introduce new bills to institute some form of mandatory military
service. We're going to have a draft, and once we have a lot of people standing
around with guns in their hands, trained and ready to go, all it's going to take
is the whim of a President. If the Government ever gets itself into a just war,
I would support it. But this, this is a matter of dying in some bloody
third-world jungle for no good reason.''

As I listened to Ben Sasway make that statement, I was impressed at how little
he seemed to have gone through to reach those conclusions. I had known I could
be drafted for years before I even considered that I had the option to refuse.
He learned about both possibilities at the same time. It took intense personal
disillusionment for me to distrust the Government. He does so almost as a matter
of course. My generation had to be in the middle of a third-world jungle before
we even asked why we were there. He seems to have strolled into a perspective we
had to struggle mightily to reach. That sense was confirmed by his answer to my
next question.

''Did you have to work out a John Wayne thing before you could take this
stand?'' I asked.  He wanted to know what a ''John Wayne thing'' was.  No draft
resister from the 60's would have had to ask. We grew up in an America where
masculinity was equated with armed combat and little else. A lot of the men who
died in Vietnam were trying their best to play the Duke's role in ''Sands of Iwo
Jima.'' Those of us who became draft resisters first had to reject the role
models we had been raised with and then make new ones. Ben Sasway had gone
through no such upheaval in his self-image. The culture is no longer so
singular. Little is off limits anymore, and Sasway has done what he thinks is
right without having to change his mind first.

That difference between us is also a central link. Though still a sensitive
subject in many circles, the 60's are at the root of much of what America has
become since, and the diversity and skepticism that seem to have nurtured Ben
Sasway are just two of its byproducts. The framework of his decision would have
been significantly narrower without the precedents we set.

The catalyst was, of course, Vietnam. Appropriately enough, it is one of the
echoes Ben Sasway hears, though he has no memories of the war. He was 4 1/2
years old when Congress adopted the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, which officially put
America in the war, and he was 12 when the Paris Peace Agreements were signed.
Vietnam is still not dealt with in most high-school history classes and Benjamin
Sasway, like most of his peers, has an image of the war that is unencumbered by
detail. In the absence of information, those 10 years of history have been
passed along to him as a simplified morality tale. ''I believe there's a
cultural memory of sorts,'' he says, ''and that Vietnam affected me and my peer
group profoundly even if we can't remember it.

''A lot of older people don't understand where I'm coming from when I say you
can't have blind faith in a government. It just doesn't get to them. I say,
'Well look at what happened in Vietnam,' and they say, 'Vietnam was an isolated
incident. We've got to put that behind us and get behind our Government for a
change.' We can't put it behind us. I think a fundamental part of the way I see
the world is Vietnam.

''The one thing that's obvious,'' he continues, ''is that you've really got to
watch those guys closely. You have to have a hands-on democracy or lose it. I
believe people have to make moral decisions, take responsibility and put the
pressure on them or we're going to be in Vietnams over and over. I don't think
the fundamental attitude that made Vietnam possible has changed. You still see
it in government. The same hard line, meeting the crisis situation without
intellect, without any compassion or understanding, with just brute force.''

Ben Sasway's images of what was called ''the movement'' in those days are even
more vague than the ones he has of Vietnam. ''I've had mixed feelings about the
60's movement, whatever that is,'' he explains, ''but at the same time I've
always been kind of excited by the 60's. Throughout high school, I thought back
to those days as a very aware time among young people. I'm not an organizer,
like I guess people were in the 60's. Organizing drives me out of my mind. I can
take it for two weeks and then I go berserk and quit and hide out somewhere. I'm
not a radical; I'm not trying to tear the Government down. I just have what I
think is a healthy amount of irreverence for certain institutions.''

Indeed, in the 60's, we were a much more driven bunch, who conceived of
ourselves as the shock troops of a new age. Life and death seemed to be at
stake, and that pressure goaded us into a continuous and all-consuming
offensive.

No such fervor grips Ben Sasway. Where 2,000 of us crowded in front of San
Francisco's Federal Building to announce our noncooperation, Ben Sasway wrote
his letter and waited.

In the 60's, political activism long preceded the phenomenon of draft
resistance. When I mailed my letter to Local Board 71 in 1966, both the
Mississippi Summer Project and the Free Speech Movement were close to two years
old and large-scale teach-ins and marches against the war had been going on for
more than a year. Before draft resistance reached anything approximating the
scale of the present disobedience, I and a small corps of others had been
organizing for two years. Today's draft resistance has sprung up without a
preexisting political network, without an infrastructure of experienced
organizers and without the framework of a political agenda larger than itself.

Since becoming a headline two months ago, Ben Sasway has grown accustomed to the
comparison between now and the 60's.  ''Everybody,'' he admits, ''is interested
in the then and now part of this. I get tired of that. Everybody wants to say,
'Well, it's not the 60's, but ...' That really irritates me. The 60's are the
60's, and now is now. I think people in my position deserve to be treated on
their own merits and considered on their own terms.''

Ben Sasway has put himself in serious legal jeopardy for his own reasons, and
for him they exist quite intensely in the present. If the vast majority of the
new generation of draft violators are simply ignorant and unmotivated, as
Selective Service claims, Sasway is altogether unrepresentative of them. His
violation was intentional and his sincerity is apparent. He has had plenty of
opportunity to back off his stand in the last two years and has not been tempted
to do so.

The long wait following Sasway's letter to Jimmy Carter in July 1980 was not
broken until Ronald Reagan became President and the deadline for registration
was finally fixed. Official acknowledgment of Sasway's disobedience came on June
17, 1981, in a letter from Selective Service General Counsel Henry N. Williams.
''Dear Mr.  Sasway,'' it began. ''We have received information that you may be
required to register with Selective Service ... but a check of our records
indicates that you have not. ... A male who is not already in the active Armed
Forces is required to register under provision of the Military Selective Service
Act if he was born in 1960, 1961 or 1962, or if born in 1963 or a later year,
within 30 days of his 18th birthday.'' The letter went on to remind its
addressee how to comply with the law. ''Let me stress,'' Williams wrote in
closing, ''that unless we hear from you within 15 days of the date of this
letter, we will send your name to the Department of Justice for investigation
and possible prosecution.''

Thirteen days later, Ben Sasway responded. ''You are correct in your letter,''
he advised Williams. ''I was required to register for the draft. I have not done
so. ... The bottom line is that I cannot go against my conscience, even faced
with the possibility of fine or imprisonment. These sentiments I still feel
today, especially when the present Administration is threatening another Vietnam
-type war in El Salvador. I must perform to the dictates of my conscience.''

After his letter was mailed, Sasway left the country for several months' travel
in India and Nepal and was still there when he next heard from the Government
through a letter dated Oct. 7, 1981, from Douglas G. Hendricks, chief of the
criminal complaint unit of the United States Attorney for the Southern District
of California.

Benjamin H. Sasway was, at that point, one of the 160 names forwarded to various
United States Attorneys around the country from Justice Department headquarters
in Washington. The list had been collected with what the Justice Department
described as a ''passive detection system'' - names drawn from the pool of
people who had either publicly expressed their unwillingness to cooperate or
been informed upon. Four of those 160 were in the San Diego jurisdiction of
Douglas Hendricks. In Sasway's absence, his attorney, Charles T.  Bumer,
informed Hendricks that Sasway had no intention of registering. When Sasway
returned the following month, the Reagan Administration announced a grace
period, and the future first indictee spent it anonymously among the redwoods at
Humboldt State.

The final leg of the process began on June 16, when, according to Bumer, the San
Diego Federal Attorney received a cable from the Justice Department instructing
him to proceed with Selective Service indictments. Later that same day, San
Diego received another message, instructing that the indictments should be
pursued on a priority basis and making specific reference to Sasway. On June 30,
Sasway's indictment was announced. During the three-month period immediately
preceding it, Selective Service's compliance rate had, according to the G.A.O.,
tumbled under 80 percent.

''The Government has chosen to prosecute me,'' Benjamin Sasway told the waiting
national press when he learned of his indictment, ''to intimidate the 500,000
people who did not register for the draft. I urge these resisters to stand firm,
without fear. I ask people appalled by hatred and violence, who believe in
freedom and who oppose militarism, to stand by me in protest. We can't forget
that it is our Government and we have the power, if we act together, to change
and improve it.

''They can't,'' Sasway pointed out, ''possibly prosecute us all.'' The principal
question is whether they will need to, whether prosecution of Sasway and the
minuscule percent of the other violators selected will prove a deterrent to
those hundreds of thousands of young men who are defying the law now or would in
the future. History, again, might hold a lesson.

During the course of the Vietnam era, some 200,000 cases of Selective Service
violations were referred to the Justice Department for possible prosecution. Of
those, the Depart-ment managed to indict 25,000, and from those indictments,
there were 8,750 convictions.  Furthermore, of the 8,750 convictions, 5,500
received probation or suspended sentences.

There is evidence, too, that publicity generated by the trials served as a
stimulus rather than a deterrent to disobedience. Now, as then, public
prosecutions could make a political movement out of what is now relatively
disorganized and amorphous.

Ben Sasway's case will be the object lesson. It is at this stage that I feel
much in common with him. I was once an object lesson myself. ''You shall not do
this without suffering a penalty,'' the judge who sentenced me to prison said,
''and let this be a warning to others they will be punished if they do the
same.'' I know from personal experience that coming out of jail whole is by and
large a function of feeling good about the act that put you there in the first
place.

On that score, if jail is his fate, Ben Sasway seems resolute. He has responded
to being in the spotlight articulately and earnestly.  And his resolve gives no
signs of fading. Since his indictment, Sasway has become a regular on the
talk-show circuit. Neither the questions nor the answers have changed much over
the last 15 years.  When asked why he does not serve his country, Ben Sasway
responds that, in his own way, he is. When asked why he does not move to Cuba,
he responds that what he is doing is as American as the Boston Tea Party and
Henry David Thoreau. When asked what he would do about the Russians, he says
there are plenty of ways to deal with them other than blowing them up.

Sooner or later, all the interviewers get around to asking if he is an example
of what young people are like today. I hesitated to ask that question, flinching
as I recalled how we used to laugh at the reporters who slogged across ''the
counterculture,'' asking identical questions about the true identity of our
generation.  Nonetheless, it is, of course, the kind of question that has to be
asked.

''Do you think your peers see the world the way you do?'' I finally said. ''Are
there really half a million guys like you out there?'' Ben Sasway tried his best
to answer. ''I don't know,'' he admitted. ''I really don't know how my peers put
all this together. It's hard to generalize. A lot of people aren't very
politically aware, but I think there's a healthy skepticism. It's an attitude
-kind of like, 'Wait a minute. What are they asking me to do here? Didn't we go
through this before?' I don't know if that makes sense, but do you know what I
mean?''

His answer inevitably sets off another flock of echoes.  ''I know what you
mean,'' I responded, still somewhat lost in the time warp between us. ''Believe
me, I know what you mean.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ben Sasway

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDITORS' CHOICE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 29, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


AUNT JULIA AND THE SCRIPTWRITER, by Mario Vargas Llosa. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $16.50.) A comic novel about soap opera by the imaginative Peruvian
writer.
AUTUMN, by A. G. Mojtabai. (Houghton Mifflin Co., $9.95.) A novel about a
widower's adjustment to the death of his wife.
THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $11.95.) A novel
about black men and women in the South.
THE DIARY OF VIRGINIA WOOLF. Volume Four. 1931-1935, edited by Anne Olivier
Bell. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Rich, varied personal reflections
from the years when she was over 50.
EARL WARREN, by G. Edward White. (Oxford Univeristy Press, $25.) A biography of
the 14th Chief Justice of the United States.
THE IMPERIOUS ECONOMY, by David P. Calleo. (Harvard University Press, $17.50.)
An analysis of the decline of America's influence in the world.
THE RED SMITH READER, edited by Dave Anderson. (Random House, $15.95.) An
anthology of the late sportswriter's columns.
THE 13th VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) A large novel
about Americans in the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WEIGHED LOAN OF A-ARMS IN 1964

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 291 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 22


A National Security Council unit considered lending France atomic weapons to
obliterate Communist insurgents in Vietnam in 1954, State Department documents
released today showed.

It was one of several atomic options discussed at the highest level of the
United States Government years before the United States made major commitments
of troops to the conflict in the early 1960's, the documents showed.

A stunned aide to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles dismissed the suggestion
from Adm. Arthur Radford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

And President Eisenhower, wary of the perception that the United States would
''replace French colonialism with American colonialism,'' rejected any United
States involvement in the conflict at that time, saying he would first put the
idea of a ''D-day invasion'' to Congress and the allies later.

2,497-Page Book Is Released

There was no evidence President Eisenhower was presented with any proposal for
the use of atomic weapons in Vietnam.  The developments are chronicled in
memorandums included in ''Foreign Relations of the United States, 1952-54,
Volume 13,'' a 2,497-page book released by the department.

One of the options, advocated by Admiral Radford, was to use three atomic
weapons to aid French forces.  Admiral Radford floated the idea of giving the
weapons to the French ''to assist in the defense of Dienbienphu,'' where the
French suffered their worst defeat of the war. In a memo, Admiral Radford said
other members of the Joint Chiefs ''unanimously recommended against such an
offer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT FOE IS GOING ON TRIAL IN MILITARY SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 948 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Aug. 22


Benjamin H. Sasway is a native son of a military-minded region, and the irony of
being the first American indicted under the present draft registration law is
not lost on him. And as one who may face a maximum penalty of five years in
prison for what he considers a moral principle, he prefers to dwell on the
positive ironies.

The 21-year-old Mr. Sasway says some of the most gratifying support for his
refusal to register for a possible draft has come from marines at nearby Camp
Pendleton, who believe as he does that military service should be voluntary.
''Like the motto of the Marine Corps - they want only the few and the proud,''
he said.

Many people, including Mr. Sasway and his attorneys, believe the jurisdiction of
the Federal District Court in San Diego was intentionally selected by the
Government for the first indictment of a nonregistrant in the hope that the
pervasive military atmosphere might help win a conviction. Mr. Sasway, a student
at Humboldt State University in Arcata, is to go on trial here Tuesday before
Judge Gordon Thompson Jr.

Virginia Man Convicted

Last week, in a nonjury trial in Roanoke, Va., Enten Eller, a 20-year-old
college student, was convicted and sentenced by a Federal judge to three years'
probation and ordered to sign up within 90 days.

Three other men besides Mr. Sasway and Mr. Eller have been indicted under the
two-year-old law, which requires all young men to register within 30 days of
their 18th birthday. Government estimates are that 8.5 million men are eligible
for draft registration and that 700,000 have not signed up.

Many in San Diego say of the Sasway case that they have seen such clashes of
moral and practical forces and that little has changed.  ''I understand what
he's doing, but he's making a mistake,'' said Bill Curran, a World War II Army
veteran. ''The status quo is lined up with the military. It's like in Vietnam.
They paraded up and down Broadway here, but the draft went on, the war went
on.''

Navy Sets the Tone

From the time even before the era in which Mr. Curran served, the military has
been a powerful force in San Diego. Along with headquarters for the 11th Naval
District, major military installations in San Diego County include the Navy
Amphibious Base at Coronado, the Antisubmarine Warfare School, naval air
stations at Miramar and North Island and the 32d Street Naval Station. Of the
county's 1.9 million residents, active or retired military personnel and their
families are estimated to number 400,000.

The head of the National Lawyers Guild's military law task force here, Kathy
Gilberd, said it was ''very likely'' that the Justice Department had
intentionally chosen this military community for one of the first draft
prosecutions. ''But we couldn't prove it,'' she said.

But she pointed to the disclosure by news organizations of transcripts of a
Pentagon meeting, attended by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, that
discussed picking jurisdictions where the least public outcry was likely.
According to the transcripts of the April meeting, John S. Herrington, an
Assistant Secretary of the Navy, urged choosing ''the right jurisdiction, so you
don't end up in New York or Chicago, and end up in Omaha or somewhere like that
for your first trials.''

'Selective Prosecution' Seen

Defense attorneys maintain that Mr. Sasway was chosen for ''selective
prosecution'' aimed at those who have made a public issue of not registering.

A defense motion for dismissal on that basis was denied Wednesday by Judge
Thompson. His ruling has been appealed.  In a sense, Mr. Sasway considers
himself one of ''the few and the proud.'' He termed his refusal to register ''a
strong moral, ethical statement,'' one he chose to make publicly because to have
remained quiet would have seemed self-interested.

''I wanted to impact the system of injustice as I saw it,'' he said. ''They say
this country is based on freedom, liberty and equal justice, but that is not a
very accurate analysis of history. I believe in those things. I want to point
out the contradictions.''

Mr. Sasway grew up in Vista, 35 miles north of here, near the sprawling Camp
Pendleton Marine base. Many of Vista's residents work for producers of military
technology. During his childhood, he said, his views were almost always opposed
to those of his peers.

'Respect for Human Beings'

He said his parents - his father teaches theater arts at a junior college and
his mother teaches sixth grade -gave him a sense of social justice and respect.
One result of that, he said, was that ''if you learn respect for nature, you
become an environmentalist; if you learn respect for human beings, you become
part of the antiwar movement.''

In 1980, after the Carter Administration reinstituted mandatory registration,
Mr. Sasway sent a four-page letter to President Carter declaring and explaining
his refusal. He also sent copies to magazines and newspapers to try to draw
attention to the issue, he said. A year went by before he got his first response
from the Government, from Selective Service.

He continued to refuse to register, despite letters from the Justice Department
threatening him with prosecution. On June 30 he was indicted by a Federal grand
jury here on one count of failure to register, a felony. A maximum sentence, in
addition to a five-year term, could bring a $10,000 fine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of B.H. Sasway

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TROOPS' SLIP FORCES ARMY MAJOR TO START OVER

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: RALEIGH, N.@C., Aug. 22


An Army major whose career was interrupted when his troops shouted a barnyard
vulgarity in front of a major general has been cleared and has started over at
another base, still proud to be a soldier.

''Everything has been wiped clear,'' said Maj. Stanley Daugherty, who was
transferred to Fort Bragg last September after the incident at Fort Riley, Kan.

''I'm working my way into what I was doing before I was kicked off base,'' said
the major, who is 35 years old. ''But I'll be two years behind my
contemporaries. It bothers me to have to do it all over again.''

Despite the setback, ''I firmly believe in the Army system,'' Major Daugherty
said, adding that he would have abandoned his military career if he had not been
exonerated.

Letter of Reprimand

Maj. Gen. Edward A. Partain, the Fort Riley base commander, gave Major Daugherty
a letter of reprimand and an unfavorable efficiency report after 14 men in Major
Daugherty's 200-man company shouted the vulgarity at the end of a marching
cadence that goes, ''We like it here, we like it here.''

The reprimand aroused outrage among some of Major Daugherty's Army colleagues.
Hundreds of people wrote letters of support.  ''The man was a born leader, and
now his career is down the drain because of something he wasn't even responsible
for,'' said an officer who asked that he not be identified.

Another officer said Major Daugherty had admonished the company before General
Partain reprimanded him. The commander told the men that they were excellent in
the review parade but had ruined the impression with the vulgarity, the officer
said.

Help From Senator Dole

Major Daugherty said he cleared his record with help from Senator Bob Dole,
Republican of Kansas, who contacted the major and asked Army officials in
Washington to check into the matter. A spokesman for Senator Dole confirmed his
involvement.

Lawyers from the John F. Kennedy Center for Military Assistance on the base,
where Major Daugherty has been working, helped him write letters to clear his
record.

''Anything connected with the incident has been removed from his record,'' Maj.
Jim Weiskopf said in an interview from the Pentagon.  ''That includes the
evaluation and any letter attached to it.''

General Partain said he would have ''no comment'' on anything connected with the
incident.

Praises His Company

''Commanding is a high-risk job,'' said Major Daugherty, a highly decorated
officer whose 13-year career included a tour as a helicopter pilot in Vietnam.
''You win some, you lose a lot. I took the heat for the company. I just thought
the punishment was a little harsh.''

He said ''misguided exuberance'' led his men to use the barnyard expression,
which he said is as common among soldiers as blistered feet.

''You can hear that cadence at almost any installation; they just did it at the
wrong time,'' he said, adding that he felt no bitterness toward his superiors or
his men.

''That's a real, good, solid company,'' he said. ''That was the only thing they
did wrong in eight months. I was relieved for leading a nondisciplined company,
but they've received awards for no absences without leave in a year and the unit
re-enlistment award.  Those are not signs of an undisciplined company.''

Major Daugherty, who had been scheduled to attend Command and General Staff
College at Fort Leavenworth before his transfer, said he was trying to work his
way back into aviation leadership.

''It's up to me to show the battalion commander that I can instill leadership,''
he said. ''It's something you earn.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 24, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAELIS COMPLAIN THAT GUERRILLAS ARE BEING ALLOWED TO VIOLATE PACT

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Aug. 23


Israel complained today that Palestinian guerrillas leaving Beirut were being
allowed to violate a carefully negotiated withdrawal plan through improper
supervision.

Officials in Jerusalem said there was no apparent registration of the
guerrillas, that they were departing with weapons and equipment they should be
leaving behind and that women and children disguised as men were included among
those going.

At the same time, the Israelis expressed satisfaction at the election of Bashir
Gemayel as President of Lebanon. Prime Minister Menachem Begin sent Mr. Gemayel,
the leader of the rightist Christian militia that has been long allied to
Israel, a message signed ''Your friend Menachem Begin.''

Israelis Mute Their Criticism

Mr. Begin said in his message, ''May God be with you, my dear friend, in the
fulfillment of your great and historic mission for the liberty and independence
of Lebanon.''

Israeli officials indicated that they were unwilling to make a major issue of
the violations because to do so would undermine their principal objective,
seeing that the guerrillas left Lebanon for other Arab countries.

As a result, the Israelis have muted their criticism of French and Lebanese
troops, charged with supervising the pullout, and of Philip C. Habib, the
American negotiator who permitted 20 jeeps to be loaded aboard a ship Sunday
with 1,000 guerrillas bound for Cyprus.

Reports of Cease-Fire Violations

The same apparent unwillingness to do anything to interfere with the pullout
plan also has seemingly prompted military leaders to refrain from responding
vigorously to reported cease-fire violations by Syrian or Palestine Liberation
Organization forces in the Bekaa Valley of eastern Lebanon.

''We're all interested - Mr. Habib, the Lebanese, the Israelis - in getting the
P.L.O. out,'' a ranking Government official said here, ''and it's not a question
of whether there are violations, but what are we going to do about it?''

The answer, in the view of most Israelis, is very little. In the port, the
Israelis complain each day to Mr. Habib, and Sunday they sought briefly to block
the Cypriot ship from leaving. But the pullout has continued, with checking
procedures seemingly ignored in many cases.

To the east, the Israelis assert they are responding to light shelling and
sniping by returning fire at the same low level while counting the cease-fire
violations - more than 60, they say, since the beginning of August - and warning
of dire results if the military action continues.

Officials here concede that any heavy military response against the Arab units
entrenched in eastern Lebanon could spread and disrupt the withdrawal because
the Beirut-Damascus road, a planned exit route for the final stage of the
pullout, goes through the lines of the confronting armies.

No Direct Role in Pullout

Israel has no direct role in the pullout, which is being supervised at this
stage by the Lebanese Army and some French paratroopers, the first contingent of
a multinational force that has agreed to stay only for one month.

But the Israelis have been able to watch the departure of the Palestinians at
least with binoculars, and they have not liked what they have seen, from the
tardy arrival of the Lebanese the first day - they were said to have overslept -
to the efforts today by the guerrillas to take weapons such as rocket launchers,
which the Israelis consider heavy weapons that cannot be removed but which the
guerrillas apparently consider personal weapons.

On Sunday, in a move that was criticized by Defense Secretary Casper W.
Weinberger, Israeli gunboats blocked the Beirut port for six hours when it was
discovered that Palestinians had loaded the jeeps aboard the ferry leaving for
Cyprus.

An Israeli official said today that the blockade was lifted ''only in this
case'' after a request from a ''high American official.'' Israel was surprised
and annoyed at the action from Washington.

'Maybe a Jeep Is Not a Weapon'

''In the first place, we're still in a state of war and justified, we believe,
to take such action,'' an official said. ''The Americans only have to recall
Cuba and Vietnam to know that blockades sometimes are called for.''

''Second, we agreed to a detailed plan that leaves no room for jeeps to go with
the Palestinians,'' he said.  According to the Habib plan, guerrillas can carry
''one individual side weapon (pistol, rifle or submachine gun)'' but they must
leave all other weapons behind.

''Maybe a jeep is not a weapon,'' the official said. ''But they've also been
taking RPG rocket launchers, and perhaps they will try for a Sagger,'' or
missile, ''and then they have a real weapon, perhaps to be followed by a cannon
and a tank.''

The Israelis also have watched women and children climbing aboard the ship
disguised as men wearing Arab headdresses. Families of guerrillas are permitted
to leave, ''but not in disguise to confuse the numbers.''

Little Effort to Check Names

The Israelis say they are unaware of the registration of guerrillas that the
Habib plan calls for. Such scrutiny may be under way at staging areas in west
Beirut, but reporters and others watching the process in the port see no
attempts by the French or Lebanese to check names or luggage.

This bothers the Israelis, in large part because they seem unable to determine
if any of the violations is serious enough to intervene with enough severity to
halt the pullout. And they suspect that the Palestinians realize that such a
problem exists.

An Israeli official said ''we won't permit such violations to take place,'' but
added that the form of reaction would be up to the Government.

''Our opposition is a matter of policy, what we do about it is a matter of
tactics,'' he said.

Mortar and Rocket Fire

The military action in eastern Lebanon is seen in more ominous terms, because an
Israeli response is almost certain and military officials have long followed the
tactical guideline that they would select the time and place and especially the
severity of any such response.

Military officials say the Syrians have bolstered their forces in Lebanon since
the Israeli invasion on June 6 and particularly in recent weeks.

Today's communiques referred to mortar and rocket fire in the Mansoura region.
Israeli officials again warned the Palestinian guerrillas not to undertake any
military activities.

Mordechai Gur, a former Chief of Staff who is now a Labor member of Parliament,
said Israel's focus ''now shifts from Beirut, which is a domestic affair'' with
the election of Mr. Gemayel as President, ''to the north and the east against
the terrorists and the Syrians.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 24, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Stream of Refugees From Vietnam Slackens

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Aug. 23


The number of refugees fleeing Vietnam dropped sharply during the last three
months, indicating tougher action by Hanoi to stop them from leaving, United
Nations refugee agency officials said today.

A spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said that
3,503 arrived last month, the lowest July figure since 1977. From May to July
nearly 15,000 put ashore in Southeast Asia compared with just under 30,000 in
the comparable period last year.

''From what we get from the new arrivals, the Vietnamese are taking more
stringent measures to stop attempted departures,'' the spokesman said.

The United Nations spokesman said nearly 6,000 people left Vietnam last month -
mostly for the United States, France and Canada - under the orderly departure
program worked out by the agency and Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 24, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Veteran Wins His Plea

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 54 words

DATELINE: LITTLETON, Colo., Aug. 23


A former soldier who said he was having a flashback about Vietnam when he shot
at two men in a parking lot was found not guilt of attempted murder Friday.
However, the veteran, Alan Lukowski of Littleton, 31 years old, was found guilty
of attempted assault.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 25, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAELI PILOT TELLS OF GREAT EFFORT TO SPARE CIVILIANS

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Aug. 24


An Israeli pilot who took part in the bombing of Beirut said today that every
precaution was taken to avoid civilian casualties.

The pilot, a major who wished to remain anonymous, discussed in an interview how
the bombing missions were selected, how targets were assigned and how the
results were assessed. He did not deny that there were civilian casualties, but
wondered whether blame was being assigned fairly.

Charges of indiscriminate bombing of Beirut prompted the 34-yearold major to
seek out, through a mutual friend, a foreign reporter so that he could present a
pilot's view on the extended bombing of the Lebanese capital, an effort that
Israeli officials say persuaded the Palestinian guerrillas to leave.

''You see them as civilian targets,'' the major said. ''I see them as military
targets.''

'It's Not Fair'

''And it's not fair to ask only about their civilians,'' he said.  ''Most of our
soldiers are civilians,'' or reservists, as he said he was.

''I feel everyone, including some in Israel, are blaming us about being cruel or
inhuman,'' the major went on, ''but how about the quality of the P.L.O. and
their inhumanity? I'd prefer they sat in the Bekaa Valley and that we bombed
them there, but they concentrated in Beirut.''

In the evenings at his home in Tel Aviv, after returning from his missions, the
major said, ''we would watch the bombing on television with our two childen, and
we would have feelings about it.''

But the feelings were mixed. ''I'm not happy to see any civilian injuries,'' he
said, ''and we always thought about the alternative.  If it was the other way
around, thousands of Israelis would be killed, and the reaction would be
stronger.''

Targets Were Assigned

He said that the pilots were briefed for at least half an hour before each
mission and that the targets were assigned by headquarters. ''Nobody was able to
pick anything according to his mood,'' the major said.

The targets, he said, had been precisely selected, through aerial photography or
intelligence or both. Afterward, the results were assessed. ''There were
mistakes,'' he said, ''maybe one or two, but that's all, and the commander would
talk to the pilots.''

The planes dived at speeds of about 400 miles an hour, he said, and the targets
had to be found ''by eye - we had to see it.'' Bombs were released one at a
time, he said, and the pilots hit their intended targets.

The major reached into a white kit bag, a common accessory in Israel, and pulled
out what was obviously an aerial photograph.  ''This building here is the
Japanese Embassy, and this one is the Chilean Embassy,'' he said, indicating a
site just off a highway along the coast.

''And this,'' he said, pointing to an object in between the embassies, ''is a
133-millimeter gun, which as you know fires 25 to 27 kilometers.''

He said that the artillery piece was about 200 feet from either embassy and that
the Israeli F-4 Phantom, an American-made fighter jet that he also flew in the
1973 Arab-Israeli war, could accurately drop bombs to within 60 feet. That was a
relatively easy target, he said, but ''others were located where it made it more
difficult.''

'Sat Behind the Civilians'

Asked whether there was any question that civilians had died in the raids,
perhaps along with the guerrillas who were the Israeli targets, the major
replied: ''I have a personal problem. No one likes to bomb civilians, and we
aimed at no civilian targets. We went where the P.L.O. took their guns, and they
sat behind the civilians' backs.''

He said he landed twice with his full bomb load ''because the target had been
moved.'' ''This was a controlled situation,'' he said. ''We knew what we were
after, and we did not do area bombing but rather precision dive bombing.

''I don't like to bomb civilian targets,'' he went on, ''but if you put a T-34
tank in a civilian parking area, and you bomb it to prevent injuries to the
I.D.F., then it's their problem.'' I.D.F.  stands for the Israeli Defense
Forces.

''If you can find a better way,'' the major said, ''then I'll take it. I don't
think the air force could have done it better.''

'You Should Fight'

The major said that ''if you want to achieve peace, you should fight.'' ''Look
at the American-Japanese war,'' he said. ''In order to achieve an end, they
bombed Hiroshima and Nagasaki.'' The Israeli bombing, he said, ''created a
situation where they left Beirut - it achieved results and won the war.'' The
major also spoke of a conversation he said he once had with an American pilot.
''In Vietnam,'' the major said, ''he said pilots did the bombing without
believing because they felt the politicians had decided to lose the war. I don't
want to be in such a struggle that I don't believe in it.''

Denies Indiscriminate Bombing

The major argued that the accusations of random or indiscriminate Israeli
bombing were ''completely untrue.'' ''Look,'' he said, ''suppose the P.L.O. took
Qiryat Shemona or Tiberias,'' two northern Israeli towns. ''The Israeli Air
Force might have to issue orders. What did we do at Maalot, or the airliner at
Lod or the bus on the highway'' when Palestinian guerrillas struck.

''Our forces attacked,'' he said, and people died.  ''You can't wait until the
sword is at your throat to act,'' the major said. ''If you take the first step,
sometimes it saves lives from both sides. I think we saved lives in Beirut. I
don't think we bombed in vain.

''The aim was just,'' he said. ''We want to live in peace in Tel Aviv, and if we
want to live in peace so sometimes we have to fight.  That's how I see it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a Palestinian guerrillla bidding farewell to
his wife

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 25, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. IMAGE OF FUTILITY;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Aug. 24


Last Thursday, almost at the moment that the agreement on west Beirut was being
accepted in Jerusalem, delegates to what was billed as an emergency session of
the General Assembly here were voting to hold a $5.7 million, 12-day conference
in Paris next August to talk about the Palestinian question. This episode
illustrates what one Western diplomat called the ''monumental irrelevance'' of
the United Nations in the crisis over Lebanon. There is a pervasive sense of
frustration in corridors and offices here.

The Assembly's vote on holding the conference followed more than two months of
ineffective efforts by the Security Council, the most powerful body in the world
organization to deal with the problem of Lebanon.

The United Nations Charter proclaims that the Council ''shall determine the
existence of any threat to the peace and shall decide what measures shall be
taken.''

Threat Repeatedly Recognized

Since June 5, on the eve of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, the Council has
formally and repeatedly recognized the threat to the peace, but it has been
thwarted every time it tried to do something about it. The 15 members have
adopted no fewer than nine resolutions demanding, urging and calling for an end
to the fighting, the withdrawal of Israeli troops, the lifting of the blockade
of Beirut and the deployment of United Nations officers between the forces of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Most of these resolutions were adopted unanimously. For a brief instant on Aug.
1, when the Council agreed to station United Nations personnel to monitor the
occasional cease-fires that were arranged in Beirut, it appeared that the world
organization might make a practical contribution to the peacemaking.

But, as many other nations have done, Israel ignored the Council's commands,
including those providing for the monitors. The United Nations' most powerful
body could pull out all the stops on the East River but there was no offstage
echo on the ground in Lebanon, Israel or the other Middle East countries
involved in practical diplomacy.

Council's Power Limited

At one point, Olara Otunnu of Uganda, one of the Council's most respected
members, said in public what others say in private: that the Security Council's
power ''is now more limited than ever.''

Many third world and Soviet-bloc diplomats have a simple explanation for this
situation: The United States, Israel's shield, blocks the Council from imposing
sanctions or punishment. Indeed, the Council all but gave up on Aug. 6 when the
United States vetoed a Soviet resolution to embargo arms shipments for Israel.

Thoughtful diplomats in all camps, however, recognize that the events here
reflect the essential fact of United Nations life, that sovereignty does not lie
with the organization but with its 157 members. Each has a monopoly over the
legitimate use of force against its own citizens or those of other nations. The
United Nations can establish token peacekeeping forces, but only with the
consent of sovereign combatants.

In April, Argentina ignored a Council command to remove its invading troops from
the Falkland Islands. They were forced off by another sovereign, Britain.

Debate Discouraged by Veto

Iran and Iraq have paid no attention to Council requests to stop fighting and
negotiate their differences. Some issues affecting peace never reach the Council
because its members know that a veto will block even the issuance of a paper
text. So the Council does not concern itself with the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan or Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia because Moscow's veto will block
any resolution.

The United Nations, as one official put it, ''deals in symbols.'' Its lightly
armed peacekeeping troops with their blue helmets are not a military force but a
symbolic presence. Israeli armor easily rolled through the 7,000 United Nations
troops in southern Lebanon on June 6. The Turkish Army could do the same to the
peacekeeping force stationed between it and the Greek Cypriots on Cyprus. A
determined platoon could brush aside the 37 United Nations officers watching the
@Indian-Pakistani truce line in Kashmir.

But the peacekeeping force on Cyprus and the truce observers in Pakistan are
undisturbed, apparently because the sovereign nations on either side do not want
another test of arms.

Pressure on U.S. Suggested

French and Egyptian diplomats here believe that in the deliberations over
Lebanon a great political opportunity has been lost, or at least postponed.
Paris and Cairo have been suggesting resolutions designed to nudge the United
States toward a recognition of the right of Palestinian Arabs to
''self-determination,'' a hint of an eventual Palestinian state.

But the French-Egyptian plan has not yet been brought to the Security Council
for fear of a United States veto. Egypt's attempt to take it to the Assembly was
frustrated by P.L.O. insistence on far more sweeping language that would raise a
question of Israel's right to exist.

All this has left one Western diplomat comparing the United Nations and its
orders to Shakespeare's Glendower, who boasted that he could ''call spirits from
the vasty deep.''

Hotspur, who understood the limits of sovereignty, replied, ''Why, so can I. But
will they come?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 25, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Jury Picked at Trial Of Registration Resister

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Aug. 24


The trial of Benjamin H. Sasway, 21 years old, the first American to be indicted
for failure to register with Selective Service since the Vietnam War, began
today with the selection of a jury of eight men and four women.

Judge Gordon Thompson of Federal District Court predicted the trial would last
no more than three days.  Mr. Sasway is the second person in the post-Vietnam
War group to go to trial for failure to register for the draft. If convicted, he
could be sentenced to a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a $10,000
fine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 25, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MIDDLE-AGED INTELLECTUALS CAN WIN US NO WARS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 480 words


To the Editor:

Mark Gerzon (Op-Ed Aug. 14) offers as a defense for resisting Selective Service
registration the beguiling notion that we should draft 25- to 45-year-olds
before 18-year-olds.

In this age of technological warfare, he states, the keys to being a good
soldier are no longer fleetness of foot and muscularity, but good judgment,
wisdom and tolerance. Life itself might be threatened with extinction if we
continue to permit immature 18-year-olds access to the triggers of modern
weapons. Those 25 to 45 years old are better able to stand the stress of battle
because they have voted, brought home paychecks and have had children.

If the Vietnamese war has taught us anything, it is that that war was decided
precisely not by middle-aged intellectuals using hightech gadgets, but by a
young (North Vietnamese) infantry which stalemated us in the field using
conventional weapons. It was an infantry that was in excellent physical shape
for the tough jungle terrain and sufficiently disciplined to shoot back under
superior enemy fire.

Modern commanders still want this type of combat soldier: men at their physical
peak and yet malleable enough to accept the strong discipline and complex
training in weapons systems and unit tactics that lead to effective battlefield
behavior. In short, 18-to-20-yearolds.

In the absence of the draft, the Army can only field men not smart enough to
avoid, as Mr. Gerzon wisely has, the incredible horrors of combat duty.
Commanders certainly do not want ''philosopher kings'' with the wisdom to decide
individually and at any moment whether or not they should obey the dreaded order
to attack.

Surely no one seriously believes that a troop of 33-year-olds, with wives,
children and interrupted careers to worry about, could possibly muster half the
esprit de corps of a gung-ho bunch of 18-year-olds.

It seems to me what Mr. Gerzon is really offering is just another of the endless
equivocations the ''Why me?'' generation is so adept at conjuring up to avoid
shouldering their share of the responsibilities of citizenship. Draft me first,
he challenges, safe in the knowledge of his unsuitability. And until the draft
board agrees with his unilateral stance, he can feel morally justified in
counseling his sons not to register.

His is a neat tactic of modern guerrilla citizenship: no hearings necessary, no
voting, no Congressional acquiesence; just do it my way - or else. No doubt such
self-centered behavior might well mean ''we would fight fewer wars,'' as we
would have fewer soldiers to fight them with.

Of course, as we become short of foot soldiers who fight their battles with the
bullet, there's an inevitable alternative: middleaged intellectuals who will
prefer to fight wars with the bomb.
TOM HOLZEL, Concord, Mass., Aug. 18, 1982

The writer is a former Army first sergeant and senior instructor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 25, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
'A LEADER WHO LISTENS';
Man in the News

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 827 words


It is expected that Archbishop Joseph L. Bernardin, who yesterday was invested
as head of the Archdiocese of Chicago, will soon be named a cardinal and wear
the red hat of a prince of the church. But it probably will not affect his
style; since his ordination as a bishop in 1966, he has shunned the princely
manners that young and favored members of the Roman Catholic hierarchy often
take on.

His direct and informal style may have been a big factor in his selection as
head of the nation's largest Catholic archdiocese, church insiders say.The
54-year-old Archbishop takes the cathedral of the see led by John Cardinal Cody
until his death on April 25.Cardinal Cody cherished his authority and wielded it
in a manner that his critics termed autocratic and said alienated many who
sought a more democratic church.

Although Archbishop Bernardin's style is markedly different, he will be, as
Cardinal Cody was, the sole proprieter of millions of dollars in church
property. And he will have the authority to move pastors and dictate religious
and social policies.

It is not Archbishop Bernardin's style to wield his authority with a heavy hand.
When he was chosen bishop, he selected as his motto the Latin phrase ''sicut qui
ministrant,'' meaning ''as those who serve,'' a line taken from a document of
the Second Vatican Council on the role of bishops.

He Sought a Consensus

As Archbishop for 10 years in Cincinnati, an archdiocese whose 500,000 Catholics
makes it one-fourth the size of Chicago, he earned a reputation as a leader who
consulted and sought a consensus. In a pastoral letter written to commemorate
his 15th year as a bishop, he said he believed a bishop should be ''a shepherd
who leads and cares for his people and, above all, a leader who listens.''

Indeed, he acknowledges that one of the criticisms leveled against him is that
he takes so long to consult that he is slow to come to a decision.

Joseph Louis Bernardin (the last name is pronounced BURN-uh-deen) was born in
Columbia, S.C., a city that is overwhelmingly Protestant. He attended public
schools because there were not enough Catholics in Charleston to support a
parochial school.

His father, a stonecutter from northern Italy, died before the boy was 10 years
old. His mother, Maria, supported her son and a daughter, Elaine, by working as
a seamstress. As a youth, Joseph was studious and planned to become a doctor.

Ordained to Priesthood in 1952

Shortly after he began his pre-medical studies at the University of South
Carolina, he felt the call to the priesthood and in 1948 entered St. Mary's
Seminary in Baltimore. He earned a master's degree in education from Columbia
University in 1952 and was ordained the same year.

Father Bernardin returned to South Carolina, and work in several parishes in
Charleston brought him to the attention of church leaders. By 1966 he was the
administrator, or executive assistant to the bishop, of the South Carolina
diocese.

He was appointed bishop in 1966 and assigned to the Diocese of Atlanta, where a
former mentor from Charleston, Archbishop Paul J.  Hallinan, was leading a
diocese eagerly carrying out the reforms from the Ecumenical Council called by
Pope John XXIII.

When the National Conference of Catholic Bishops was formed in 1968, it selected
Bishop Bernardin as first general secretary because of his administrative
skills, energy and ability as a mediator. As the full-time officer of the
organization, to which all the nation's Catholic bishops belong, he became in
effect the chief executive for the hierarchy.

After he was named Archbishop of Cincinnati in 1952, he was president of the
organization for a three-year term beginning in 1974.

Close Ties to His Family

The baldish, slightly stocky Archbishop leads a simple life and is noted for his
12-@ to 14-hour work days. In Cincinnati he moved out of the chancery and into
modest quarters above a downtown church. His 77-year-old mother is moving to
Chicago with him, and he maintains close contacts with his sister and other
relatives.

In Cincinnati, he adhered to strict interpretation of Catholic dogma but was
willing to discuss thorny problems, such as the ordination of women, even though
the Vatican declared itself firmly in opposition to women as priests.

Archbishop Bernardin has been generally cautious in his public pronouncements,
but has not avoided controversial issues. Shortly after he arrived in
Cincinnati, he vigorously denounced the American bombing of North Vietnam and
racism in the United States.

''I have spoken out before, I will speak out here,'' Archbishop Bernardin said
on his first visit to Chicago after being named to the post. ''You'll hear from
me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Archbishop Bernardin and Archbishop Pio Laghi

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 25, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PHILIP HEHMEYER, 37, HEADED NEW YORK COTTON EXCHANGE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BLUMSTEIN

SECTION: Section D; Page 21, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 665 words


Philip L. Hehmeyer, the chairman of the New York Cotton Exchange and a cotton
futures trader, was found dead in his Manhattan apartment Monday, the police
reported yesterday.

The police said the death had been ruled a suicide.  Detectives said Mr.
Hehmeyer, who was 37 years old, had evidently killed himself on Friday with a
shotgun. They said that although no suicide note had been found, they had been
told by associates of Mr.  Hehmeyer that he had been despondent over losing
about $60,000 in the stock market last week.

''Even though the amount was not a significant amount in the overall scheme of
things, it just had a devastating psychological effect on him,'' W. Thorpe
McKenzie, a friend and former roommate of Mr. Hehmeyer, said last night.

'Concerned' About Banking

Mr. McKenzie said Mr. Hehmeyer might have felt ''a certain amount of being
shellshocked'' after working 10 years in commodity trading.  Mr. Hehmeyer's
brother, Christopher, said that his brother had been ''concerned about the
financial soundness of the country and the banking system'' - in particular
because of Mexico's financial crisis last week - and that he may have used
futures contracts to bet mistakenly on a decline in the stock market.

He said that he was still calculating his brother's financial losses, but that
''it was nothing that he hadn't faced before as a trader.''

Wedding Had Been Scheduled

Mr. Hehmeyer was engaged, and his wedding was scheduled for Sept. 4 in
Clarksdale, Miss.  His fiancee had already left New York on Friday for the
wedding, Mr. Hehmeyer's brother said.  When Mr. Hehmeyer did not show up for
work on Monday, friends called the superintendent of his building at 14 East 62d
Street, the police said. He was found dead on the kitchen floor of his apartment
at 2:20 P.M., and was fully clothed with a shotgun under his left leg,
detectives said.

There was no indication of foul play, according to the detectives.  Ernest
Simon, a vice president of Bache Halsey Stuart Shields Inc., said Mr. Hehmeyer
was ''a very good and successful cotton broker.'' Mr. Simon said that Mr.
Hehmeyer traded both for clients and for his own account, although members of
the trader's family said he had not been trading for his clients when he lost
money last week.

Mr. Hehmeyer, whose death was announced on the floor of the Cotton Exchange
yesterday morning, started his one-year term as the unpaid chairman of the
exchange in June. The chairman heads the exchange's board of managers, while a
president runs the exchange on a day-today basis.

The Cotton Exchange, which has 450 members, trades futures in cotton, orange
juice and propane gas.  Under the exchange's bylaws, Alex Weissenborn, the vice
chairman of the board, will serve as the board chairman until the board convenes
to fill vacant positions.

Mr. Hehmeyer graduated in 1963 from East High School in Memphis and attended the
University of the South in Sewanee, Tenn., for three years. He then joined the
Army and served in Vietnam before receiving his degree from Sewanee in 1970.

Worked as Reporter

After graduation, Mr. Hehmeyer worked as a reporter for The Memphis Commercial
Appeal, managed two restaurants in the Virgin Islands and represented a Memphis
cotton company in New York City.

He then began his own futures trading concern, Hehmeyer & Company.  He started
on the Cotton Exchange as a clerk before buying a seat on the exchange in the
early 1970's.

Besides his brother, he is survived by his parents, Mr. and Mrs.  Walter
Hehmeyer of Oxford, Miss.  A funeral service is tentatively scheduled for
Thursday afternoon at St. Peter's Episcopal Church in Essex Fells, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Philip L. Hehmeyer

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT FOE CONVICTED AND ORDERED TO JAIL TO AWAIT SENTENCING

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1174 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Aug. 26


A 21-year-old college student was convicted today of failing to register for a
military draft and was immediately jailed to await sentencing Oct. 4.

Federal District Judge Gordon Thompson Jr. said he was ordering Benjamin H.
Sasway held without bail to prevent his possible flight to another country.

''He is aware of the fact that many of our people have gone to Canada when the
chips were down,'' Judge Thompson said. ''He has said he wouldn't, but the
statement indicated he knows about it.''

In a July television interview that was heard at the trial, Mr.  Sasway said he
would not flee to Canada or seek conscientious objector status because either
action would be selfish.

The jury of eight women and four men returned the verdict after 50 minutes of
deliberation. The felony charge carries a maximum penalty of five years in
prison and a $10,000 fine.

Mr. Sasway, a student of political science and philosophy at Humboldt State
University in Arcata, was the first man indicted and is the first to be jailed
for violating the 1980 Selective Service law requiring all men to register
within 30 days of their 18th birthday.

The Selective Service System estimates that 8.5 million men are eligible for
registration and that 700,000 have not signed up.  The Reagan Administration
began a crackdown on nonregistrants this year. Four other men have been
indicted, and one, Enten Eller, was sentenced Aug. 17 to three years' probation
and given 90 days to register by a Federal judge in Roanoke, Va.

Yesmin Annen, the Assistant United States Attorney who prosecuted Mr. Sasway,
touched on the case's significance to the Government today. ''It goes to the
heart of the national interest,'' she told the jury.

Speaking in a driving cadence, Mrs. Annen went on to describe Mr.  Sasway's
resistance as ''brazen.'' ''He wants to violate the Selective Service law, to
flaunt it in the face of the United States and to dare the United States to do
something about it,'' she said. ''Now is the time for him to pay the
consequences. He has forced us to be here today.''

Opponents Are Adamant

A spokesman for opponents of a possible draft, who demonstrated outside the
courthouse, said the jailing of Mr. Sasway would not deter their opposition and
would only encourage other men to take their resistance underground.

Deborah Russell, a spokesman for the Draft Resisters Defense Fund, a San Diego
County group, called the trial ''a clear attempt on the part of the Government
to intimidate and scare young men who haven't registered,'' adding, ''I don't
think it's going to work.''

Mr. Sasway had no opportunity to comment on the verdict. Federal marshals
quickly led him away from the defense table as his mother, softly calling,
''Ben,'' was reaching for his arm. He was taken to the Metropolitan Correction
Center in San Diego.

His parents, Joseph R. and Delores C. Sasway, were distraught and bitter. Both
wept.

'It's Unjust,' Mother Says

''It's unjust,'' Mrs. Sasway said. ''If you can't make a moral decision in a
free country, it's unjust.'' Judge Thompson suggested that by ordering Mr.
Sasway to jail he was preventing him from wrongly trying to influence public
opinion.  ''This trial has had the purpose of, has attempted to have the jury to
do other than follow the law, as he has,'' Judge Thompson said.  ''I cannot
permit that any further.''

The judge added: ''I respect his conscience. I don't, however, respect his
position because it is against the law.''

Reagan Calls Program Essential

President Reagan has called peacetime draft registration essential to an
effective military response in the event of ''severe national emergency.'' He
ordered last January that registration be continued, reversing a position he
took in his election campaign. Resgistration was instituted by President Carter
in July 1980 after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.

''We live in a dangerous world,'' President Reagan said in ordering the program
continued. ''In the event of a future threat to national safety, registration
could save the United States as much as six weeks in mobilizing emergency
manpower.''

Opponents of the draft in Congress and civil libertarians contend that the
registration law is unenforceable because the number of young men who could be
convicted under it is more than 20 times the population of Federal prisons.
Leaders of the antidraft movement contend that the Government will not be able
to prosecute all who resist.

Mrs. Annen, the prosecutor, said in her closing remarks that the evidence showed
Mr. Sasway had been given opportunities over two years to register and that he
had rejected them on at least 10 occasions. Much of today's summation consisted
of a detailed account of those occasions.

'Must Take Responsibility'

''Benjamin Sasway must take responsibility for his acts and his admissions,''
she said.  Mr. Sasway wrote a letter to President Carter in 1980 saying he
objected to registration and a draft on moral grounds. He maintains that the
United States has no defensive military needs and that a draft could facilitate
American involvement in a conflict like the Vietnam war. He called the American
role there ''interventionist.''

Joseph Sasway, a 49-year-old college teacher, said the jury ''was never given an
opportunity to understand'' the essential issues in the three-day trial because
his son was not permitted to discuss his philosophical opposition to
registration and a draft.

''All law, to be just, there must be individual considerations,'' he said. ''Ben
should have had an opportunity to at least face the jury and say why he was
doing what he was doing.''

Judge's Instructions Criticized

The father also criticized Judge Thompson's instructions to the jury as overly
restrictive. The judge told the jurors that essentially only two elements of law
might be considered, failure to register and intent. ''A person may not decide
for himself whether a law is good or bad,'' he said.

Mr. Sasway's attorney, Charles T. Bumer, said he would prepare an appeal based
on the sentence. He said he would also seek to have his client released on bail,
since Mr. Sasway had no criminal record.

In an emotional closing statement to the jury, Mr. Bumer said, ''You have the
power to brand this young man a felon for the rest of his life.''

He said Mr. Sasway was trying to ''improve his country'' by taking a stand
against what he considered unjust national policy. Comparing Mr. Sasway to the
Boston patriots of the Revolutionary War, Mr. Bumer said, ''In this country,
we've made heroes of people who stood up to the Government and said no.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Benjamin H. Sasway (Page A8) photo of Mr.
Sasway's father (Page A8)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Rebuffs Hanoi On a Border Truce

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Aug. 26


China has dismissed a Vietnamese proposal for a six-week cease-fire along their
border starting Friday and lasting until Oct. 3, the New China News Agency said
today. China and Vietnam fought a brief border war in early 1979 and since then
sporadic border clashes have occurred.

The agency said the Chinese Foreign Ministry had delivered a note to the
Vietnamese Embassy here blaming Hanoi entirely for tension on the border and
accusing Vietnam of deliberately provoking China.

''The Vietnamese troops frequently opened fire into Chinese territory, attacked
and kidnapped peaceable Chinese border inhabitants and disrupted production,''
the note said.

It also accused Vietnamese naval vessels of seizing Chinese fishermen and
refusing to return them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JURY AWARDS $58 MILLION TO 47 RAILROAD WORKERS EXPOSED TO DIOXIN

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words


Forty-seven railroad workers who were exposed to the deadly chemical contaminant
TCDD, or dioxin, have been awarded a total of nearly $58 million in damages by
an Illinois jury.

The trial, in a suit brought by present and former employees against the Norfolk
& Western Railway, began April 5 in Madison County Circuit Court and more than
700 exhibits were entered in evidence.

Albert E. Schoenbeck, attorney for the railroad, indicated that he planned to
appeal the decision, but declined to comment further.  Paul L. Pratt, attorney
for the railroad workers, also declined to comment.

Spokesmen for veterans' groups said yesterday they hoped that the award would
influence the Federal Government to approve their claims for injuries caused by
Agent Orange, a defoliant used in Southeast Asia in the Vietnam War.

Agent Orange Contained Dioxin

There is no direct legal connection between the two cases, but Agent Orange also
contained dioxin. The dioxin became a critical point in hundreds of claims
brought by veterans since the war. Thus far, all Agent Orange claims have either
been rejected or placed in abeyance by the Veterans Administration.

The symptoms of the railroad workers, as described to the Illinois jury, were
similar to those described by veterans exposed to Agent Orange: cancer, liver
damage, neurological problems, loss of sex drive, dizziness and problems in
breathing.

The railroad case grew out of an incident on Jan. 11, 1979, when a tank car
carrying 30,000 gallons of orthochlorophenol crude, a chemical solvent, ruptured
near Sturgeon, Mo. The solvent was being shipped to a woodworking concern in
Tacoma, Wash.

The orthochlorophenol was manufactured by the Monsanto Company plant at Sauget,
Ill. Monsanto, along with Dresser Industries, which made the tank car, and the
General American Transportation Company, which made the coupling on the car,
were originally named as defendants and recently settled out of court. A local
news report said the settlement was for approximately $8 million. However, the
figure has not yet been publicly confirmed nor is it known how the settlement
money was divided.

Each Plaintiff Gets Award

It remained unclear how the $58 million awarded by the jury has been ordered
paid, although 32 out of the 47 plaintiffs were awarded damages of at least $1
million. The jury awarded something to each of the plaintiffs, with $1.95
million as the highest individual award.

Among those receiving awards were Wid Smith, 43 years old, of Jacksonville, Mo.,
$550,000; Dean Coleman, 31, of Huntsville, Mo., $600,000; John Little, 28, of
Clark, Mo., $650,000, and Richard Tremblay, 36, of Mexico, Mo., $650,000. The
names of the other plaintiffs were not immediately available.

Lewis M. Milford, a lawyer at the National Veterans Law Center in Washington,
said yesterday that he had not seen the decision, which was made late Wednesday.

''It is the first major award that I know of involving dioxin,'' Mr. Milford
said. ''It makes the Government's rejection of the Agent Orange claims even more
absurd. The Veterans Administration has commissioned a study that will take
decades to complete, while a jury of sensible Americans has shown the compassion
that the Government lacks.''

Workers Called to Clear Tracks

Testimony in the Illinois case indicated that the Norfolk & Western Railway
mustered laborers, yard men, engineers and other railroad workers to assist in
clearing the tracks after the tank car ruptured. According to testimony in the
trial, the rupture occurred when the yoke connecting the tank car to another car
broke, forcing one set of wheels off the track and sending another set of wheels
into the belly of the tank.

The 30,000 gallons of orthochlorophenol contained only a tiny amount of dioxin,
which occurs as a contaminant in the manufacturing of certain chemicals. The
dioxin accounted for only 22 parts per billion of the total amount of material
carried in the car. Lawyers for the railroad argued that the total amount of
dioxin involved in the spill was less than half a teaspoon.

But in controlled experiments with laboratory animals, scientists have found
that dioxin causes cancer in amounts as little as 5 parts per trillion. Matthew
Meselson, a professor of biochemistry at Harvard, has called dioxin ''the most
powerful carcinogen known.''

Although the accident occurred less than four years ago, one of the workers
exposed to dioxin in the clean-up has developed cancer of the testicles and the
skin.

Called Deadlier Than Cyanide

The principal witness for the workers was Dr. Berthram Carnow, a professor at
the Universty of Illinois School of Occupational Medicine in Chicago. He
testified that, in his opinion, exposure to dioxin was 200,000 times more deadly
than exposure to cyanide and that there was no safe exposure to it at any level.
He said that exposure to dioxin could cause birth defects in children yet
unborn.

The trial was conducted at the Circuit Court in Edwardsville under terms of the
1910 Federal Employee Liability Act, which allows any railroad worker to bring a
personal injury claim to any court existing wherever the railroad's tracks go.
It is not known why Edwardsville in particular was selected.

Nor was it clear what effect, if any, yesterday's decision would have on the
Agent Orange cases.  The Veterans Administration's announced study, which has
been sharply criticized by veterans, is being conducted by Dr. Gary E.  Spivey
of the University of California at Los Angeles.

Dr. Spivey's objectivity was questioned last year after veterans groups learned
that he had appeared before a committee of the California General Assembly and
said that he doubted that many troops were exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam,
that there was little evidence of any adverse health effects from exposure to
the chemical, and that ''The fear which is generated by the current publicity is
very likely to be the most serious consequence of the use of Agent Orange.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A JOB FOR NIXON IN THE CAUSE OF WORLD PEACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


To the Editor:

Former President Nixon's Aug. 18 Op-Ed article, ''Hard-Headed Detente,'' evinces
considerable good sense and political acumen.  This is not to say that all of
his self-congratulatory assertions are palatable. The bombing and mining of
Haiphong were ruthless and dangerous acts, whatever their alleged advantage for
summit bargaining. On the whole, however, Mr. Nixon's perspectives certainly
demonstrate far more sensitivity to the risks and complexities of world power
than is currently manifest in the White House.

Nevertheless, some of the conclusions of the article are disappointing and
contradictory to prior analysis.  Mr. Nixon writes, ''The West must restore the
nuclear military balance so that it will not be subject to Soviet nuclear
blackmail.'' Earlier, he refers to ''Soviet attainment of superiority in
landbased nuclear weapons'' (significantly, he did not assume overall Soviet
nuclear superiority), but he also sharply criticizes the argument ''that the
only safe course is to restore United States nuclear superiority.''

Mr. Nixon surely knows, better than most Americans, that the Soviet land-based
nuclear superiority is balanced by American submarine-based nuclear superiority
and by our nuclear strategic bombing force. He also surely knows that it is not
necessary to be ''equal'' in all aspects of nuclear weaponry, so long as a
credible deterrent is maintained. And he must know that the goal of ''catching
up'' with the Soviets has been used by the Administration as a blatant cover-up
for its reckless quest for first-strike capa-bility.

The threat of nuclear blackmail in the world, if credible at all, is an American
threat more than a Soviet threat, as it always has been.

If the Soviets wanted to play that scary game, what have they been waiting for?
Wouldn't now be the time, before Reagan's planned new weapons systems become
dispositive? Surely there are enough world crises taking place which sharply
affect Soviet interests.

The truth is that nuclear blackmail is simply a threat of nuclear suicide when
each side possesses a credible deterrent, even if one side has ''less'' overkill
than the other.

When Mr. Nixon was President, he took important initiatives in foreign policy,
especially in regard to China and the Soviet Union.  Those achievements were
overshadowed , quite understandably, by the Watergate scandals and other abuses
of Presidential power.

If the former President truly wants to regain a respected place in American
history and to demonstrate also a continuing potential for constructive
leadership, let him step forth as the chief spokesman for a nuclear freeze, or
something similar to it, like a comprehensive test-ban agreement; let him speak
out against the folly and duplicity of the so-called civil defense program,
which aims at conditioning Americans to accept the inevitability of nuclear war.

The entire world would be grateful, and the former President would have shown
the degree of courage and commitment necessary to elevate him securely above the
dark abyss of Watergate.
ARNOLD MILTON PAUL, New York, Aug. 20, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words


Around the World 2
In the Hebrides, austere beauty and very few jobs 2
Salvador exiles offer to go home if assured political freedom 2 Mexico moves to
limit purchases by Americans in border area 2
A fugitive Polish union leader appeals for large protests 3 Turkish diplomat is
shot dead in his car in Ottawa 3
South Africa admits 3 of its troops were killed in Zimbabwe 3
France is reportedly ready to sell jets to Peking 3
Weinberger will visit Lebanon, Israel and Egypt 4
30,000 Palestinians in south Lebanon to spend winter in tents 4
Egypt formally halts peace talks with Israel 4

Government/Politics
Police have few clues in killing of mobster's son 27
Klenetsky ruled eligible to challenge Moynihan in primary 28

Washington Talk
Briefing 7
Supreme Court to tackle long list of criminal law issues 7

General
Search on for fabled galleon near San Francisco 5
Around the Nation 6
After protests, California decides not to shut prison newspapers 6
Zoo officials say Ling-Ling, the panda, is not pregnant 6
Drug agent, charged with narcotics smuggling, surrenders 24
Botiques in the city are struck by a rash of burglaries 25
Police seize $2.5 million in counterfeit $50 bills in Queens 26
An alcoholism-treatment program works in upstate prison 27

Arts/Entertainment
City Opera orchestra agress to wage freeze 8
Hayden's ''Infidelity Outwitted'' at Mozart Festival 9
Book on ''disappearing child- hood'' reviewed 11
CBS follow-up on Vietnam program running into snags 44
Cheap Trick rock group at Pier 84 44

Health/Science
Three Soviet astronauts return to earth safely 5

Industry/Labor
A Federal judge blocks a newspaper merger in Seattle 6
Photo exhibition traces black struggle in U.S. labor 6
Hartford's insurance industry is expanding, but outside the city 25

Education/Welfare
Black law students support boycott of course at Harvard 5

Style
Consumer Saturday: counterfeit sweaters and shirts 12
De Gustibus: foods with more repute than merit 12
F.D.A. may warn on drugs in pregnancy 12
Street smarts: a shoe that's a bargain 12

Sports Pages
Stadler and Shearer share 2-shot lead in World Series of Golf 28
Bettina Bunge upsets Pam Shriver in Volvo Cup tennis 28
Nets get Dawkins from 76ers 29
Mets suffer 11th straight loss, 9-8, to Braves 29
Henderson steals four bases and breaks Brock's record 29
Steven Crist on Ronnie Warren, the horse trainer 29
Jets planning to add pressure on Simms of Giants 29
Blue Jays rout Yanks, 10-3 30
Mystic Park is scratched from International Trot 30
Scouting: Nolan Ryan's long-awaited strikeout 30
Stabler files a libel suit against The Times and NBC 31
Players: The nation remembers Joe Louis 31
Brain tumor of Giants' Kotar is found to be malignant 31

Features/Notes
Saturday News Quiz 10
Going Out Guide 11
New York Day by Day 27
Sports People 30
Man in the News: John McKinney of Manville Corporation 33

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

Judges judged, by history Tuition credits and civil rights Let Vista live
Letters 22
Russell Baker: your TV set is a stopped clock 23
David H. McKillop and Nigel J.  Collie: the test ban treaty 23
Alan P. Lightman: ''cultural cold war'' 23
Andrew Stein: beyond loving New York 23
Jane Doe: raped twice - once by the system 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS FOLLOW-UP ON VIETNAM RUNNING INTO SNAGS

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 44, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words


CBS News has encountered problems in preparing a follow-up program that the
network promised to broadcast after running into criticism over its documentary
about enemy troop strength during the Vietnam War.

The program will, in effect, be a sequel to ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' which appeared on CBS-TV last January. It will probably be shown in
mid-September as an hourlong panel discussion during prime time, according to a
CBS News official who asked not to be identified.

Planning for the program has been complicated by several factors, including the
possibility of a $300 million lawsuit against CBS by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, who was said in the original documentary to have led a conspiracy
to underestimate deliberately to his superiors the size of enemy forces during
the Vietnam conflict.

Four months after the original documentary, TV Guide magazine charged that the
program had violated CBS standards of accuracy and fairness. Following a
six-week investigation into the charges, the president of CBS News, Van Gordon
Sauter, issued an eight-page memorandum last month based on a 68-page report. In
the memorandum Mr. Sauter stood by the documentary, although he acknowledged
that CBS News had committed five violations of its journalistic practices. Mr.
Sauter also pledged to present another program exploring the issues raised in
the documentary.

Westmoreland's Terms

At least three of the proposed participants in the program have said they are
mistrustful of CBS and so far have declined to commit themselves to be on the
program unless certain conditions are met.  Principal among these is General
Westmoreland, who has written a letter to CBS specifying the terms under which
he could appear on the follow-up broadcast. The general, who was traveling in
Japan yesterday and thus was unavailable for comment, has hired Dan M.  Burt, a
lawyer, to advise him on matters related to his treatment in the CBS
documentary.

Mr. Burt declined to discuss any possible litigation. But he said in an
interview: ''General Westmoreland was accused of what many feel was treason. I
think the general would not make an idle threat and would say nothing he did not
intend to do.''

Neither Mr. Sauter nor Mr. Burt would disclose the contents of General
Westmoreland's letter to CBS, nor would Mr. Sauter comment on his reply, which
he sent on Thursday.

A source close to the general said that his letter was sent within the last two
weeks, that it contained a deadline for the program's appearance, that it made
suggestions about the program's format, and that it requested access to CBS's
report on the investigation into the documentary. Mr. Sauter has declined to
make the report public on the ground that it is ''an internal document not
written for public release.''

Unedited Broadcast

CBS officials declined to discuss the specific format of the follow-up program,
but several of the proposed participants said it would be taped in New York
during the week after Labor Day and would be broadcast unedited.

They said it would feature a panel discussion with representatives of General
Westmoreland's point of view as well as advocates supporting charges made in the
documentary - probably Sam Adams, who had been CBS's paid consultant for the
documentary, and Col. Gains Hawkins, an expert on the Vietcong during the
Vietnam War. Both Mr.  Adams and Colonel Hawkins also appeared in the January
documentary.  In addition, three journalists, probably from outside CBS, will
ask questions of the panelists.

One of the journalists who has agreed to participate is Peter Braestrup,
formerly a reporter for The New York Times and The Washington Post who covered
the war in Vietnam. He said that when he discussed the program last week with
its producer, George Allison, ''they were still scrambling to get a quorum - I
have a feeling they are having a great deal of difficulty with this.''

Mr. Braestrup, who wrote an article in The Washington Journalism Review raising
questions about the CBS documentary, said he had urged Mr. Allison to ''get a
full cast of characters - all the people who should have been on the documentary
in the first place.''

Some Reservations

Two proposed participants in the follow-up program who were not included in the
original documentary have expressed reservations about appearing on the program.
One of them, Gen. Phillip Davidson, formerly the military's chief intelligence
officer in Vietnam, said he had told Mr. Allison that 30 minutes - the length
originally proposed by CBS - was too short a time in which to examine the
issues, and he suggested the program be expanded to an hour.

Moreoever, General Davidson said, ''there are obvious legal implications, how
this program might affect things if General Westmoreland sues CBS.'' General
Davidson said that last Wednesday he asked Mr. Allison for a detailed
description of the format and its participants, and that Mr. Allison agreed to
do so in a telegram.

''I would like to do the program,'' General Davidson said. ''I would like to
clarify this thing, but I would want to have very careful answers to the
questions I asked. I don't think the situation indicates anything but a great
deal of wariness.''

The other person to express reservations was George Carver, who was the Central
Intelligence Agency official in charge of Vietnamese affairs during the period
examined by the documentary. He said Mr.  Allison told him the program was being
presented because ''there had been charges of bias and loading the deck, and the
question was of sufficient importance to take a more balanced look at it.''

Mr. Carver said that he was told that ''the object of the exercise was not an
adversary situation with the prosecution speaking and then the defense, but to
get the facts out.'' He said, however, that ''I was disconcerted when I heard
Sam Adams would be on - Sam has had his innings.''

Mr. Carver told CBS that ''I was terribly concerned about being a hostage to the
cutting-room floor - I said I didn't trust his network.'' Although Mr. Carver
said he was relieved to hear that the follow-up program would be presented
''live on tape'' without any editing, he got CBS to agree to the presence of his
assistant to tape his remarks.

Mr. Carver said he had agreed in principal to participate ''provided I know the
ground rules and who is going to be on.'' He added: ''I am going to insist on
getting something in writing before I go on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
Vietnam to Press Truce Despite China's Rebuff

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 183 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 28


Vietnam said today that it would observe a unilateral cease-fire with China
despite Peking's rejection of an appeal that both sides end hostilities along
their common border.

''The Vietnamese Government has declared it will act unilaterally according to
its proposal'' for a cease-fire, the official Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan
said in an editorial relayed by the Vietnamese press agency and monitored in
Bangkok.

Hanoi proposed the cease-fire two weeks ago as a way to celebrate the two
countries' national holidays, Vietnam's on Sept. 2 and China's on Oct. 1.

China rejected the offer, saying border tension was the fault of Vietnam.  ''The
Vietnamese people put great store in their longstanding friendship with the
Chinese people,'' the Nhan Dan editorial said.  ''In this spirit, the Vietnamese
Government has declared it will act unilaterally according to its proposal, and
has demanded that China respect Vietnam's good will.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAN-MADE HAZARDS POSE MORE THAN A MEDICAL PROBLEM

BYLINE: By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words


With every new wave of product liability claims, captains of industry and
officers of the courts hope for a change in the prevailing winds. Typically,
cases go on for years, legal expenses are high, jury awards run to six figures
and no one is satisfied with the results.

When the Manville Corporation, one of the nation's largest companies and the
world leader in asbestos production, sought the safety of bankruptcy court last
week amid a storm of product liability litigation the wind did shift, however
slightly. Not only did the bankruptcy filing spotlight a new method for handling
the litigation, it also focused attention on a longstanding failure of the legal
system. ''We need a better mechanism for handling all these mass tort cases,''
said Sheila Birnbaum, a product liability lawyer.

The kinds of litigation to which Miss Birnbaum referred involve products such as
drugs, pesticides and building materials to which large numbers of people are
exposed and which prove to be diseasecausing agents. The names of some of these
products are familiar: diethylstilbestrol (DES), a drug thought to prevent
miscarriages; Agent Orange and Agent White, two of the rainbow of herbicides
sprayed over Vietnam in the 1960's. Manville filed for bankruptcy to protect
itself from 16,500 pending claims by factory workers suffering asbestos-related
diseases and an anticipated 32,000 future claims.

The magnitude of asbestos exposure makes it unique. But the asbestos court
litigation has pinpointed the legal system's inadequacies in any litigation
involving man-made hazards. Who should bear the liability for such hazards? The
answer is usually determined on a case-by-case basis. Each case can then become
a jumble of legal issues and technicalities - and almost inevitably, an
expensive jumble. Indeed, insurance data indicate that lawyers usually get a
larger share of the jury award than the victim does.  With asbestos, the gap is
immense. The Asbestos Compensation Coalition, a group of asbestos-claim
defendants, says it costs the defendant companies an average of $150,000 to put
$28,000 into the hand of a successful claimant. (Much of this expense comes from
the companies' own efforts to challenge the claim.)

Liability in the case of man-made hazards raises several difficult questions.
When an earthquake or other natural disaster strikes, it is immediately apparent
who has been injured, what caused the injuries and whether or not there is
insurance.

By contrast, the results of a man-made hazard may appear 20 years after exposure
and there is rarely a direct line between exposure and subsequent illness, since
heredity or other factors could also be the cause of disease in many cases. As
to who must compensate the victims, the battle is joined between the insurer
whose policy was in effect when the hazardous product was used and the insurer
providing coverage when illness manifests itself.

Then, too, manufacturers are often unaware of a product's hazards when it is
first marketed and sold. Several courts, including the New Jersey Supreme Court
in an asbestos decision last month, have ruled that ignorance is no defense,
even if the state of the art was such that no one in the medical community
suspected a product would prove dangerous.

In the case of asbestos exposure, there is also the matter of the Federal
Government's ''fair share'' of liability. Asbestos manufacturers argue, for
example, that since many workers were exposed while filling Government
shipbuilding contracts during World War II, the Government should assume the
legal burden in those cases.

Many victims of man-made hazards think large jury awards - and punitive damages,
where they are available - will help keep new hazardous products off the market,
and out of the courts, by punishing the manufacturers.

Many businessmen, however, believe the product liability system is stacked
against them and that the legal system has gone too far in trying to compensate
every victim for every medical problem. ''In most product liability cases,
faceless large organizations are pitted against sympathetic injured local
people,'' said George Frazza, general counsel to Johnson & Johnson. ''Jurors are
going to see someone with a terrible injury, and they're going to want to hand
him some money. That's a basic human reaction. They're not going to think too
much about where the money's coming from.''

The asbestos manufacturers are pushing hard for Federal legislation to create a
trust, jointly funded by the industry and Government, to compensate asbestos
victims. According to industry representatives, an advantage of one proposal
currently making the rounds is that it would establish a mechanism for
compensating victims of any widespread occupational health hazard. For any
particular class of diseases - such as those linked to formaldehyde exposure -
Congress would simply pass an implementing resolution.

The idea faces serious political problems. To begin with, many Congressmen will
be reluctant to add this new Government expenditure to a newly trimmed Federal
budget. And some lawmakers may not wish to set a precedent for Government
involvement in compensating the victims of as yet unknown carcinogens.

The bankruptcy proceedings used by Manville have the advantage of placing an
automatic freeze on pending litigation, and preventing any new lawsuits from
being filed. But bankruptcy court is not the ideal forum for handling product
liability questions; it serves no one's interest for manufacturers to feel so
threatened by litigation that bankruptcy proceedings become attractive. Victims
cannot get redress from a company that is broke, and society at large suffers
from the loss of products and jobs when a large corporation is forced to cut
back operations.

Nor are bankruptcy courts designed to establish a manufacturer's culpability.
Bankruptcy filing, said lawyers representing asbestos victims, may thus be the
ultimate abuse of the product liability system.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of worker wearing asbestos dust protector

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
Purse Strings and Power

BYLINE: By Richard E. Mooney

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives...
So spoke the founding fathers in Article I, Section 7 of the Constitution. Then
how come this year's big tax increase originated in the Senate? Is it
unconstitutional? Eighteen disgruntled members of the House say it is and have
filed a lawsuit against the House and Senate and their principal officers.

It seems unlikely that any court will knock down a piece of legislation so
thoroughly considered as the tax bill. But the issue has been raised.

The journal that James Madison kept at the Constitutional Convention records
considerable debate on the matter. The root issue was ''taxation without
representation'' - the cry that set off the Revolution. There also were heavy
questions of responsibility and power in the new Government.

Charles Pinckney of South Carolina, ''a young gentleman of most promising
talents ... altho' only 24 ys. of age,'' put a strict clause in an early draft
Constitution that he submitted: ''All money bills of every kind shall originate
in the house of Delegates & shall not be altered by the Senate.'' Elbridge Gerry
of Massachusetts observed that the House ''was more immediately representative
of the people and ... that the people ought to hold the purse strings.''

Madison argued the contrary: ''As the Senate would be generally a more capable
set of men, it would be wrong to disable them.''

Pinckney's clause was stricken. By the time the issue came up again, compromise
was emerging on a larger point - the power of big states versus little states.
There were to be two senators from each state, regardless of size. In the House,
the states with bigger populations would have bigger delegations. House members
would be popularly elected to two-year terms, and senators would be elected to
six-year terms by the state legislatures.

Debate then turned to a proposal that the House originate revenue bills and that
the Senate be empowered to make technical, but not substantial, amendments.

Edmund Randolph, the Governor of Virginia, rose to ''remind the members from the
smaller states of the compromise by which the larger states were entitled to
this privilege.'' His Virginia colleague, Col. George Mason, asserted in support
that ''the Senate did not represent the people, but the states in their
political character.''

James Wilson of Pennsylvania took one last twist on the purse strings. The purse
would have two strings, he asserted, one in the hands of the House, the other in
the Senate. ''Both houses must concur in the untying, and of what importance
could it be which untied first, which last.''

The final language, another compromise, gave the origination power to the House
and added ''but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other
bills.''

Therein lies the procedure by which the Senate originated the l982 legislation.
It took a relatively minor tax bill that had been passed by the House and
''amended'' it by deleting every word the House had approved and substituting
its own massive package.

Perhaps this violated the spirit of the 1787 debate - but not for the first
time.  Seventy-odd years ago, the House passed a bill establishing inheritance
taxes. The Senate substituted a corporation tax. The Supreme Court held in 1911
that the bill had originated in the House and that the Senate amendment was
germane, therefore not unconstitutional. More recently, the surtax imposed
during the Viet Nam war was essentially a Senate-originated measure.

Moreover, senators are popularly elected now, under the 17th Amendment, making
them just as representative of ''the people'' as Congressmen. And, quite apart
from the merits of these arguments, the U.S. judiciary has little taste for
stepping into the intramural politics of Congress. The betting in legal circles
is that the new taxes will stand, and the republic won't crumble.

RICHARD E. MOONEY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDITOR'S CHOICE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


AUNT JULIA AND THE SCRIPTWRITER, by Mario Vargas Llosa. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $16.50.) A comic novel about soap opera by the imaginative Peruvian
writer.
AUTUMN, by A. G. Mojtabai. (Houghton Mifflin Co., $9.95.) A novel about a
widower's adjustment to the death of his wife.
THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $11.95.) A novel
about black men and women in the South.
THE IMPERIOUS ECONOMY, by David P. Calleo. (Harvard University Press, $17.50.)
An analysis of the decline of America's influence in the world.
THE RED SMITH READER, edited by Dave Anderson. (Random House, $15.95.) An
anthology of the late sportswriter's columns.
THE 13th VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) A large novel
about Americans in the Vietnam War.
THOMAS E. DEWEY AND HIS TIMES, by Richard Norton Smith. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.50.) A political biography of the Republican Presidential nominee.
THE WHEAT AND THE CHAFF, by Francois Mitterrand. (Seaver Books/ Lattes, $16.95.)
The private reflections of France's President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PORTRAIT OF AN ACTIVIST PRIEST

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2564 words


THE Rotary Club of Springfield, Mass., convened for its weekly luncheon a week
ago. The members dined, sang several songs and then quieted for the special
presentation, entitled ''Everything You Always Wanted to Know About a Priest but
Were Afraid to Ask.''

The priest was the Rev. Edmund S. Nadolny, the controversial director of the
Office of Radio and Television of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Hartford.

Father Nadolny read the first of several questions submitted by the audience.
''Why don't priests get married?'' he intoned. ''Because they know better.''

The hall howled, and when the din died, Father Nadolny gave a serious
explanation about duty to the Lord.  ''Next question,'' he said, unfolding the
piece of paper, which read, ''What ideas do you have to break the poverty
cycle?'' He paused, leaned into the microphone and declared, ''As the Pope has
said, the arms race is a direct attack on the poor.''

He then said that nations spend $50 billion more on arms than on human needs and
accused the United States of complicity in the loss of lives in Lebanon for
arming Israeli and Arab forces. He also defended himself for vowing not to bless
a Navy warship in the July 4 parade in East Hartford, and then asked, ''Why
can't America be No.  2? We've got enough arms. We are part of God's global
family and we don't have to be No. 1 in anything but love.''

Father Nadolny fisted his hands, pointed his fingers, spread his arms like
wings. He pursued the arms issue again and again, but he also threw in jokes.
When he ended one by saying, ''Seriously, though,'' one thought more of a comic
than a cleric. But he ended his comments with an admonition for the committee of
bishops that is considering a policy on the proposed bilateral nuclear arms
freeze.

''I hope what they do say,'' he said, ''and I pray what they do say, is that the
arms race is immoral. That arms are immoral. Immoral to make, immoral to use,
immoral to intend to use.''

The Rotarians rose in a standing ovation. Several came forward to shake Father
Nadolny's hand. But others muttered, ''I didn't like it'' and ''What was that
for?'' And four had walked out during the presentation.

''Only four?'' Father Nadolny said, apprised of the tally. ''That's not too bad
for me.''

Father Nadolny quite likely is, other than Archbishop John H.  Whealon of
Hartford, the most public Roman Catholic in Connecticut.  As the director of the
archdiocesan Office of Radio and Television, he prepares 10,000 radio programs
and 3,000 television programs annually, ranging from masses to audience
participation to spiritual and secular music, and he appears on many of them.
The broadcasts are on four television stations and more than a dozen radio
stations.

That the 49-year-old priest has been one of the Connecticut clergy's most
prominent advocates of social and political change for 15 years - from civil
rights through the anti-Viet Nam War movement to the nuclear freeze campaign -
is the essence of his controversy.  Not only does he hold his views
passionately, he spreads them through access to free media time that is
unparalleled in the clergy and, possibly, the entire state.

The archdiocese itself encompasses Hartford, New Haven and Litchfield Counties,
but his broadcasts can be heard throughout Connecticut and parts of New York
State and Massachusetts.

Father Nadolny's politics recall those of the Berrigan brothers, which has not
always made him popular, whether in the religious community or in his own
family. But most of the criticism of him comes with respect.

Whether or not Connecticut Catholics endorse his politics, many recognize him as
their best fund-raiser and, in the words of Archbishop Whealon in 1978, someone
who ''probably does more apostolic good and help for souls than a half-dozen
priests.''

Father Nadolny has led voting-rights drives in the Hartford ghetto, called for a
national work strike to protest the Vietnam War, assailed the naming of a
nuclear-armed submarine ''Corpus Christi'' (''Body of Christ'' in Latin,
although the namesake was the Texas city), ignited the ship-blessing dispute on
July 4 and walked out on President Reagan's speech to the Knights of Columbus
convention in Hartford on Aug. 3 in protest against the arms race.

He also has distributed 150,000 copies of the New Testament, 400,000 fliers on
religious meditation and 200,000 questionnaires to lapsed Catholics. He has run
telethons that raised $200,000 for inner-city Catholic schools and $500,000 for
televising masses. He has given away $20,000 of his own money to strangers, been
taken for most of it, and then received triple that amount back from other
strangers who heard of his plight. He has led a memorial service for Elvis
Presley and has called for the disengagement of Santa Claus, whom he terms a
pagan holdover, from Christmas.

But it is the priest's pronouncements on politics that have stirred the
tempests. Father Nadolny's brother, Walter, a conservative Republican, has said,
''One thing about Father Ed: Either you love him or you hate him.''

Thus, Auxiliary Bishop Peter A. Rosazza, a friend of Father Nadolny and an ally
in the freeze movement, can say: ''Jeremiah, Isaiah, Amos and Jesus did not
bring unanimity either. I believe in God and I believe in Providence. God put
Father Ed in that place for a reason.''

Yet George A. Dagon, the Mayor of East Hartford, criticized Father Nadolny's
refusal to bless any Navy warships that might be in a parade in his city. As it
turned out, a Navy training ship withdrew from the blessing ceremony given by
the priest.

''I think his attitude and comment were totally out of place,'' said the Mayor.
''What he was asked to do was not different from a chaplain in a combat area
blessing men who have rifles on. But this won't happen again, because we won't
invite him back.''

Archbishop Whealon has been tactful and moderate in his public comments, and
after Father Nadolny walked out on President Reagan he offered a typically
cautious response.

''I respect his convictions,'' the Archbishop said. ''I do think people, in
judging Father Nadolny, must make a distinction between him speaking as a priest
and speaking as an individual. He in no way represents me or represented the
archdiocese.''

Father Nadolny and other church sources said the Archbishop has never attempted
to muzzle him.  Father Nadolny himself defines his stands in terms of priestly
duty and religious doctrine.  ''I'm not expressing the views of the mainstream
of Catholics,'' he said in a recent interview. ''But I am expressing the
mainstream of Catholic teaching.''

''I end up quoting the Pope - not myself - on the arms race being an assault on
the poor,'' he said. ''You're less of a priest if you don't talk about faith
issues. These are the Ten Commandments. They aren't political commandments,
they're faith commandments.''

Several years ago he designed an advertisement seeking young men for the
priesthood. He wrote of the appeal of the collar to him: ''No phoniness. People
in the world are forced to do many things they don't want to do. The priesthood
gives me freedom to be myself.''

And in addressing the Rotary Club he said, ''I don't think I'm a maverick. I'm
not outspoken. I just speak out. My job as a priest is to comfort the afflicted
and afflict the comfortable.''

Edmund Nadolny was born into the comfort he disdains on Feb. 18, 1933. His
mother, Helen, worked in the kitchen of a hospital, and his father, Walter, sold
life insurance. They were, in Father Nadolny's words, ''a hard-working Polish
couple who wanted to put their kids through school.''

The family, who lived in New Britain, attended church but was not bent on
producing a priest - Walter, who now lives in Merrick, L.I., became a dentist
and Mrs. Nadolny thought Edmund might become a doctor.

Walter served as an altar boy at Holy Cross Church; people remember Edmund as a
sports enthusiast. He chose to attend the St. Thomas Seminary instead of New
Britain High School, largely because the competition for varsity positions was
slimmer. He pitched on the baseball team and was captain of the basketball team.

But there were hints of whom he would become. Mrs. Nadolny remembered Edmund
fighting back with playground bullies. The boy warmed to two uncles who were
priests. One, Paul Bartlewski, was known as the ''Mayor of Thompsonville,'' a
part of Enfield, for his efforts to raise money to build a church and bailing
local folks out of jail. The boy also observed and remembered how the monsignor
of his grammar school helped the newly arrived Poles start an orphanage, a bank,
a community center.

''As I think back on those role models,'' Father Nadolny said, ''I know they had
an effect on me.'' Walter Nadolny recalled his brother's ambivalence about
material things.  ''He bought this used car - a beat-up VW that broke down
constantly -and I said, 'Get a half-decent car,' and he said he didn't want a
big car or a new car, it was too ostentatious.''

Still, when Edmund left St. Thomas to study history, psychology and political
science at Catholic University in Washington, D.C., he remained unsure of his
direction.

''You don't go into the seminary to become a priest,'' he said.  ''You go in to
see if you hear the call. It's like falling in love with a girl. You don't ask
her to marry you the first time. It's a gradual attraction that builds. It took
me 11 years to decide to become a priest.''

His early assignments - a parish priest in Thomaston from 1959 to 1964, a
teacher in East Catholic High School in Manchester in 1964 and 1965 -pleased
him, but did little to build a social conscience.  That bloomed with his
assignment to St. Michael's Church in Hartford's North End in 1965.

He remembered being shocked by what he saw: 15 people living in three rooms, the
landlord collecting the rent, the stoning of his car the night that the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was shot, the interracial couple he married, thinking,
''What's going on here?''

''I was surprised to discover how much of a racist I was,'' he said. ''I'm still
struggling with that. I've got a long way to go, but I've gone a long way.''

He began the journey by working on voter registration drives, a summer school in
the suburbs for inner-city children, and ''Project Concern,'' a similar program
on a year-round basis. And, eventually, he began to relate the paucity of butter
in the North End to the plethora of guns in Vietnam.

''I saw all the poverty around me and I began to connect it to the money spent
on armaments,'' he said. ''We think of killing with bombs or bullets, but we
kill more with neglect. I didn't have the patience of the poor because I haven't
suffered as they have, so I was angry a lot.''

His anger took the form of anti-war protests, including a prayer vigil on the
steps of the Federal building in Hartford. As he read of the Berrigan brothers,
''at first I was confused and didn't understand this civil disobedience, but
then I began to see them as prophets of our time.''

He never has felt comfortable, however, with protest acts such as damaging or
pouring blood on weaponry, and felt more drawn to communication. In 1968, he
established the Office of Radio and Television. Since then, he has raised most
of its $900,000 annual budget through a network of patrons, now numbering
25,000, and has set its tone for controversy.

During the Christmas bombing of North Vietnam in 1972, Father Nadolny went on
the air to call for a weeklong work strike. No one heeded the word and many
listeners hated it. At a public meeting with Archbishop Whealon, one Catholic
accused Father Nadolny of veering from church doctrine. Others attacked him on
his call-in radio programs.

''You couldn't believe the names people were calling him,'' Walter Nadolny said.
''I kept on telling him,'' his mother recalled, '' 'Don't interfere with the
Government, don't get mixed up with these things.' And he would say, 'I'm not
mixed up in nothing. I have a mind of my own.' ''

But the end of the war did quiet Father Nadolny on the political front for
several years. His most highly publicized efforts of the late 1970's involved
raising money and spreading the faith. The stories of his questionnaire to
lapsed Catholics and his personal loans totalling $20,000 made newspapers
nationwide. One Christmas, he recorded radio and television appeals for
nonpracticing Catholics to return to the church; he literally said, ''Sorry''
for whatever may have driven them away.

After the race riots in Miami in 1979, he sponsored a contest for the best
nonracist jokes and songs. In October 1980, during a resurgence of Ku Klux Klan
activity in the state, he wrote and placed newspaper advertisements on ''Racism
- the Cancer of Connecticut.''

Now the nuclear arms freeze campaign has become, to him, the most important
issue to face the Catholic clergy and laity. His refusal to bless any Navy
vessels on July 4 provoked a torrent of opinions.  Mayor Dagon apologized to the
Navy and, in letters to The Hartford Courant, readers criticized Father
Nadolny's ''insult to patriotic Americans'' and ''eccentric behavior.'' But
others, including several priests, hailed the ''man of conviction'' for his
''forthright and honest statement.''

Father Nadolny's personal activities come as a pro-freeze group known as Pax
Christi has grown to include 130 bishops, and a national Catholic policy is
being considered.

''The leaders of the church are taking on leadership I haven't seen before,'' he
said, ''so I'm optimistic. I see them in many cases ahead of their flock.''

But he also has a realistic view of his limits. The priest, who lives in a
rectory in Hartford, has had to slow himself since the removal of a kidney and
gall bladder last December. And he has come to accept that he can proselytize
for change but not create it, as he thought as a younger man.

That changed one day in St. Michael's. He was speaking about the love of God the
Father to a group of poor children. Few had fathers at home, and his premise of
some male parent in the heavens seemed to them preposterous, utterly foreign
from earthly truth. They began to laugh, and they did not stop, and as Father
Nadolny returned to the rectory after class, he wept, wept for the weakness and
unworthiness that, in that moment, consumed him.

''And then it hit me,'' he said. ''That your job isn't to convert the world,
it's to save the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev. Edmund Nadolny (page 16) photo of Rev.
Edmund Nadolny

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WAR AFTERMATH: $13.5 MILLION AWARD

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


In the final days before Saigon fell, an Air Force cargo plane carrying
Vietnamese orphans to safety lost a rear door 23,000 feet above the South China
Sea. The plane crashed and exploded, killing 98 of the 247 children aboard.

Fifty-five of those who survived were adopted by American families. Many came
through the crash without a scratch, but over the succeeding years some of their
parents began to believe the children, who were about a year old, on average,at
the time of the crash, suffered brain damage from lack of oxygen.

Yesterday, Federal District Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer in Washington approved a
settlement that will award 45 of the children $13.5 million, which the parents
say will help pay for medical care and special education. The judge will
determine later how the money will be divided.

''They're kind of like little misfits,'' a parent, Lynda S.  Reynolds of Eaton,
Col., said of the children.  They are also a disparate group that was together
only once, in April 1975, aboard the plane that crashed, and they are now
scattered among families around the United States and Europe.

Signs of Trouble

Some parents said they did not know their adopted children had been in the
crash. Others believed they had not been injured. But many began to see, as
their children matured, that they could not pay attention for more than a few
minutes, had trouble making friends and could not learn in regular schools.

Thomas and Pamella Morrill of Bronxville, N.Y., did not believe their 8-year-old
adopted son, Dirk, had sustained injuries in the crash until they saw other
crash survivors who came to Washington in January 1980 to be tested by medical
witnesses.

''What convinced us was to see him compared to the other children from the
plane,'' Mr. Morrill said. ''It was like seeing Dirk reproduced 12 times. They
never got tired and they all did the same thing of running back to their parents
and then running off again.''

Dirk, who was adopted when he was 8 months old, could not sit still long enough
in kindergarten to write the letters of the alphabet, Mr. Morrill said. He added
that the boy is now given Ritalin, an amphetamine that acts to calm hyperactive
children, four times a day.

''In 1976 a number of parents became concerned that something was wrong with
their children, but they didn't know what it was,'' said Charles R. Work, who
was appointed in 1978 by the Federal District Court in Washington, D.C., to see
to the interests of the 149 children who survived.

Friends For All Children, the adoption agency responsible for the infants aboard
the plane, originally filed the suit against the United States and the Lockheed
Aircraft Corporation, which built the C-5A.

In the years since 1976, the parents of all but three of the 55 children adopted
by American families joined the suit. One family dropped out of the suit.
Yesterday's settlement was the culmination of six years of legal battles. ''This
type of litigation is war,'' Mr. Work said, ''shin-kicking litigation. It often
lasts for a long time.''

Both Lockheed and the United States will pay a portion of the settlement, but
yesterday they did not disclose what percentage each will pay because they said
they believed a breakdown would affect the way further cases would be litigated,
according to Mark A. Dombroff, the director of the Justice Department branch
handling the case.

Cases brought by the adoptive parents overseas and Government employees involved
in the crash are still being litigated.

Testimony of Specialists

In all, about 30 psychiatrists, psychologists, neurologists and education
specialists were called in to test the children and gave varying testimony about
the results, according to Mr. Dombroff and Mr. Work.

The plaintiffs' doctors, Mr. Work said, testified that ''all of the children in
the suit suffered from minimal brain dysfunction, which stems from tissue damage
in the brain.'' He went on, ''The plaintiffs' doctors felt the cause of that was
the loss of oxygen when the door blew off at 23,000 feet.''

The defense, however, argued that ''whatever injuries these children had were
the manifestation of problems that these children brought with them,'' Mr.
Dombroff said.

Mrs. Reynolds and her husband, Allen, adopted twin boys, James and Nathan, who
were abandoned in Saigon when they were two weeks old.  Only one, James, was in
the crash.

Differences at 4 Years

''We started noticing differences when they turned 4,'' Mrs.  Reynolds recalled.
''They were both active in their 2's, but at 2 Nathan started calming down. He
was easy to calm down. We could never get James to calm down.''

At 5, both boys were tested by a psychologist before entering kindergarten in
Los Angeles, where the Reynolds then lived. The psychologist said Nathan was
''borderline gifted,'' but ''James didn't even test out age 4 when he was 5,''
Mrs. Reynolds said.

The Reynoldses settled out of court in June 1981 for $860,000.  Five other
families also settled out of court before yesterday's settlement. Lockheed and
the Government settled these earlier cases because, Mr. Dombroff said, ''We were
genuinely satisfied that there was an injury and that it was causatively related
to this accident.''

''The most important reason for settling it now is that the children need
treatment now,'' Mr. Work said. ''The children are at a crucial stage in their
development, a dollar spent now in their treatment is worth a lot more than a
dollar spent later.''

The Reynolds have used the settlement money to send James to a psychologist and
an orthopedist and to have him tutored. ''Our goal for him is that he grow up to
be a productive person,'' Mrs. Reynolds said. ''He may not go to college. He
will need the money to find his niche. I feel very protective of him from the
outside world.''
*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Thomas and Pamella Morrill with children

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-P.O.W. Takes Federal Job

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 30


Everett Alvarez, a former Navy pilot who was held prisoner in Vietnam longer
than any other American, was sworn in today as deputy administrator of the
Veterans Administration. Mr. Alvarez replaces Chuck Hagel, who resigned in a
dispute with the chief of the Veterans Administration, Robert Nimmo, over delays
in financing a Federal study on the effects of the defoliant Agent Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ON GEORGE BALL'S PRESCRIPTION FOR ISRAEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


To the Editor:

While George Ball never has been known as an ardent supporter of Israel, it is
difficult to quarrel with his contention that Israel bears a heavy
responsibility toward insuring Lebanon's revival. I am, however, at a loss as to
why he excluded the P.L.O.  and Syria (among others) from this responsibility.

As a Vietnam-era veteran, I am curious as to one other point. Since I consider
the six-week Israeli invasion far more justified than our 10-year escapade in
Southeast Asia, I wonder whether Mr. Ball believes that the U.S. bears the same
moral onus for the far greater devastation wreaked on that region by our
''roving Air Force and rampaging Army.'' This question is especially pertinent
since much of that havoc resulted from policies conceived and/or endorsed by him
and his cohorts.

Before Mr. Ball invokes ''the name of humanity and decency'' again, I suggest he
remember the biblical advice that he who is without sin cast the first stone.
EDWARD S. HOCHMAN, Paterson, N.J., Aug. 25, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
PREPARING SOVIET TALKS

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 30


A few days of intensive talks with officialdom reveals what seems to be a
widespread mood of questioning about whither the Soviet Union.

It is only possible to scratch the surface of this secretive system. There is no
way to know the real extent of the debates that are developing in the layers
that form the ruling crust of Soviet society. But a sense of crossroads, of
crucial choices ahead comes through clearly.

For the most part, the decisions will have to be about making the economy work
better and agriculture more productive. But inevitably foreign policy enters the
calculations. The talks are uneasy, probing, as though Moscow were waiting to
react rather than considering any initiatives.

Perhaps it is too late now to use the opportunity of the end of the Brezhnev era
to seek a sturdier basis for American-Soviet relations.  The transition has
already begun, and there is scarcely any direct contact between Washington and
Moscow. The chill is translated literally when it comes to diplomatic exchange.

But that makes it all the more important for Washington to prepare its agenda
for the new leadership when it comes. It may well bring something like the thaw
that marked the emergence of Khrushchev after the frozen Stalin years.

The best chances for breakthroughs come in the period of experiment and
consolidations at the start of a new regime. We can't follow the power brokerage
and competition for influence that goes on within the closed circles. But
everything indicates that American decisions will have some effect.

Washington needs to be ready to try both for settlement of key points of
conflict and understandings on how to prevent inevitable crisis around the world
from becoming superpower confrontations. That means setting Western priorities
with some clear ideas on what the United States wants from Moscow and what it
can offer in return.

What President Nixon most sought when he engineered detente was a way out of the
Vietnam War. Now the United States has other concerns. It isn't enough just to
demand ''restraint'' all over, as Washington has been doing. Signposts are
needed to show which path can actually reduce tensions.

There is a question whether the best approach is to tackle specific danger spots
as as the Middle East, Afghanistan, arms supplies to Central America, or to
focus on arms control. Certainly, the arms race must be the central issue in the
long run. But whether ''linkage'' is directly applied or not, the climate of
relations does determine how far each side will go toward the compromise.

Hints indicate Moscow may be coming to look for a face-saving way out of
Afghanistan with guarantees of non-alignment. There isn't even a hint of a
possible solution for Poland at this stage.

In the Middle East, the Russians have boxed themselves out of the diplomacy.
They would like to get back in, but they have nothing to offer the Arabs except
arms to prolong the bloody deadlock, and they don't even talk to Israel. So they
make tough noises about America's ''obligation'' to discipline Israel, and
softer appeal for at least the appearance of being consulted and considered in
U.S. Middle East decisions.

That is what Henry Kissinger provided in his shuttle diplomacy after the 1973
Middle East war, maneuvering Moscow out of an effective role but giving it the
satisfaction at least of being seen to be consulted by the United States. It
isn't a bad idea now. And if it chooses, the Soviet Union can really be helpful
by urging Syria to withdraw troops from Lebanon along with Israeli withdrawal.

Central America, which is of little direct interest to the Russians but
important to their Cuban connection, is an area where the United States should
try to work out arms limitations for both sides. Similar understandings would be
helpful for parts of Africa.

But the arms race must be the key question. The Russians insist adamantly that
never again will they accept military inferiority and that they will match the
United States in whatever it does to add weapons. They probably could squeeze
the price out of their ailing economy with less domestic trouble than the United
States can.  Certainly, they sound as if they mean to try if they are
challenged.

Preparing a careful list of possible agreements and understandings to take up
with the next Soviet leadership does not, of course, guarantee that concessions
can be gained. But it seems clear that for their internal reasons the Russians
aren't going to be in a position to make the first offers. If nothing is
proposed, their new course is most likely to be a hard and dangerous one.
Another opportunity will be lost, perhaps for a long time as Mr. Brezhnev's
successors settle into place. It could even lead to direct conflict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, AUGUST 31, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 900 words


International
Yasir Arafat left Beirut aboard a Greek ship, vowing to fight again.  As the
leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization was sailing, more than 2,000
troops of the Syrian army also began leaving the city. The Syrians have occupied
Beirut since 1976. (Page A1, Column 6.)
Israel is concerned over the leftists who remain in Beirut in possession of the
heavy weapons left behind by the departing Palestinians. Officials in Jerusalem
said that members of the Moslem leftist group clashed Sunday with Lebanese army
units. (A8:3-6.)
Nahum Goldmann died at a Bavarian spa at the age of 87. Dr. Goldman, a major
force in Zionism, was the chief architect of the agreement in which West Germany
pledged to pay reparations to Jews for acts committed in the Nazi years.
(D17:1-3.)
The Polish authorities deployed riot policemen, water cannons and armored
personnel carriers around Warsaw on the eve of scheduled anti-Government
demonstrations. The protests have been called by leaders of the trade union
Solidarity. (A1:4-5.)
Less severe sanctions in President Reagan's attempts to thwart a Soviet natural
gas pipeline to Western Europe are being urged by Secretary of State George P.
Shultz and Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldridge. Officials said the two were
recommending to Mr. Reagan less punitive sanctions against a British company
that may violate the pipeline embargo than were imposed last week against two
companies in France. (A1:2.)
Major nuclear waste disposal efforts are being pressed by Sweden, which plans to
dismantle all 12 of its nuclear power plants by 2010 and is taking steps to bury
the radioactive waste from them deep in granite at sea. In the United States,
which has 73 operating nuclear plants, the Energy Department and Congress have
been unable to agree on a plan for developing long-range storage sites.
(C1:3-4.)
National
A Supreme Court debate on abortion was joined by four major organizations of
physicians and nurses. They urged the Justices to declare unconstitutional a
1978 city ordinance in Akron, Ohio, that limits the ways in which doctors may
counsel and treat women seeking abortions. (A1:1.)
Vietnamese orphans won an award from Federal District Judge Louis F.  Oberdorfer
after a long legal dispute. He approved an award totaling $13.5 million for 45
of the orphans that their adoptive parents say is needed for medical care and
special eduction. The orphans were among 149 who survived the crash of an Air
Force cargo plane that killed 98 others in the final days before Saigon fell.
(A10:1-3.)
Ingrid Bergman died of cancer at her London home on her 67th birthday. The many
honors won by the widely acclaimed actress included Academy Awards for her
delicately drawn performances in ''Gaslight,'' ''Anastasia'' and ''Murder on the
Orient Express.''(A1:1-3.)
A man who served 13 years for murder before he got a chance to prove his
innocence was freed in Boston. The prisoner, 42-year-old George A. Reissfelder,
was unmanacled and released when the District Attorney's office declined to
oppose a defense motion for dismissal.  (A10:1-2.)
Drugs may be used in executions, under a ruling by Federal District Judge Norma
Holloway Johnson. She held that the states could use drug injections to carry
out the death penalty even though the Government has not specifically approved
the drugs for that use.  (A17:1.)
Millionaires and businessmen dominate the top ranks of the Reagan
Administration, according to the profiles in a new book released by Ralph Nader.
The book discloses that the leaders include executives from 23 industries who
now oversee or regulate those industries.  (A15:1-2.)
Activism among postal workers is increasing despite their secure, relatively
well-paying jobs. Postal union leaders say the 320,000-member union has
collected nearly $350,000 to influence the fall elections. (A15:3-4.)
Metropolitan
New procedures for reducing rents of rent-stabilized apartments have been
adopted by New York City in an effort to clear up a huge backlog of complaints
of overcharges. The rules, which apply to 956,000 apartments, enable the city to
reduce rents at once in cases in which landlords fail to justify an increase
promptly. (A1:3.)
The attorney for a reputed figure in organized crime said that his client,
William P. Masselli, had ''no idea'' why his son had been murdered in a
gangland-style shooting. The lawyer also said that Mr.  Masselli doubted the
slaying was linked with a new investigation of Labor Secretary Raymond J.
Donovan. (A1:4.)
A second organized crime shooting occurred in New York City. A man identified as
the bodyguard and driver of the late crime figure Frank Tieri was critically
shot in his car outside his home in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn.
(B4:5-6.)
Long Island commuters were delayed by a fire in a huge pile of discarded wooden
ties in a Long Island Rail Road yard in Queens. The blaze disrupted the evening
rush schedule and stranded 1,600 passengers on two trains in the East River
tunnel for more than 30 minutes. (B1:5-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


CARRIER

Museums house history, but in our newest museum, the ''house'' itself is
history. This is the U.S.S. Intrepid, a 900-foot aircraft carrier berthed at
Pier 86, West 46th Street. The Intrepid, launched Dec. 3, 1943, was attacked by
Japanese kamikaze planes in World War II, served as a combat ship during the
Vietnam War and was the primary recovery ship for astronauts in the Mercury and
Gemini space programs.

She was retired from duty in 1974, but for almost a month now she has been open
as a sea, air and space museum. To judge by a recent visit when thousands
trooped aboard, she has given life to this stretch of the West Side waterfront
that was off the tourist track, except for the Circle Line tours at 42d Street.

The Intrepid is a walk-up museum, and one with an aversion to steps should be
forewarned. Visitors climb stairs from pierside to the cavernous hangar deck and
then follow a course through the attractions, which are well laid out. There is
a 17-minute film, with a booming soundtrack, that depicts carriers and planes at
work. The visitors then pass through several halls of modern and bygone Navy
planes, and an exhibit of space-age technology. One hall is devoted to
recounting the Intrepid's battle history through audio and visual presentations
and models. There is a cafeteria and a gift shop.

Also open to visitors is the flight deck, the flat top. A keen imagination can
conjure visions of small fighters hurtling on and off this pitching deck as
throngs of deck crew stand by.

The museum is clean and neat and well-designed to tell the story of these
engines of war. It is open daily from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.  Admission is $5 for
adults, $2.50 for under-12's and $4 for over-65's. A very complete and
worthwhile recorded tour is available for $2. Information: 245-0072.
POPULAR MECHANICS

The General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York was
founded in 1785 as a guild, and later offered classes to young men and women to
improve their trade skills. In 1820 it established a library, the third-oldest
in New York after the New-York Society and the Mercantile Libraries. The library
and the society have been housed since 1898 in their impressive home at 25 West
43d Street.

The library today is more general than technical, and its members, drawn mostly
from the surrounding office area, browse among its 140,000 volumes that include
new publications of all the major New York houses. In addition, it is the
repository of works belonging to the Gilbert and Sullivan Society and, for some
reason, of just about every whodunit ever printed. Membership is $15 a year; $5
for those over age 65. It is open Mondays through Thursdays from 9 A.M. to 6
P.M., Fridays from 9 to 5. Information: 921-1767.

Upstairs in the building is the Mossman Collection of Locks, 370 of them ranging
from antique key locks and Chinese padlocks to pull-out dial locks, combination
locks and barrel-key locks, most of them made between 1850 and 1912. Locks may
not seem a stimulating object of study, but in these days when unadorned
functionalism attracts many artisitic tastes, and security is on many New
Yorkers' minds, the superb workmanship here can be rewarding for the student of
design. It is open, free, from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Information: 840-1840.
A TRAMP ABROAD

So you couldn't get away this summer? No matter. Drop by Associated American
Artists, 663 Fifth Avenue, near 53d Street (755-4211) and take in the large show
of 230 etchings, prints and photographs called ''The Grand Tour.''

The works here are displayed country by country: England, France, Sweden, Italy,
Spain, the Scandinavian nations, Greece, Russia, Egypt, India, China, Japan, and
elsewhere, too. There are churches, peasant homes, landscapes, city views and
palaces, possibly more than one could absorb by visiting these nations in
person. The works were done by such artists as Whistler, Utrillo, and others
less wellknown.

''The Grand Tour'' is open through Sept. 10, free, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Mondays through Fridays.

Tuesday Sports is on page D18.  Richard F. Shepard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a jet

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 1, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE STUDY WON'T BE COMPLETED UNTIL '89, V.A. SAYS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 295 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 31


The Veterans Administration said today it would probably take until 1988 or 1989
to complete a study on whether exposure to the toxic herbicide Agent Orange
damaged the health of Vietnam veterans or their offspring.

That projection was made at a meeting of the agency's Advisory Commitee on
Health-Related Effects of Herbicides. The panel also heard testimony from an
Illinois State Senator who said there existed ''a lack of commitment, a lack of
concern, a lack of interest on the part of the national Government'' about
thousands of veterans worried about the effects of the herbicide.

In 1979 Congress directed the agency to conduct the study to identify soldiers
who came into contact with the herbicide in the war, but the project has run
into several delays.

Dr. Barclay Shepard, a Veterans Administration official who is chairman of the
advisory committee, told the panel that the project would be finished by 1988 or
1989 if a pilot study went well.

Groups of 6,000 Under Study

That program will test the concept of the main study, which will compare the
health of 6,000 men known to have been in areas where the herbicide was used
with two other groups of 6,000 men each, one group that served in Vietnam but
was not exposed and another that was not in the war zone.

The pace of the study was criticized by State Senator Karl Berning of Illinois,
who is chairman of the Illinois Agent Orange Study Commission.

''Continued studies of the types that have been discussed here, we agree, are
necessary,'' he told the scientific advisory group.  ''However, I remind you
that while you and I are talking, men and women, our fellow citizens, are
suffering and dying now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S ECONOMIC PROGRAM SEEN AS PIVOTAL IN NOVEMBER;
Campaign Outlook Second of a series of articles on the 1982 Congressional
campaign.

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2109 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


Probably not since just after World War II has the country headed for a midterm
Congressional election in which the outcome hinged so heavily on a single issue
as it does this year on public reaction to the Reagan economic program. In 1958,
President Eisenhower faced a midterm recession, but Republicans were also
buffeted by the Soviet leap into space, which shattered the nation's
self-confidence. In 1970, President Nixon saw another recession rob the
Republican Party of expected gains, but law and order and the Vietnam War were
also compelling concerns. In 1974, Republicans were badly damaged by two issues:
inflation and the Watergate affair, which kept ashamed Republican voters home.
The last time either party made big gains on the single issue of the economy was
in 1946, when wartime price controls, imposed under the Democrats, were lifted.

This year, the nuclear freeze, military spending, environmental issues and the
appropriate role for Federal programs will play a part. But most Democratic and
Republican politicians and poll-takers believe that even though President Reagan
will not be on the ballot, the election for the House of Representatives will be
a referendum on Reagan economics.

''If we Democrats make gains, it will be a public statement on Reagan's economic
policies,'' asserts Charles T. Mannatt, national chairman of the Democratic
Party, ''The program has not worked. The economy is not improving. The
unemployment rate is still moving up.  Fairness and mismanagement of the economy
will be the overriding issues.''

''The election is going to be about the direction Reagan is trying to turn the
country,'' agrees Robert Teeter, president of Market Opinion Research, whose
company conducts polls for the Republican Congressional Campaign Committee. ''It
will be about whether this is the right direction and whether the program is
going to work and we ought to keep it up, or it's the wrong direction and it's
not going to work and things are now worse than when Reagan took office. In a
very real sense, it's a one-issue election.''

For 19 months, political calculations have pivoted on the economy.  Early last
year Republicans talked expectantly of capturing a majority in the House this
fall and causing a major national political realignment, but the recession
dashed those hopes. Then Democrats began to dream of their own landslide, but
the recent stock market surge, the decline in interest rates and surprising
public patience toward the Reagan program have tempered their expectations.

PICK UP FIRST ADD ISSUES

Nonetheless, hard times in the industrial Middle West have increased Democratic
chances for taking over governors' chairs in Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin,
Minnesota, Iowa and even possibly Illinois.

Conversely, bad economic news has been good political news for senatorial
campaigns of Middle Western Democratic incumbents such as Donald W. Reigle Jr.
of Michigan and Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio, and thus helped ease Democratic
fears of serious Senate losses this year, to the point where Republicans are
predicting a gain of only one or two seats.

But while Senate and gubernatorial races can turn on local issues and individual
personalities, the national battle over the House is taken by most politicians
as the best political litmus test for the President's economic programs.

In a Gallup Poll Aug. 2, people were asked which party they preferred in the
Congressional election and chose Democrats over Republicans by a margin of 54
percent to 38 percent. That would translate into a gain of 30 to 35 House seats
by Democrats and a serious setback for the President.

Using an index linked both to the President's job rating and a key economic
indicator, the trend in real personal disposable income, Edward R. Tufte, a Yale
University political scientist, has forecast a gain of 40 seats by Democrats.

Moderate Shift Foreseen

But despite the recession and prospects for only a sluggish recovery, campaign
specialists for both parties expect a less dramatic shift. Democratic officials
predict a gain of from 10 to 20 seats for the party, with Mr. Mannatt, the
Democratic chairman, projecting a gain of 15 House seats.

Nancy Sinott, executive director of the Republican Congressional Campaign
Committee, contends that with some favorable economic trends on inflation and
interest rates plus a few signs of imminent recovery, Republicans will come
close to holding even or losing only two of their 192 seats in the House. But
Richard Wirthlin, President Reagan's poll-taker, says the loss could be five to
25 seats, adding that he would be relieved by a loss of only 10 to 15 Republican
seats.

Since the party in control of the White House normally loses seats in an
off-year election, that would be a reasonably good showing for Republicans.
White House officials contend that, even with losing 15 seats, President Reagan
would still be able to push his agenda through Congress, though Democrats like
Mr. Mannatt assert that such a shift would move them ''toward working control of
the House.''

By comparison, Republicans lost 47 House seats and 13 Senate seats in the
Eisenhower recession of 1958. But they lost only 12 House seats and gained one
Senate seat in the Nixon recession of 1970, a year more like the present,
according to experienced political analysts such as Horace Busby, a former aide
of President Johnson, and Peter Hart, a poll-taker for Democratic candidates.

Factors Affecting Impact

The political effect of the economic issue is expected to depend not only on
economic performance over the next nine weeks but also on how each side frames
the issue and develops the debate.

Democrats focus on the present; Republicans, on the past and future. Democratic
candidates push talk about 9.8 percent national unemployment, the rate of small
business bankruptcies and farm foreclosures and the high cost of personal
borrowing.

Republicans, appealing for more time to let the Reagan program work because it
took so long for the problems to develop, emphasize the fall in inflation from
12 percent in 1980 to under 6 percent now, the decline in the prime interest
rate from 21 1/2 percent under President Carter to 13 1/2 percent now, and four
consecutive monthly increases in the Government's Index of Leading Economic
Indicators.

''Our hope is that voters will remember the past, and what Reagan has said, that
change does not come overnight but it's going to take time and that the future
will be better because of Reagan,'' Miss Sinott says. The party plans to spend
$10 million or more on a big advertising campaign to emphasize these themes.

''The Republicans will command the paid communications environment of this
campaign,'' Gene Eidenberg, director of the Democratic National Committee,
concedes. ''They will try to persuade the voters that Democrats are to blame for
the present mess and to hang tough for a better future, and not to hold the
Reagan Administration's policies accountable. But we say the President's
policies are fatally flawed.''

Focus on Reagan Program

Democratic analysts such as Mr. Hart counsel Democratic candidates that the most
fruitful charges will be that the Reagan program is unfair, that Mr. Reagan has
his eye on curbing Social Security benefits eventually, and that small business
has been put in a particularily bad squeeze.

Yet not only Republican poll-takers such as Mr. Wirthlin but also Democratic
strategists have been surprised that in such hard economic times Republican
incumbents are not worse off politically.  Both parties have polls showing that
even in areas of high unemployment like Pontiac, Mich., or northern Indiana,
Republican incumbents in the House such as John Hiler and Jim Dunn are holding
their own and people are willing to give the Reagan program more time.

''While people still don't think the Reagan program is working, they hope it
will,'' Marty Franks, the executive director of the Democratic Congressional
Campaign Committee, acknowledges. ''There's a tremendous reservoir of patience
on that. I don't see Reagan and the Republicans being held responsible for
making a bad economy worse. The Reagan people are doing a marvelous job of
slipping back their own deadline for results and putting off public
expectations.''

In mid-July, Mr. Wirthlin's polls showed that roughly half the public believed
the Reagan program would eventually help the economy. Of those, he says, 69
percent believed it would require another year or more to take effect, a sign of
public patience that he finds amazing in comparison with the impatience of the
American electorate in recent years. Polls for Democratic candidates in Michigan
show similar results.

Some Modest Assessments

As a result, knowledgeable Democratic campaign specialists concede that they may
not achieve gains as large as might be expected in the economically hard-hit
farm states or the industrial region around the Great Lakes, which have the
highest spots of unemployment in the nation.

''Sitting in Washington and looking at the tremendous problems in the farm
economy and the industrial states, you would think these guys are dead ducks,
but they are not,'' Mr. Franks says. He and other Democratic strategists expect
to gain only three to five seats in the six major Middle Western states, fewer
than the five or more they hope to pick up in California.

One major reason is that the recession has now spread through the country,
hitting normally prosperous Sun Belt areas such as Texas and southern
California, making the nation's economic experience more homogeneous. Moreoever,
Mr. Teeter observes that while ''Michigan has 14.3 percent unemployment and
people are hurting, there are not bread lines or the obvious human distress you
would anticipate with those numbers.''

A second important factor is the Congressional redistricting that followed the
1980 Census. Many of the most economically hard-hit states such as Michigan,
Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania and Illinois lost Congressional seats from normally
Democratic urban areas. With such redistricting losses, Democrats have to fight
hard to hold their strength in these states.

That makes California, Texas and Florida, which gained nine seats among them,
important targets for gains. And in California, the redistricting process
managed by the Democrat-controlled Legislature and Governor gerrymandered new
districts for maximum Democratic increases.

G.O.P. Tactics on Backlash

Finally, Republicans in hard-pressed economic regions or tight races are finding
ways to gain some protection from voter backlash on the economic issue by
putting distance between themselves and President Reagan.

In Massachusetts, where Representative Margaret M. Heckler, a moderate
Republican, has been been thrown into a tough battle with another incumbent
because of redistricting, her Democratic opponent, Representative Barney Frank,
has accused her of being a ''Reagan robot.'' To deflect the effect of the
charge, Mrs. Heckler has concentrated her campaign on the service she has given
her district in 16 years, and on women's issues and those affecting the elderly.

In Delaware, Representative Thomas B. Evans Jr., who has voted solidly for every
major element of the Reagan economic program, has sought to project some
independence from the President by stressing his efforts to curb coastal dumping
and his opposition to the Administration on environmental issues and the nuclear
freeze issue.

''People who want to defeat me want to tie me close to the President,'' Mr.
Evans said. ''And I do have a first-name relationship with members of the
Cabinet and the White House staff.  But my voting record has been independent. I
have not hewed to the Administration line on every vote.''

It is a theme that Republicans will be using from Rhode Island to Washington
State to try to hold together the heart of the Reagan coalition that the
President needs to protect and expand his economic program in the next two
years.

Tomorrow: The White House strategy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GEORGIAN SAYS OPPONENT'S CAMPAIGN 'BACKFIRED'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 447 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Sept. 1


Joe Frank Harris, a Georgia legislator who came from behind to win the
Democratic gubernatorial nomination in a runoff election Tuesday, said he won
because his opponent's ''desperation campaign backfired.''

Mr. Harris, who finished second to Representative Bo Ginn in a primary election
three weeks ago, surged ahead of his better-financed rival and won by 70,000
votes Tuesday.

Mr. Harris, 46 years old, who has served 18 years in the Georgia Statehouse,
brushed aside campaign assertions by Mr. Ginn that he would be a puppet for Tom
Murphy, the powerful House Speaker.  ''People saw through'' the charges by Mr.
Ginn, he said.

In the general election, his Republican opponent will be State Senator Bob Bell
of DeKalb County. The incumbent Governor, George Busbee, a Democrat, cannot seek
re-election this year because the state limits the Governor to two consecutive
terms.

Emerged From Obscurity

Mr. Harris, who emerged from obscurity months ago with a promise not to raise
state taxes, won the runoff even though Mr. Ginn was better financed and enjoyed
support from Georgia teachers and endorsements from four defeated gubernatorial
candidates and many of the state's biggest newspapers.

Mr. Ginn, a former teacher, said he had ''fought the good fight'' and planned to
leave politics and return to the classroom.  With 2,246 of 2,247 precincts
reporting, Mr. Harris had 498,823 votes, or 53.7 percent, to Mr. Ginn's 428,707,
or 46.2 percent.  Meanwhile, Mr. Bell, the Republican nominee, said, ''Now the
campaign really begins.'' Mr. Bell has contended that the entrenched Democratic
power structure in Georgia has failed to deal with crime, drugs and public
corruption.

In another primary contest, Max Cleland, who headed the Veterans Administration
in the Carter Administration, unseated the appointed incumbent, David Poythress,
to win the Democratic nomination for Secretary of State.

Backing for Cleland

Mr. Cleland, a handicapped Vietnam War veteran, was endorsed by the former
President Jimmy Carter and was already known in Georgia politics for his
unsuccessful race for Lieutenant Governor in 1974.

With 2,246 of 2,247 precincts reporting, Mr. Cleland had 434,147 votes, or 51.9
percent, to 402,111 votes, or 48 percent, for Mr.  Poythress.

Mr. Cleland's Republican opponent in the general election will be Nick-Reagan
Belluso, an investment analyst, who ran for Governor in 1978.

In other races, voters also chose Democratic and Republican nominees for eight
of the state's 10 Congressional districts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joe Frank Harris and his wife

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A BOUNTIFUL COLLECTION OF NEW WORDS IS OUT

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 907 words


The second college edition of the American Heritage Dictionary, containing 1,568
pages and 200,000 definitions, has begun moving into bookstores. Hailed by its
publisher, the Houghton Mifflin Company, as the first new dictionary in 10
years, the book includes 10,000 new general vocabulary words and meanings and
5,000 drawn from the fields of applied science, computer science and technology.

Like the original edition, published in 1969, the new dictionary places heavy
emphasis on etymology, contains a large number of illustrative quotations and
uses only one abbreviation in the definitions ( ''esp.'' for ''especially'').
The dictionary also lists the current, most frequently used definition first, so
that, for example, ''mankind'' is defined as ''the human race'' followed by the
second choice, ''man as distinguished from woman.''

Panel in Agreement

The dictionary again employs a usage panel of 166 scholars, writers, journalists
and critics who act as collective watchdogs against catachresis, malapropisms
and just plain bad English. These include Edwin Newman, the chairman; Senators
S.I. Hayakawa and William W. Bradley, Ralph Ellison, Vine Deloria Jr., Bruce
Catton, Maya Angelou, Gloria Steinem, Leo Rosten, John Simon, Dwight Macdonald,
Clare Boothe Luce, Jacques Barzun, Ved Mehta, Alistair Cooke and Tony Randall.
The noted wordsmith William F. Buckley Jr. is also on the usage panel - no doubt
charged, among other things, with guarding against creeping solecism -and he
also contributes an essay opposing the proposition that ''the prevailing usage
of its speakers should be the chief determinant of acceptable language.'' Prof.
Dwight Bolinger favors the proposition.

A majority of the usage panel insists that ''disinterested'' not be used to mean
''uninterested or indifferent,'' rather than ''impartial,'' despite an
increasing tendency in that direction.

The dictionary, as it has been since the time of Noah Webster, is important for
recording how language changes over time. Thus ''body bag'' and ''body count,''
which achieved widespread usage during the Vietnam War, make their first
apperance in the American Heritage Dictionary. The drug culture accounts for the
first-time inclusion of ''upper,'' ''downer'' and ''bummer.'' The imminence of
1984 may account for the reason that ''newspeak'' - meaning ambiguous and
contradictory language used for propaganda - finally puts in an appearance. And
if real men don't eat quiche, they can at least read the dictionary's
description of what they are mising.

'Coffin Nail' Included

The dictionary is silent as to whether the inclusion of ''debug'' is an
outgrowth of Watergate or the electronic revolution. Its definition of ''double
dipping,'' the practice of drawing two government incomes, carefully avoids any
suggestion that the practice is controversial. Yet its definition of
''gentrification'' - ''restoration of deteriorated urban property esp. in
working-class neighborhoods by middle and upper classes'' -contains a hint of
the controversy that policy has engendered. Its definition of ''petrodollar''
adds up to a succinct lesson in international economics and finance that some
members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries might well find
offensive: ''A unit of hard currency, as a dollar, held by oil-exporting
countries as a result of the sharp increase in oil prices that generated a
transfer of purchasing power to oil-exporting nations and a balance-ofpayments
deficit for oil-importing countries.'' And the American Tobacco Institute is
unlikely to enjoy reading that ''coffin nail'' is a slang term for cigarette,
derived from ''the unhealthful effects of smoking cigarettes.''

Some new words are unsettling, among them ''acid rain,'' ''nuke'' and
''meltdown.'' Others - ''open marriage,'' ''palimony'' and ''singles bar'' -
reflect changing attitudes toward social lifestyles (yep, that word's in there,
too). Health and medicine account for ''holistic,'' ''Lamaze'' ''CAT scanner''
and the ''Heimlich maneuver''

And Some Omissions

America's growing fascination with things Japanese is apparent in the first-time
inclusion of such Japanese words as ''ikebana'' (the art of flower arrangement),
''rumaki'' (an appetizer of a marinated chicken liver and a water chestnut
wrapped in bacon and broiled), ''tofu'' (bean curd), ''yakitori'' (chicken
pieces roasted on skewers) and Bunraku (traditional Japanese puppet theater).
The Hispanic influence is apparent in ''salsa'' (a form of Latin American dance
music), ''chorizo'' (a spicy pork sausage) and ''nacho'' (a small piece of
tortilla topped with cheese or chili-pepper sauce and broiled).

There are several interesting omissions, including ''gridlock,'' the term for
terminal traffic congestion, which gained currency during New York's 1980
transit strike and quickly gained the attention of the editors of the
Merriam-Webster dictionaries. Another omission is ''Moral Majority,'' but if the
past is any guide to the future, its disciples are likely to raise strong
objections to the dictionary's listing of explicit four-letter words.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 3, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MIDDLE EAST: BASIS OF FUTURE BLOODSHED?

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 56 words


To the Editor:

Many called the suggestion that the U.S. declare itself ''victorious'' in
Vietnam and withdraw ridiculous. The P.L.O. has demonstrated that the idea
works. It has left Beirut as a victorious army by its own declaration and has
been greeted by its Arab hosts as victor.
A. HARRY PASSOW, Englewood, N.J., Aug. 26, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL, ANGERED AT U.S. SANCTIONS, BALKS AT PASSING OVER WAR DATA

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 4


Israel will not share military intelligence from the war in Lebanon with the
United States until the Reagan Administration removes a variety of sanctions
against Israel, according to Administration officials.

The officials said the Israeli Defense Minister, Ariel Sharon, made that
position known in a conversation with Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger in
Washington two weeks ago.

One of the sanctions cited by Mr. Sharon was President Reagan's decision to hold
up Congressional action on the sale of 75 F-16 jet fighter-bombers long promised
to Israel. The delay was in response to Israel's attack on Palestinian forces in
Lebanon in early June.

C.I.A. Seeks Information

American military officers and Central Intelligence Agency officials have long
attached great importance to Israel's sharing of military intelligence.

They have made it clear to Pentagon officials that they want to see what Israel
learned from combat with Syrian forces using new Soviet weapon systems.

At the same time, the Israelis place considerable importance on sticking to the
delivery schedule of the F-16's in order to maintain air superiority over
increasingly capable Arab air forces.

Backdrop to Bigger Dispute

The bargaining process over intelligence sharing and F-16 deliveries serves as a
backdrop to the larger dispute that Israeli and American officials say they
expect over Mr. Reagan's new Middle East peace plan.

On Wednesday Mr. Reagan proposed ''a fresh start'' toward resolving the
questions of a Palestinian homeland and Israeli security. The Israeli
Government's first reaction to the plan was anger and complete rejection.

Administration officials insisted that there was no connection between the
continued delay in F-16 shipments and the efforts to gain Israeli cooperation
with the President's negotiating plan. They said no one in the Administration
was questioning the commitment to provide the aircraft and that approval was
''only a matter of timing.''

The Bargaining Process

Administration officials did not deny, however, that the F-16's could become
part of the bargaining over sharing intelligence information.

The Administration sent informal notification of the prospective sale to
Congress in May, but it did not take the virtually automatic next step -
providing formal notification and giving Congress 30 days to block the sale. The
State Department cited Israeli intervention in Lebanon as the reason.

On an Aug. 27 visit to the Pentagon, Mr. Sharon mentioned to Mr.  Weinberger
that Israel had learned many military lessons from the war in Lebanon.

But Mr. Sharon added, according to informed sources, that it would not be
logical for Israel to pass over such information while the United States
maintains sanctions against the Israelis.

Mr. Sharon was said to have urged that the two sides wait until their relations
got back to normal before negotiating an agreement for sharing the information.

It is normal practice for Israel and the United States to negotiate such
specific arrangements, as they did after the 1967 and 1973 wars.

Other Information Exchanged

The two nations are continuing to share other, nonmilitary intelligence
information under separate agreements.  Mr. Weinberger is said to have responded
that he did not know what sanctions Mr. Sharon was referring to. He reportedly
presented Mr.  Sharon with a list of weapons that the United States continued to
provide Israel.

Mr. Sharon was said to have responded with a long list of American sanctions.
They included the F-16 delay, the suspension of the 1981 Memorandum of
Understanding on military cooperation when Israel annexed the Golan Heights last
December, and the suspension of cluster bomb deliveries because of Israel's use
of the weapon in Lebanon. Mr. Weinberger's response could not be learned.

Raids on Missile Batteries

American military officers are particularly interested in learning about what
Israel experienced in attacking Syrian missile batteries.  The batteries - made
up of a variety of Soviet-made, surface-to-air missiles, SAM-2's, SAM-3's and
SAM-6's, as well as antiaircraft guns and radar - are virtually identical to
Soviet systems in Europe. The Israelis destroyed all the batteries without
losing an aircraft.

There is also considerable interest in Israel's experience against the
Soviet-made MIG-21's and MIG-23's, where the Israelis shot down 80 without a
loss.

The Israelis also provided the first battle test for the muchvaunted T-72
Soviet-built tank and destroyed several of them. But Adminstration officials
said the Israelis had not been able to recover the tank hulks.

After the 1967 war, Israel provided information about the highaltitude SAM-2's
that proved valuable for American pilots flying against these missiles in North
Vietnam. After the 1973 war, the Israelis passed over intelligence information
on the low-altitude SAM-6's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Defense Minister Ariel Sharon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Capital Vigil Planned On Vietnam War Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 204 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 4


For 48 hours and 29 minutes over three days in November, the names of 57,709
Americans killed or missing in Vietnam are to be read aloud by volunteers in the
Washington Cathedral.

The cathedral vigil is to be part of a Veterans Day weekend National Salute to
Vietnam Veterans. Its sponsors expect to draw 250,000 veterans of America's
longest war to Washington, nearly 10 percent of the 2.7 million who fought in
the war.

Plans for the five-day salute, Nov. 10-14, were announced at a news conference
Wednesday by Jan Scruggs, president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund.

Mr. Scruggs is the combat veteran who is chiefly responsible for a $6 million
memorial nearing completion on a two-acre site between the Washington Monument
and the Lincoln Memorial.

The memorial, consisting of two polished black granite walls meeting in a V and
bearing the names of all killed and missing in the war, will not be dedicated
during the salute because a statue that was incorporated into the design will
not be completed for a year. The addition was made at the insistence of veterans
who considered the original design too stark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YVES MONTAND - FROM THE MUSIC HALL TO THE MET

BYLINE: By Moira Hodgson; Moira Hodgson is an editor of Vanity Fair.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2310 words


Frank Sinatra may have conquered the Pyramids, but can Yves Montand fill the
Metropolitan Opera House all by himself? And can he - alone in front of an
enormous auditorium - hold that stage which is large enough to accommodate the
elephants in ''Aida''?

From Tuesday to Saturday this week, Mr. Montand will be the first popular singer
to play the Met alone. Charter flights of fans are already booked from Paris to
New York to hear him sing such musichall favorites as ''Au''Hollywood,'' and
recite poems by Jacques Prevert, Aragon and Baudelaire. Not the sort of thing
one usually hears at the Met, but Jane Hermann, presentation director of the
Metropolitan, who booked him after seeing his show in Paris last year, has no
reservations about it. ''Montand has a classicism that supersedes the normal pop
artist,'' she says. ''He belongs here, where the greatest artists in the world
perform, and he's played bigger houses before.''

For many of his contemporaries, Yves Montand is more than a singer or an actor;
he is the symbol of a generation. His songs, which come out of the music-hall
tradition of Piaf and Chevalier, have an arresting simplicity and a knowing,
ironic seductiveness. With his special kind of romanticism, his nonchalance and
his intensity, he created his own persona and a brand of eroticism that have
resisted changing fashions.

When he returned to the music hall for the first time in 13 years (not counting
a benefit for Chilean refugees in 1974), Mr. Montand's three-month run last year
was the sensation of the Paris season, with tickets being scalped for hundreds
of francs. For the past year, the 60-year-old Mr. Montand has been giving
sold-out performances all over Europe, and eliciting the kind of adulation and
screams of applause that are usually reserved for rock stars. The group that
makes up the majority of his audiences these days ranges in age from 18 to 25,
and would seem to belong more in a stadium with the Rolling Stones than in an
auditorium with a veteran of the music hall. This group barely remembers the
Vietnam war, let alone World War II, the cold war or McCarthyism - issues that
meant so much to Mr. Montand.  Ironically enough, some of Mr. Montand's youthful
admirers wear 40's dresses, jackets or baggy pleated trousers, which recall the
styles of his early days when he sang in the nightclubs of Marseilles.

His two-hour show, staged and lighted by himself, is an extraordinary feat of
athletic virtuosity. Backed up by an eightpiece orchestra that includes an
accordion and electric guitar, he dances, clowns, recites poetry and, in his
slightly hoarse baritone, sings tireless French favorites about amusement parks,
boulevards and young lovers. His expressive body makes up for a virtual absence
of props. He begins in a black velvet suit and begins in a black velvet suit and
cocked hat; in ''Planter Cafe'' he wears a tattered straw hat while lamenting
how tired he gets gathering beans all day to keep others awake. In ''Sir
Godfrey,'' a sketch about a bowler-hatted criminal who feeds oysters to his
racehorses, he flourishes a sword-umbrella as he gives a Frenchman's imitation
of British upper-class talk.

There is no intermission, but in the middle, Mr. Montand runs into the wings:
action is picked up by a short film projected on the scrim in which Montand is
sending a telegram to the woman he loves. The operator goes unseen but her voice
over the telephone is unmistakably that of Simone Signoret, Mr. Montand's wife.
Meanwhile, he changes into the brown shirt and trousers which have been his
trademark for over 40 years; he says he first donned it after someone from the
audience yelled ''Zazu!,'' meaning zoot suit, when he appeared in a garishly
checked yellow-and-brown jacket. He took the jacket off at intermis

Mr. Montand has greying hair now, and it is just beginning to thin out on top.
He has given up smoking and even poker to keep himself in shape for his tour.
Despite rigorous dieting, work at a ballet barre before each show and the two or
three pounds he sweats off in each performance, he has a slight paunch. His feet
and hands are enormous (strangler's hands, a French critic once called them).
His head, with its big nose, big ears and small chin is lined and
weather-beaten, like a sculpture from Easter Island. Yet somehow it all adds up
to Presence.

''I don't know why I am doing this,'' he said in Paris recently, pausing for a
quick salad between rehearsals at the Olympia theater; his performances there
were sold out this summer, a feat akin to packing the outdoor amphitheatre in
Central Park in January.  ''Sometimes I look in the mirror in the morning and I
think, you're crazy. What do I want? Money? I got it. Success? It's O.K. I want
to win, to give the best I can. And it's exciting to give these young audiences
something that's almost disappeared: the tradition of the music hall.''

He chats with easy affability, gesticulating with his arms, moving between
French and English as the fancy takes him and driving his points home with
unprintable slang in both. When he speaks English his voice lowers a few notes
and he slurs slightly, rolling his ''r's'' in an exaggerated way, in an accent
that could only come from years of watching cowboy or gangster movies.

Most Americans know Montand as the husband of Simone Signoret, the lover of
Marilyn Monroe and the star of such political films as ''Z,'' ''State of
Siege,'' ''La Guerre Est Finie'' and ''The Confession.'' (His latest film,
''Tout Feu Tout'' with Isabelle Adjani, opens here this fall.)

In France, he is an institution. Throughout his whole life he has attracted
working people and intellectuals alike. When he walks onstage he looks, as
Kenneth Tynan put it, like the handsome electrician sent out by the management
to apologize for the absence of the star. He is the proletarian who became a
movie actor, who spent some nights playing poker games until dawn with the boys
and others hobnobbing with Sartre, Aragon, Prevert and even Khrushchev.

In fact, politics has been one of his passions, although his views have
undergone considerable changes since his youth. ''I don't agree with Americans
selling Russians wheat or Europeans selling them what will probably be used to
kill us,'' he says, jabbing his finger in the air. ''They say, well, we've got
to do business. It's not business. It's money. But it means we approve of
Afghanistan, and Poland, and Russian intolerance.''

When Mr. Montand flew into New York on the Concorde to look at the Metrpolitan
Opera House last spring, he was wearing a Solidarity button. He says he'll wear
it until his friend Lech Walesa is set free. He was incensed by the anti-nuclear
rally that was taking place in Central Park that weekend. ''They won't allow
that in Russia, so what's the point?'' he said. ''The Russians have got all
their guns trained on us. It can't just be one way only.''

This from someone who had for years been a close compagnon de route with the
Communist Party and to whom the United States for years denied a visa. ''I'm not
a borderline Reagan supporter, although I do agree with his position on Russian
imperialism,'' he went on. ''I'm not trying to be nice about America to sell
tickets for my concert.  I'm sure I'll be sold out when I get there anyway.
O.K., I've taken a wide route, and I don't regret my fights in the past. They
were very simple and very clear. But I don't pretend I've found the key.''

Although Mr. Montand became something of a symbol of the French left, he isn't
even French. He was born Yvo Livi in 1923 in Monsummano, a Tuscan village near
Florence. His father, a broom maker, took his family to France to escape the
Fascist brownshirts.  He grew up in extreme poverty in Marseilles, leaving
school at 11, first to work in a spaghetti factory, then on the docks and later
as a hairdresser's apprentice. At 17, he graduated from impersonating Donald
Duck in the public square to doing imitations of Charles Trenet, Maurice
Chevalier and Fernandel in local nightclubs. It was a tune called ''Les Plaines
du Far West'' that made him into a minor star. He arrived in Paris in 1944 and
eventually was hired as the back-up act for Edith Piaf at the Moulin Rouge. He
was still singing ''Les Plaines du Far West,'' not to mention ''Je vends des
hotdogs a Madison et a Central Park.''

''Don't destroy the legend,'' Mr. Montand said. ''The truth is Piaf did not make
me. I had a bit of a name already when I met her. But when a woman like Piaf
comes near you, of course you are put in the spotlight, and learning from her
saved me five years' work'' - thanks largely to the fact that Piaf wasn't
impressed by the cowboy songs.

''To prove how much I loved her, one day I threw them all out,'' he says,
shrugging his shoulders with a conspiratorial grin. ''I did ones she wrote or
chose. For a little while I was Piaf's man. Then suddenly she left me. She went
on a short tour and then, clack! She was gone. It was enormously cruel. But that
was her temperament. She knew instinctively that when she was in love she sang
marvelously. So when she got bored, she would leave.''

Still, after their affair was over they eventually became friends.Piaf got
Montand a small part in a Marcel Carne film ''Les Portes de Nuit.'' It was a
flop. As one critic wrote at the time, ''He is handicapped by his slack physique
and by his curious accent which gives the impression that he is talking with his
mouthful.'' But the film was written by Jacques Prevert, starting one of the
most important associations in Montand's life. Prevert gave Montand some of his
best poems and Montand planted them in the brains of every shop assistant and
factory worker for whom the words of ''Barbara,'' ''Les Petits Cireurs de
Broadway'' and ''Autumn Leaves'' became as familiar as ''Frere smash the glass
that held his pictures in the theaters and steal them; and only two years ago,
F, a feminist publication in France, voted Montand, by readers' consensus, as
the man they most wanted to father their child.

When Mr. Montand finally obtained his visa to the United States, he brought
these songs to America where he was engaged for three weeks at the Henry Miller
theatre on Broadway (and was such a success that he stayed for three more).
Writing of this performance in The New Yorker Kenneth Tynan said, ''When he
describes the bewilderment of being in love, he lets his voice creep up to the
important notes, sliding from baritone to tenor, at which point he idles,
producing a careless caressing vibrato. The touch is light, the tone pervasively
dark; your ears tell you that the microphone has here encountered one of its few
virtuosos, a singer for whom it is an instrument instead of a crutch.''

At that time his repertoire included some 20 French songs. It also included his
famous brown shirt -A few weeks in Hollywood were enough to rid him of the
Bogart-Cooper-Gable fantasies of his youth.  There, Montand made ''Let's Make
Love,'' costarring Marilyn Monroe who was married to playwright Arthur Miller.
Of Monroe and their much-publicized affair, he is reticent. ''She was afraid of
the other actors, who had a tendency to make fun of her, and I was terrified,
too, because I was working in a foreign language. But it was lovely. And it
still is lovely. That's all.''

Simone Signoret, who will be at the Met on opening night, writes touchingly of
Monroe in her autobiography ''Nostalgia Isn't What It Used To Be.'' She blames
the press for blowing up the incident. ''The press knew nothing of the quiet
lives of the four people in bungalows No. 20 and 21. If they had, they would
have seen nothing resembling the blond heartbreaker, or the moody dark man, or
the bookworm, or the admirable wife standing on her dignity, which were the
labels they pasted on us afterwards ...the press undertook to transform into an
'event' one of those stories that can occur in any enterprise, big or small, any
apartment house, big or small - and also during the making of many films ...and
sometimes, as time goes by, (such relationships) transmute into a friendship
that is more solid than any fleeting passion.''

Montand agrees. ''Passion is gone after a while. What remains? A wonderful
tenderness, respect, complicity, understanding without having to say anything,
laughing at the same things. So you stay together. You're not protected from
accidents, of course, you're only a human being. Some people might say that
accidents should not happen. But we're not saints.''

Montand returns to films early next year after his tour is over.  He will appear
as a waiter in Claude Sautet's ''Le Garcon.'' (Sautet directed him in ''Cesar
and Rosalie.'') ''I have to carry five plates on my arm and not give the
impression of being a brilliant actor.'' he said. ''I can't explain the
difference exactly but I can see it on the screen. I always know when I'm in the
part and when I'm on the border. In 'La Guerre Est Finie' and 'The Confession' I
was right on the nose.'' Montand made a boxing gesture with his fist.

But before the return to films, Mr. Montand will have done a world tour which
includes the West Coast, Brazil, Japan, the West Coast and another stint across
Europe. After the opening night of his show in Paris this summer, friends
crowded outside his dressing room. TV people clogged the hallway. In the small
dressing room, which contained an ironing board, blackcurrant cough drops, a can
of hairspray and a bottle of Vittel water, a Brazilian man was trying to
persuade him to come to Rio earlier than planned. ''No, I'll be in New York
walking under the trees of Central Park,'' Mr. Montand replied, relishing the
image. He raised his large hands in the air and let them fall. ''The Met, it's a
big responsibility. I've done Broadway. I've done Hollyvood. But the Met
...enfin ...''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Yves Montand (page 14)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A JOBS-WATCHER HOLDS LITTLE HOPE FOR QUICK IMPROVEMENT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1895 words


THOUGH the White House called the 9.8 percent unemployment reported again last
week ''unacceptably high,'' the Administration sees the jobless rate as an
aberration in a generally improving economy.

Others see it as a symptom of serious underlying problems. To help interpret the
statistic, The Week in Review talked with Sar A.  Levitan, economics professor
at George Washington University, chairman of the executive committee of the
National Council on Employment Policy and chairman of the National Commission on
Employment and Unemployment Statistics in the Carter Administration.  Excerpts
of the interview with Robert Pear, a reporter in the Washington bureau of The
New York Times, follow.

Question. What is the significance of the high unemployment rates reported in
the last several months?

Answer. I don't think it's just in the last several months.  For the last 10, 15
years or so, we have had creeping unemployment. What we have had in this
recession is an accelerated increase. In the 1960's, unemployment dropped to
below 4 percent - in the Vietnam period, the late 60's. And in the recovery from
the 1970 recession, it dropped below 5 percent. In the recovery from the 1974-75
recession, it dropped just below 6 percent. And from the short 1980 recession,
it never recovered even to 7 percent. The lowest it dropped to was 7.2 percent.
And now we are having 9.8 percent unemployment.

In other words, (the current recession) started from a higher level of
unemployment and we are getting a record rise.  Q. Has there been a structural
change in the economy or in the labor force that explains why unemployment rates
have been high?

A. To a limited extent, to the extent that there are more females, more kids in
the labor force. But there again, that hardly explains the continued, creeping
unemployment. First of all, in this recession, the rate of female unemployment
is less than the rate of male unemployment. Also, income-support programs have
delayed the necessity for unemployed people to look for jobs. If you are going
to provide more income maintenance, then there will be some increase in people
not looking energetically for jobs, even when they are unemployed.

Q. How significant is the participation of women in the labor force as a factor
in current levels of unemployment?

A. A fraction of a percent may be due to the fact that substantial numbers of
women have entered the labor force. But women are behaving increasingly like men
in the labor force.

They stay longer, they stay for a lifetime.  Women have entered the labor force
in every industrial country. I don't know that the growth will continue as
during the 1970's, but I don't think there is going to be any drop. In Sweden,
75 percent of the females are in the labor force. We are still far away from
that level, (but) in this country, the fact that over half of all the women will
remain in the labor force seems irreversible.

Q. Do the official statistics overstate or understate the true level of
unemployment?

A. Well, it depends what you want to make of it. When we say that the
unemployment rate is X percent, are we talking about the number that is
announced on the 7 o'clock news? To that extent, I would say it is understated.
But if you look at the total report that the Bureau of Labor Statistics puts
out, the richness of the numbers, you can see lots of other things.

When you look at the July figures, unemployment was 9.8 percent. In addition to
that, you have a million and a half of what they call discouraged workers. Now
some of the discouraged workers have really not looked for a job for months, or
maybe a year or more; they are really not in the labor force. But a large
proportion of them behave the same as unemployed people: Their number increases
during recession, declines in good times. So there is definitely a relationship
between unemployment and discouraged workers.

The third factor we have to look at is the number of people working part-time
for economic reasons - people who want a full-time job, but cannot get it. And
that has increased to the highest proportion ever - to 5.5 million.

Q. Five and a half million people would like full-time jobs and are working only
part-time?

A. Yes. Even in the 1974-75 recession, there were only slightly over 4 million
people who worked part-time for economic reasons. That tells us there are
weaknesses in the labor market. When you are cut from a $15,000-a-year job to
$7,500, you can't meet your bills, even the necessities.

Q. How does the nature of the unemployed population in this recession compare
with previous recessions?

A. This recession has hit certain industries, certain types of occupations that
are male-dominated rather than female-dominated.

First, industries involved in manufacturing durable goods - industries where
males tend to predominate - have been worst hit.  That includes the automobile,
steel and rubber industries. This is even more true in the construction
industry, which has also been hard hit. On the other hand, service industries,
where females predominate, have been hit much less.

Another difference is the high concentration of unemployment in given areas,
particularly the heartland. If you take Indiana, Ohio and Illinois, you have
over 12 percent unemployment. One of every eight workers is unemployed.

Then you have to add another sector of the economy, agriculture, which is also
suffering.  Q. Is the American economy still, nevertheless, creating a
substantial number of jobs? A. No question about it. In the 1970's, the economy
generated 19 million new jobs. Other major industrial countries have not done
that. In Germany, the number of workers hardly changed. Even if you take the
period from 1978 through 1981, the American economy generated 4 million
additional jobs.

If anything, our economy has been very resilient. We have been absorbing most of
the kids, we have been absorbing more and more women and an unknown number of
undocumented aliens. Except for the current recession, there is no question that
we have been creating more and more jobs.

Q. Why are you so critical of Administration policies for combating
unemployment?

A. I think they are self-defeating. Any schoolboy or schoolgirl should know that
if you are going to fight inflation with rising unemployment, then we are going
to increase the national deficit, due to reduced revenues and due to the
increase in unemployment insurance and other welfare outlays.

Unemployment (has) increased from 7.4 percent when President Reagan took office
to 9.8 percent. That in itself created an additional deficit of $50 billion to
$60 billion on an annual basis. To think a tight money policy is necessary when
the economy is operating at about 69 percent of total potential, and with 10
million unemployed, is ludicrous.

Q. In the tax legislation just passed by Congress, there is a section extending
the duration of unemployment benefits. What do you think of that?

A. There may be better ways of helping the poor. It's not exactly well targeted.
Lots of people who are not necessarily needy are getting it. But it was
essential. Also, I think it's a countercyclical measure, because during periods
when income drops and you bolster income with additional unemployment benefits,
it helps the economy recover. And it helps a lot of people.

The Administration refused to recognize that, and was actually fighting it until
the last moment, and was forced into it because otherwise it might not have
gotten the tax increase that President Reagan wanted.

The question is: To what extent is the Government responsible to help those who
are unemployed or forced into idleness through no fault of their own? That's a
responsibility that we accepted some 50 years ago. And obviously, during periods
of recession, it has to be extended.

Q. The rationale for the Administration's program is often put this way: We must
reduce Government spending, create new incentives for saving and investment,
with the idea that it will lead to economic recovery, it will create new jobs,
and that is the best thing for the labor force ultimately.

A. The premise is that if we cut our budgets and we cut our taxes, people will
act rationally, in the sense that they are going to save more and therefore it
will result in all of us sharing in the expanded pie.

Well, it has not happened. The policy is counterproductive and self-defeating.
Q. Is the shift to a service-dominated economy inconsistent with renewed
productivity growth, or are the service industries just as capable of
productivity gains?

A. People are finding now that, yes, some service industries can repeat the
growth in productivity experienced in manufacturing. But in many of the service
industries, they really don't want to increase productivity.

Take teachers. By increasing the size of classes from 20 to 25 students, you
could increase the measured productivity by 25 percent.  Q. But that does not
measure how much the children learn.

A. That's exactly the point. As another example, take a waiter in a restaurant.
You could have more tables per waiter. But there again, do you want to wait
longer, or do you prefer to have better service?

Doctors, I suppose, in hospitals, could increase their productivity, but would
we want to have a surgeon lining up patients on an assembly line to operate on
them? In other words, a large part of the service industry is an outgrowth of an
affluent society. In an affluent society people demand certain services and
certain behavior that is not conducive to increasing productivity.

Q. Do the unemployment rates differ by occupation?

A. Blue-collar workers have always been subjected to a higher incidence of
unemployment than white-collar workers. But in this recession the differential
has widened. As a result, the rate of unemployment among blue-collar workers is
three times the rate for white-collar workers.

However, white-collar workers, even professionals and managers, are also
experiencing relatively high unemployment during this recession, compared with
rates before the recession.

Q. Back to the entry of women into the labor force -Is much of that compelled by
economic conditions?

A. It depends what you mean by economic conditions. If younger families today
were satisfied with the same standard of living as their parents - and I'm not
talking about long ago, but 1950 - then they could very well get along with
fewer women working.

But the point is that younger families have expectations which their parents did
not have, and that's why you have more and more women working. In addition,
women increasingly want a career outside the home, as well as economic
independence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Sar A. Levitan Graphs of unemployment

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HISTORIANS USE CINEMA TO STIMULATE STUDENT INTERESTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When Woodrow Wilson saw ''The Birth of a Nation'' in 1915, he described the
movie epic about race relations after the Civil War as ''history written in
lightning.'' His comment referred not only to the flicker of light upon the
silver screen, but also presumably to the emotional effect of the film.

More than 60 years later, historians and scholars have now just begun to use
film as a means of communication and as a gold mine of information about the
values and concerns of a particular era.  History professors say that film is
fast gaining popularity and respectability in college classrooms across the
country.

Leon F. Litwack, professor of history at the University of California, Berkeley,
said that he shows films in four of the 30 lectures for his survey course on
American history. Film figured prominently at the annual meeting of the American
Historical Association in Los Angeles in December, he said, noting that 10 or 15
of the 125 sessions were devoted to film.

Ronald G. Walters, a history professor at Johns Hopkins University, described
one reason for the interest in film, observing that ''you can say things with
images that you can't say in print.'' A film, for example, can give a richer
feeling for the way in which a political orator harangued his audience in the
age of Andrew Jackson, Professor Walters said. He noted that the Organization of
American Historians had just established a prize for historical films and
television productions.

But on many campuses, the making of movies still does not count for much in
faculty decisions about promotion and tenure.  ''Historians are professionally a
conservative lot,'' Arthur M.  Schlesinger Jr. wrote in the foreword to
''American History/American Film,'' a book in which 14 historians analyzed
individual movies for insights into American values. ''Movies have had status
problems ever since they emerged three-quarters of a century ago as a dubious
entertainment purveyed by immigrant hustlers to a working-class clientele,'' he
said. ''Conventional history has recorded the motion picture as a phenomenon,
but ignored it as a source. Social and intellectual historians draw freely on
fiction, drama, painting; hardly ever on movies.''

The neglect, he said, was inexcusable because ''film is the only art where the
United States has made a real difference - film has been the most potent vehicle
of the American imagination.''

In college history courses today, it is not unusual for professors to show films
such as ''Birth of a Nation,'' ''Dr. Strangelove,'' ''Hearts and Minds,'' ''All
the President's Men'' or ''Triumph of the Will'' to illustrate a point,
respectively, about Reconstruction, the Cold War, the Vietnam War, the Watergate
scandals or Nazi Germany. Such films obviously are not works of historical
scholarship, but can be seen as artifacts of the years in which they were
written, revealing as much about the producers as about the subjects.

On another level, some scholars have examined films and the film industry as
part of a broader cultural analysis. For example, Robert Sklar, in his book
''Movie-Made America,'' studied motion-picture technology, the nature of the
audience, the organization and business tactics of the industry and government
policies toward movies.

Films are used, in a third way, as a mode of expression for historians. For
example, Prof. Howard R. Lamar, dean of Yale College, made a 90-minute film on
the life of a Texas cowboy, Charles Siringo, to illustrate the history of the
American West - the reality of a cowboy's life as opposed to the romantic myths,
the thin line between enforcing and flouting the law.

Robert Brent Toplin, a professor at the University of North Carolina at
Wilmington, developed a 90-minute film about an abortive slave rebellion in
Charleston, S.C., in 1822. Professor Toplin said that he had an advisory board
of 12 historians and had depended heavily on court transcripts and other records
relating to the leader of the revolt, Denmark Vesey, his followers and the
authorities in South Carolina. The movie, which cost nearly $1 million, was
televised by the Public Broadcasting Service last February. It was one of many
films supported by the National Endowment for the Humanities, which provided
$572,000 for the project.

Historians do not suggest that films replace books, but they see film as a way
to stimulate their students' interest. ''It works much better than a book as a
starter,'' said Professor Toplin. ''It's a stimulus to reading,'' said Mara
Mayor, a program officer at the humanities endowment, noting that the
circulation of library books on related subjects often increased after the
broadcast of a film.

''Students respond so strongly to film that the learning process is enormously
accelerated,'' Prof. Michael A. Roemer of Yale said.  ''They are dealing with a
medium that talks about things in their own language.''

One of film's main attractions for historians is its ability to draw a big
audience. ''Even a film that draws a relatively small audience on television is
still reaching several million people,'' Mrs. Mayor said. But she adds:
''Projects that have an abstract focus are harder to deal with visually than
projects with a narrative line. It is particularly difficult on film to show the
complexity of varying historical interpretations. It's easier to present
consensus history or the view of a particular group.''

Social and cultural historians have been in the forefront of those using film.
Professor Litwack, for example, has put together a montage of film, slides and
sounds to impart impressions about America ''from Hiroshima to Woodstock.'' The
impressions, he said, would be difficult to capture through a lecture or through
any book that might be assigned.

The Endowment for the Humanities expects to make 70 grants totaling $8.4 million
for television and radio projects this year, Mrs. Mayor said. The budget, in
keeping with cutbacks in many nondefense programs, will probably be about half
that size next year. The endowment has supported many documentaries, including
''The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter,'' about women working in industry in
World War II; ''America Lost and Found,'' a social history of the United States
in the 1930's; and ''Image Before My Eyes,'' a study of Jews in Poland between
the world wars.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of scene from The Birth of a Nation

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A WOMAN'S LIFE IN THE PRIESTHOOD

BYLINE: By Marion Knox Barthelme; Marion Knox Barthelme is a freelance writer
based in New York City.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4803 words


Ten years ago, Martha Blacklock went to England for a contemplative vacation.
She was trying to decide whether or not to become an Episcopal nun. ''I made
long lists of reasons why I should or should not. The 'Yes' side was plenteous,
yet the answer kept coming out 'No,' '' she says. ''It sounds hokey, but
literally in the middle of a worship service, I had this thought -it was very
clear - that I should go to a seminary and seek ordination as a priest. So I
came back to this country and the following year started seminary.''

It was an act of great faith. At the time, the Protestant Episcopal Church of
the United States did not permit the ordination of women.  Although a sometimes
angry debate had been going on for years, it was not until 1976 that the church
agreed to allow women into the priesthood, and then the decision was a
consequence of the illegal priesting two years earlier in Philadelphia of 11
women by four defiant bishops. When the church moved to regularize the bishops'
actions, the step was seen by many, including New York's Bishop Paul A. Moore
Jr., as ''one of the most important things we've done in this century.'' This
despite fears that the step would divide the church's membership and jeopardize
a possible union with the staunchly patriarchal Roman Catholic Church. Most of
all, there was the uncertainty of not knowing whether God had, in fact, meant
women to be ministers of His Holy Spirit.

Today there are more than 500 female Episcopal priests in the United States, and
the Diocese of New York has 52 of them. Most of the women serve as curates,
social workers, hospital chaplains, psychoanalysts and cathedral staff. Very few
have parishes of their own. Those who do tend to have small ones, or those with
a specialized ministry of some sort.

In New York City, only three women head their own congregations.  Two of them
minister in more or less traditional fashion. The third, 42-year-old Martha
Blacklock, is at St. Clement's, an experimental church-theater on Manhattan's
West 46th Street, where for the last two years she has been pursuing new methods
of spreading the message of the Gospel in a way that will make it more relevant
to those who have ceased responding to conventional forms of worship.

As she does, she must also deal with dissensions deriving from the conflicting
goals of the church and the theater within its walls. The arts people at St.
Clement's have recently become quite open in expressing their fears of impending
incursions on their bailiwick, contending that church input into the content or
conduct of their work would violate their artistic integrity; some have even
invoked a variation of the concept of the separation of church and state. But
Martha Blacklock, who has an as yet unused veto power over what is performed at
St. Clement's, believes that if the theater is merely secular, it should not be
a program of the church. As she grapples with this problem, which touches at the
heart of her very special ministry, Miss Blacklock is not unaware that ''St.
Clement's has outraged some people in the past, because of the kinds of things
we've done, particularly the adventures with the liturgy.''

''I don't mind doing something which permits people to come into the church out
of curiosity,'' she says. ''There's a hunger for the experience of God which
just gets hungrier as it's nourished.'' Clinton, the neighborhood around St.
Clement's, was once Irish and Italian Roman Catholic working class, and widely
known as Hell's Kitchen, after the gunmen and thieves who operated there earlier
in the century. Today it is chiefly Hispanic and slowly underdoing
gentrification, with a mix of semichic theater-restaurants, bodegas,
trash-filled streets and sweat-equity restoration projects. On a warm summer's
afternoon, I walked west between Ninth and 10th Avenues, past four or five
good-natured beer-drinkers loudly kidding a friend who was having his hair cut
on the sidewalk. When I reached No. 423, I climbed the steep steps that led to
the small red arched door that serves as the church's entrance and pressed the
buzzer.

The woman who answered the door was wearing faded jeans, leather sandals and a
long-sleeved black shirt with a priest's white collar.  Pinned to her shirt was
the insignia of the Episcopal Peace Fellowship, a combined cross and peace
symbol. The Rev. Martha Blacklock is tall and athletic-looking, with fair skin,
blue eyes and shaggy reddish hair. An all-but faded scar, from an adolescent car
accident, runs from her left cheekbone to under her chin. After an exchange of
greetings and a detour to an ice-cream truck for refreshment, she lead me inside
the building,where we were joined by Stephen Berwind, the 30-year-old managing
director of the church's theater component.  The three of us set off on a tour
of the physical plant during which Miss Blacklock assessed repair needs in
response to the church's latest crisis - 20 citations from the New York City
Fire Department.

''The Fire Department is irritated because they think we are a theater
pretending to be a church,'' Miss Blacklock explained.  ''Normal churches don't
look like this.'' (In fact, St. Clement's is housed in a former Presbyterian
edifice, chiefly distinguished by two sets of arched stained-glass windows,
matching arched entrances and a rather unambitious tower.)

''I don't mind them telling us we have to do certain things because St.
Clement's is also used as a theater,'' she continued. ''But don't tell me it's
not a church. Actually, it's a piece of cheese - but you don't see the trap
until you're caught.

''The Fire Department aside, our neighbors don't quite consider us a church,
either,'' she said. ''We're a noisy place where people are building sets,
running Skilsaws at 2 o'clock in the morning.''

As we walked about, Miss Blacklock noted peeling plaster, a hole in the
boiler-room wall, broken toilets, a stove that needed a vent and theater lights
in want of rewiring. The sprinkler system required by the Fire Department will,
she said, cost more than $17,000, a sizable sum for the financially strapped
church.

The building's spacious first level contains dressing rooms and a small theater.
The sanctuary, on the second floor, has tiers of black plastic seats facing what
is alternately space for worship and the theater's main stage. The third floor,
once the vicarage (Miss Blacklock makes her home in an apartment nearby), is now
office space, and when she finished her inspection, she led me to her own
office, crowded with files, books, a desk and typewriter, hammers and wrenches,
and, off in a corner, a small stone, headless statue of St. Clement, the
church's patron saint, who was an early Bishop of Rome. t. Clement's is,
technically, not a parish but a mission (though the hope is that it may someday
again become a self-supporting parish, as it was when it moved to its present
location 62 years ago), and Martha Blacklock is a vicar, not a rector. The only
religious constant at St. Clement's nowadays is that the Eucharist is celebrated
every Sunday. A prayer book is not always used, and members of the congregation,
taking turns, frequently work out their own liturgies for the weekly services.
Miss Blacklock, who tends to be informal, somtimes wears an alb, a loose white
robe, while administering the Eucharist, sometimes ordinary clothing, but always
the stole, emblem of her priesthood.

''One of the reasons I'm here,'' Miss Blacklock said, ''is because I think the
symbols which the church uses are, by and large, often inadequate or irrelevant.
We need to find new ones.

''Church services don't call on the critical faculties,'' she continued; ''in
fact, they put them to sleep. The gospels are very clear about what God has in
mind, but when it's all sung magnificently in beautiful settings, the message
blurs. The New Testament, and a great deal of the Old Testament, is the most
revolutionary stuff you can hear, if you can hear it.''

Steve Berwind rejoined us to report a problem involving the church's poetry
workshop. The poet and feminist Robin Morgan was scheduled to read and there was
a rehearsal conflict. When that had been resolved, Miss Blacklock leaned forward
and said: ''I'm interested in something that enables a person to get a taste of
what is traditionally called the communion of God, that conveys the fact that
reality is something upon which you can base hope. I'm trying to suggest the
existence of the possibility of redemption. This is what liturgy is about, and
could be what theater's about. The word 'gospel' means good news and it's the
church's job to go out and spread the news. We don't have to be God's Spirit, we
just have to be the body that makes sure the church is here. Through it, God
will act or reveal Himself.'' Martha Blacklock's first associations with the
Episcopal Church were in Concordville, Penn., 20 miles outside Philadelphia,
where she grew up. Her father, Carl Gobdel, was, she said, ''what's called a
perpetual deacon, someone who's ordained but goes on with secular employment'' -
in his case, buying and selling steel. (The fatherdaughter surname difference
dates back to the early 1970's, when Martha Gobdel took the name of a
great-grandmother, ''the most interesting member of that generation.'')

''We lived in a 16-room pre-Revolutionary house which my parents, who now live
in Arizona, were constantly restoring,'' Miss Blacklock related. ''My mother
didn't go to church. On Sundays she would say, 'I don't know why you go. It
doesn't improve your behavior or disposition one bit.' ''

Loud laughter from the street interrupted her recollections. She got up to look
out the window. ''The haircutters,'' she explained before resuming.

''When I was 14, I went to St. John Baptist School, a boarding school in
Mendham, N.J., run by a bunch of Anglican nuns who belonged to an order founded
in 1852, and who still wear habits down to their ankles and live under a rule
written by a Victorian clergyman.

''The school was good for me, though, in contradictory ways. I was an only
child,'' she explained, ''and I rebelled with the usual adolescent vigor because
of what seemed to me to be a lot of hypocrisy in the church. After I graduated,
I stayed away from the church for 13 years.

''When I was in my early 20's, I wrote to Robert DeWitt, the Bishop of
Pennsylvania, requesting excommunication. He wrote a marvelous letter back
saying that my questions were real but that he couldn't excommunicate me. He
suggested that I visit a priest near my home. I ended up doggedly appearing at a
Quaker meeting every Sunday for a year.''

Her early job experiences were more than a little varied. After leaving
Baldwin-Wallace College, she worked as a medical librarian assistant in
Philadelphia. A graduate degree in creative writing, acquired at the University
of Montana, lead to a job with a firm in Seattle, where, she says, ''I wrote
advertising copy and played little games, such as saying, 'I'm not going to
write anything for Boeing because they're making airplanes that are bombing
Vietnamese people.' '' A job as a general laborer followed. ''Then I got a
scholarship as a potter, which I really loved. The only problem was that it
seemed kind of precious in the 20th century. On the other hand, I was creating
beautiful things. Almost enough, but not quite.'' Thinking she ''was going to do
good,'' Miss Blacklock went to work for the Washington state welfare department.
''It was an ugly time,'' she says. ''A theory of psychology called 'reality
therapy' had been adopted by the state's welfare system. It went: 'You poor?
Don't have enough money? Can't earn enough? Well, it's all your own decision.'
''

She quit and went back East, intending to spend some time at a Quaker study
center near Philadelphia. ''I was 32 and thought I'd better get serious about my
life. Instead of the study center, I wound up at my old school,'' which is also
a retreat center. ''There I discovered that it really was possible to believe
the stuff the convent had been teaching.''

A telephone call at that point ended with her laughingly chiding the caller:
''Oh, so your plan is to move mountains.'' When she resumed, she said that she
liked the focus and the clarity of St. John's. ''There's a whole community of
people who say, 'This is what we're about, and we structure our lives in such a
way that we can do it best.'

''The conversion? It was like -well, you know how you can go into a room and
forget why, yet the moment you see the thing you were after, you recognize it
instantly.'' The Protestant Episcopal Church, which evolved from the Church of
England, incorporates Protestant and Roman Catholic, ancient and reformed,
liberal and conservative traditions. Inherent in its theology are a belief in
the Scriptures, the Nicene and Apostles' Creeds, baptism and communion, with the
church's authority resting with a General Convention, a bicameral legislative
body of bishops and clergy and laity, which meets every three years.

Despite a firmly established tradition of a totally male priesthood, nothing in
Episcopal church law has actually ever prohibited the ordination of women. The
question was first raised in modern times by James A. Pike, Bishop of
California, who in 1965 ordained a woman in a manner then canonically illegal
into the deaconate, a necessary preliminary to priesthood. Five years later the
General Convention voted to follow his lead, but said nothing about raising
women to the priesthood, whose members are the only ones empowered to celebrate
the Eucharist, pronounce God's blessing and give absolution.

Martha Blacklock began her studies for the priesthood by entering the General
Theological Seminary on Ninth Avenue in New York in 1973. ''Some of the male
students made you feel that you were there on sufferance,'' she recalls, ''but I
was very close to others.'' In her senior year, when she was president of the
student body, she did a crafts ministry in what was then the Church of the Holy
Communion, setting up her pottery wheel in the transept. ''It was,'' she said,
''like a guild church in the old English sense.''

In January 1977, Martha Blacklock was ordained a priest, at her old school, St.
John's. ''Some of the nuns there would probably prefer never to receive
communion from a woman, but in some ways they were family and they filed in.
They had, however, already celebrated communion and, even if they wanted to,
couldn't take it again that day from me. John Spong, now Bishop of the Diocese
of Newark, ordained me. With only a bit of malice on my part, we divided the
Eucharist prayer so that each of us spoke separately, and I stuck him with all
the 'Fathers.' ''

When the Diocese of Newark offered work, Miss Blacklock felt she ought to accept
because it had sponsored her as a candidate for ordination. She was in Newark
for about four years, at first, editing the diocesan monthly; next, as an
archdeacon on the Bishop's staff, and then, as rector of St. Barnabas, a black
parish. ''I'm sure they would have liked a black rector,'' she says when asked
about her relations with the congregation, ''but there aren't many. Still, we
cared for each other very deeply. At some point, you realize that caring and
fundamental agreement about how you do things are not identical.''

When the possibility of going to St. Clement's arose, she said she had some
conflict about it. ''I was in the middle of a city that desperately needs
political and social action - God cares very much whether people eat or not. But
I'm also drawn to a more abstract, theoretical, arts-oriented kind of ministry.
It seemed to me that my own strengths would be more useful at St. Clement's.''
In the early 1960's, when Wynn Handmann, a co-founder of the American Place
Theater, was beginning to talk about a theater that would produce new works by
American writers, Sidney Lanier, an assistant rector at St. Thomas's on New
York's Fifth Avenue, asked to be given a church-theater ministry at St.
Clement's. Mr. Lanier wanted to explore a theatrically oriented liturgy as a
means of refreshing the standard form of worship. The two concepts combined, a
stage was set up in the sanctuary of St. Clement's and Sunday church services
were held on a moveable altar in the middle of sets for various plays. When
American Place moved to its own building in 1971, the church carried on as
Theater at St. Clement's.

In time, the church became a home for several dance groups and a poetry workshop
and a temporary shelter for the Bread and Puppet Theater and the Open Eye
Company, as well as a showcase for both established and unknown playwrights.

The small congregation, which seldom has numbered more than 25, was actively
involved in the theatrical projects. A strong communal social consciousness
developed, along with organized opposition to the Vietnam War. Some services
became political happenings. ''If the congregation didn't like something that
was being said, they told people, right in the middle of the service,'' says one
communicant of the time.

But in the years just before Martha Blacklock's arrival, the organizational
structure had become so weak, she says, ''that there was no clear sense that the
theater was a function of the church.  There was crisis after crisis. The
theater administrator would go to the St. Clement's board - whose members
included nonchurchgoers - and say: 'Help! To keep going we've got to have
$10,000, or $40,000.' And the church board would say, 'Here it is,' until it
started wondering why it was pouring its last dime into the theater.''

When asked about conflicting goals shortly before his recent resignation as
artistic director, Michael Hadge said: ''I think good art and theater are
religious. We do realistic plays that get into human values and relationships. I
didn't come here to go to church.  I came to do theater, to which the church has
made a commitment.  But,'' he went on, ''guidelines are being laid down that
could present problems for theater people. The real aim of the church should be
to build a congregation. I don't know why it isn't growing. I've been told that
the services are boring.''

Others feel that Martha Blacklock has slowly begun to attract a congregation
which, though still small, is constant, faithful and interested in one day
becoming a full-fledged parish with control of the uses to which its building is
put at any particular time. Rising to her defense, Brooke Bushong, a teacher and
church treasurer, says: ''If Martha hadn't had to spend so much time getting the
building up to code, she might have been more creative, and got around more in
the community. Her focus is people's spiritual development.'' Marjorie Christie,
a lay woman on the executive council of the national Episcopal Church, says that
''Martha's strongest point is her preaching. It's thoughtful, theologically
sensitive, to the point.''

Support comes also from New York's Bishop Moore. ''Martha's a very steady, tough
person, in the best sense of the word tough,'' he says. ''She is a fine priest,
very liberal,'' who has showed skill in handling a multiplicity of problems.
''She put up a nice fight with the Fire Department,'' for example. (When the
department closed the church for multiple violations in January 1981, Miss
Blacklock held services on the street. The resulting publicity rallied the local
community behind a clean-up effort that had the congregation back inside in nine
days.)

Although the church board is the dominant operating structure, Miss Blacklock
says that she is not interested in church control of the theater, but she does
believe that the arts should be a means to spiritual development. ''If we're
partners and the partnership is the church, then I think everybody has a
responsibility to say we're looking for God, to make what we have found
available to other people, to put it in their way, so that they might be led to
want it.'' For Susan Harriss, a 30-year-old Episcopal priest who serves as
chaplain to Bishop Moore, the cutting edge for women priests is the parish.
''That's where you get in touch with people's attitudes. The Western Christian
religious tradition manifests a tremendous desire to rise out of the body in
order to worship God. On the other hand, women more or less symbolize the body.
When you bring it in and dress it up like a priest, people get confused.''

In addition to Martha Blacklock, two other women Episcopal priests have their
own congregations in New York City: 44-year-old Columba Gilliss, rector of St.
Ann's Church for the Deaf on East 16th Street, and 37-year-old Carol Anderson,
of the traditional All Angels' Church on West 80th Street. Miss Gilliss, who was
one of the first women to be ordained as a priest, thinks that ''if people grow
up seeing both men and women perform a range of roles in the church, their
associations will be different from people who have seen only men perform those
roles.''

She explains: ''A burial service offered by a very pregnant woman would present
the whole death-birth cycle. Baptism is another such rite. What the man does is
so clean, so different from the real birth process, with pure water in place of
blood, perhaps rose petals instead of water, because water looks too much like
amniotic fluid.  The first time I saw a woman baptize her own baby I realized
there was a real claiming of power.''

When asked if she has had difficulty in asserting her priestly authority, Miss
Gilliss - whose deaf parishioners sign her as ''Rev Gilliss,'' but who prefers
the title ''Mother Gilliss'' - said she never has any problems with her
congregation. ''But on the outside world, I certainly do. It takes people a
while to understand that I am the boss and not the secretary.''

Her colleague, Carol Anderson, since coming to All Angels' Church in 1979, has
concentrated on teaching her growing congregation basic orthodox Christianity.

''Now we have a lot of Ivy League grads who work on Wall Street,'' she said
between sips of lunchtime coffee. ''People around here have tried everything and
are now turning to religion.''

She stopped and considered for a moment before saying: ''The Episcopal Church
has a larger percentage of wealthy people and people in leadership positions
than any other Christian denomination. If you put together the memberships of
two or three of the East Side parishes in New York, you have something like the
Fortune 500. Part of the church's mission should be to mobilize its membership
toward making changes - in the city, in the world. A lot of people think that
the church has no business meddling in politics, and they become very secular
when it comes to something like nuclear disarmament. But if I understand the
Bible, one is a Christian first and an American second. The dependence upon
arms, upon military power, is an idolatry of vast proportions. It suggests, as
well, that God is not capable of ruling the universe.'' When asked to give her
concept of the deity, Martha Blacklock admits that she gets into ''real
trouble'' in trying to visualize God. ''It's not a goddess or some androgynous
entity,'' she says.  ''The traditional ingrained one is a male, so I attempt not
to embody God.''

A demasculinization of the image of God through the wording of the liturgy is
one of the side effects women as priests have had in the church in general,
where a conscious effort is now made to find alternatives to male pronouns.

Some parish clergy and liturgy committees in the United States have adapted
language changes that reflect this growing sensitivity to gender inclusiveness.
Others, in some rough fashion, change the words as they go along. The Roman
Catholic Church has recently decided to omit the generic use of ''man'' in its
liturgy, and a revision of the Episcopal hymnal, along similar lines, is in
progress.

Martha Blacklock says that it did not bother her when she was growing up to hear
''Lord'' and ''He,'' but ''I was aware that I couldn't do certain things - be an
acolyte, for instance.'' She feels that ''the women who were irregularly
ordained went through a lot of grief because the Episcopal Church is one in
which order is almost holier than God.''

Women wanting to enter the priesthood now still encounter difficulties. ''In the
Episcopal Church, where the diocese is the primary unit of structure,'' Miss
Blacklock says, ''if the bishop doesn't want women priests, then there aren't
going to be any in his diocese. A bishop has almost absolute power.''

There are, however, ways to circumvent unfriendly dioceses. ''The standing
committee in Newark, for example,'' Miss Blacklock explains, ''has made a policy
decision that it will serve as a stop on what we call 'the underground
railroad,' accepting transfers from another diocese without insisting on
residency requirements. In one case, a Chicago woman applied for ordination in
Newark, then she transferred back to Chicago as a priest and was employed there.
Byzantine.

''A lot of people still do not believe that women are really priests, or even
proper material for ordination,'' Miss Blacklock continues. ''This kind of
position is held by some of the most important bishops in the Episcopal Church
in this country, including the Presiding Bishop, John M. Allin.''

Despite continuing resistance, attitudes within the church are changing, or at
least being rethought. ''It used to be that the laity were seen as consumers,''
Miss Blacklock says. ''What I feel now, based on the Scripture, is that anyone's
vocation is as much a ministry as mine is; mine just happens to be more
liturgical. The church is here to help people understand more deeply how their
particular vocations relate to God, and to everything else.''

Some women, blacks and third-world people mostly, are interested in a kind of
religious rethinking, or ''liberation theology,'' that, for example, suggests a
liberating God as a suffering one rather than a bombastic, demanding deity.

''We can't add to the scripture'' says Miss Harriss, who to her amusement is
sometimes addressed as ''Father Susan,'' but ''we can maneuver it with women's
experience so that our understanding of God widens to include us. Perhaps it's
just a new way of thinking, of turning from the traditional Aristotelian
rational theology to a more receptive, embracing God that we're still talking
to. A woman might look at the story of Lot's wife and say that it wasn't just,
and that she doesn't want to live in a society that works like that. It's a
recognition that the Bible was deeply influenced by the time in which it was
written, rather than being a direct inspiration from God.'' To Martha Blacklock,
her faith is a constant source of wonder and discovery. ''When I begin to think
I understand God and creation, it's so much more than I had ever imagined or
expected, so much more wonderful, that I'm astonished. God is supposed to be
like this, and then you turn around and He amazes you all over again. As in the
Gospel where the last workers were paid as much as the first: You say to
yourself, 'What if God's mercy absolutely swamps our understanding of how God's
justice works?' ''

Opportunities for revelation abound. On a recent Sunday, a 5-yearold was among
those waiting to receive communion at St.  Clement's. As Miss Blacklock blessed
the wine and bread, consecrating them as the body and blood of Christ, the boy
whispered to his mother, ''Whose blood is it?'' When she was told about this
after the service, Martha Blacklock was dismayed. ''Whose blood? Oh, Lord, if
I'd heard that, I would have stopped everything,'' she said. ''Oh, Lord. What do
you do?''

The incident recalled for her ''a book by Monica Furlong, in which she says that
writers and priests are always failures. They're almost supposed to be: 'They
are justified only by their powers of being and of seeing.' And how good are we
at seeing?''

Miss Blacklock does not, however, doubt that she has found the right calling.
''I've felt that it's absolutely right,'' she says, ''demanding of me everything
I could ever do. Nothing essential is missing. I think God really wants me to do
this.'' Several months ago, an actor new to the St. Clement's group arrived
early one day for a rehearsal. He wandered into a small chapel, which, like so
much about the church, has a faint air of abandonment. At the side altar, he
idly opened the tabernacle and was amazed to find a chalice inside, and, inside
the chalice, a host. Moved by what one might assume were ancient impulses, he
tasted the bread and wine, and then, horrified, realized that he had blundered
into what must be a working church. He sought out Martha Blacklock to tell her
of what he supposed was a sacrilege. She was delighted. Discovery.  Mystery. St.
Clement's as cheese.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of The Rev. Martha Blacklock (Page 22) Photo of
illegal ordination of 11 women to Episcopal priesthood

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MODERN JEWISH MOTHER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


-------------------------------------------------------------------- Annie
Gottlieb is a freelance critic.
THE LOVE OF ELSPETH BAKER By Myron S. Kaufmann.  680 pp. New York: Arbor House.
$16.95.

By ANNIE GOTTLIEB

MYRON S. KAUFMANN is a man who takes his time. His best-selling first novel,
''Remember Me to God,'' was published in 1957; his second novel, ''Thy
Daughter's Nakedness,'' appeared in 1968. ''The Love of Elspeth Baker'' is his
third. There's a certain unfashionable dignity about that pace, a quiet
stubbornness, a disdain for hurry that prevails within Mr. Kaufmann's novels as
well as between them.

''The Love of Elspeth Baker'' is a vast, patient book. There's time in it to
observe a dragonfly hovering above a summer swimming pool, a piece of paper
blowing down a cold Boston street, the shape of an old-fashioned bell pull.
There's time for an 18-year-old girl's deft repair of a car transmission and a
toilet to be narrated in minute detail; time for a baby to ripen slowly in her
womb and finally to be born, contraction by contraction, and then to grow and be
patiently diapered and suckled while his spirited unmarried mother tries to
figure out what to do with her life. Mr. Kaufmann actually tells us almost every
time his heroine, Elspeth, shifts the baby, Petey, from one breast to the other;
but far from maddening, the repetition of such little acts of motherhood becomes
a lulling leitmotif that wins the reader's patience.

There is time too for many of the book's characters to argue at length about
God, whom they regard with a spectrum of feelings distinctively Jewish: despair,
exasperation, befuddled awe. ''I told the rabbi God is meshuggeh. I told him
straight out. God is meshuggeh,'' says Elspeth's embittered father, Joe Baker,
who should know. He has lost one son to Vietnam and the other to a freak medical
accident, and now his adored baby daughter, best mechanic and righthand woman in
his hardware store has come home from Mount Holyoke with a big belly. ''God
isn't Santa Claus,'' counters Elspeth's newly Orthodox cousin, Bob Shoemaker, an
M.I.T. marine biologist. ''Who are we to presume that God is morally bound to
run the universe in a way that's convenient for us? How self-centered can we
get?''

These two qualities of ''The Love of Elspeth Baker'' - profusion of mundane
detail and ebullient, long-winded religious speculation - are separate aspects
of one vision. Mr. Kaufmann's fascination with the surprises of biology and the
inventory of hardware stores has everything to do with his respect for the
Creator of this perverse and intricate world. He knows as much about ''being
here now'' as Baba Ram Dass or any Zen Buddhist. And, indeed, one of the points
this novel unashamedly makes, through Bob Shoemaker and his community of
''froomies'' (from the Yiddish word frum, or pious), is that the Jewish
tradition can provide everything its sons and daughters have been seeking in
more exotic places: mystical rapture, zest for the natural life of the body, a
sense of community, a comprehensive standard of humane conduct (did you know
that the Talmud solemnly forbids making fun of people?). In short, as Bob says,
it provides ''a vision of the good society.''

But the proselytizing in this book - talky, repetitive and very appealing -
doesn't interfere with the pleasures of the plot, which tells how Elspeth picks
her way, by healthy instinct and luck, through the million hazards of a world
gone awry. Her passage to motherhood is assailed by every kind of false wisdom a
life-denying culture can produce. ''It's not even like taking an appendix out.
Or a tooth out. It's not even part of you,'' says the Amherst freshman who is
the father of Elspeth's child and who has paid for an abortion. ''I suggest you
forget about natural childbirth,'' an obstetrician tells her. ''It's nonsense,
frankly.'' And Elspeth's father's lawyer advises: ''Breastfeeding isn't the most
sanitary thing in the world. ... You can't boil the female breast and sterilize
it.''

Without quite knowing why - and with considerable suspense - Elspeth flees two
abortionists, gives birth by Lamaze, insists on breast-feeding even though she's
giving the baby up for adoption, steals him from the nursery and, the night
before signing adoption papers, runs away from the hospital with him. She's
right, of course, and she finds allies: a ponytailed male medical resident, an
old Jewish landlady, a young Italian lawyer, a woman who runs a gas station, her
cousin Bob and his religious community. She also meets a kind, wealthy older man
who wants to marry her, baby and all, but who, like most assimilated Jews in the
story, is revolted by the froomies and dismayed by Elspeth's increasing
attraction to them.

Among the books's many pleasures are its plain language, a fine imaginative
sympathy (on the part of a middle-aged male writer) for the young and the female
and a poignant portrayal of a great, baffled love between father and daughter.
The main flaw, apart from the characters' speechifying, is that Elspeth is a
little too good to be true. A gorgeous redhead with breasts ''like pagodas'' who
fixes a flooded engine while in labor and pumps gas with one arm while cradling
her nursing baby with the other does stretch credibility.  Nonetheless, she's a
lovely super-heroine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDITORS' CHOICE

BYLINE: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 6.50.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 117 words

DATELINE: AUNT JULIA AND THE SCRIPTWRITER, by Mario Vargas Llosa.


four previously published reviews, articles and essays. GOD'S GRACE, by Bernard
Malamud. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.50.) A fable, with talking animals, about
man's fall. THE IMPERIOUS ECONOMY, by David P. Calleo. (Harvard University
Press, $17.50.) An analysis of the decline of America's influence in the world.
THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) A large novel
about Americans in the Vietnam War. THOMAS E. DEWEY AND HIS TIMES, by Richard
Norton Smith. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A political biography of the G.O.P.
Presidential nominee. THE WHEAT AND THE CHAFF, by Francois Mitterrand. (Seaver
Books/ Lattes, $16.95.) The private reflections of France's President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONFICTION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: By Fran R. Schumer

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1792 words


EPPIE The Story of Ann Landers.  By Margo Howard.  Illustrated. 253 pp. New
York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. $13.95.

This polite little biography of the advice columnist, written by her daughter
Margo Howard, will disappoint ''Dying-to-Know-in-Kenosha'' and other readers
expecting another ''Mommie Dearest.'' The truth is that there is little cause
for scandal in these pages. About the worst Mrs. Howard can say about her
celebrated mother is that she had a not too surprising tendency to give too much
advice.

Much more interesting is the story of how Eppie Friedman, born in Sioux City,
Iowa, to Russian-Jewish immigrants, grew up to create what a former Harvard
Medical School dean called ''the most effective social service agency in the
world.''

Readers of Ladies Home Journal already know the highlights: Bored playing
mah-jongg, the young wife of Julius Lederer, then a hat salesman, first tried
politics. Had the machine in Chicago been more receptive in the 1940's to gutsy
housewives, she might now be part of it. Her next venture was journalism.
Against everyone's advice, she entered and won a contest sponsored by the
Chicago Sun-Times to replace the old Ann Landers. Not so coincidentally,
according to Mrs. Howard, Eppie's twin sister Popo pulled off a similar coup at
the San Francisco Chronicle, and the famous rivalry between Ann Landers and
Abigail (Dear Abby) Van Buren began.

To her credit, Mrs. Howard doesn't exploit the gory details of the siblings'
feud, but elsewhere her kid-gloved approach does her subject a disservice. Ann
Landers is worthy of a racier style; certainly her own is.

Candor is her hallmark. As a columnist, she is shrewd, practical and to the
point. She has added some gems to the literary genre of advice-to-the-lovelorn:
To ''Miss Icarus,'' who wanted to marry her fiance's father, she wrote, ''Drop
Daedalus.'' Despairing husbands were assuaged: ''Some are cold, few are
frozen.'' ''Kwitcher Bellyachin' Buttercup'' was her common refrain.

A cocky crusader, Ann Landers bulldozed her way past editors and advertisers who
tried to muzzle her, particularly when she moved beyond the confines of social
and sexual matters. She was an early opponent of the Vietnam War (it was
''indecent, immoral and unwinnable,'' she wrote), a staunch advocate of gun
control and a longtime detractor of Richard Nixon. Her views on social issues
were somewhat more tame. It took her a long time to condone divorce.  (''How
come your dateline isn't Vatican City?'' one disgruntled reader wrote.) And she
was slow to endorse premarital sex. (''If men admire virgins so ardently, why
don't they leave a few around?'' wrote another unhappy fan.)

Because of her influence - 800 newspapers, 1,000 letters daily and advisory
positions on the boards of Harvard Medical School, the Menninger Foundation and
the Mayo Foundation Sponsors' Committee - she was able to surround herself with
a brain trust that over the years included William O. Douglas, Theodore Hesburgh
and Hubert Humphrey. (''I should have listened, Eppie; you were right about
Vietnam,'' Humphrey wrote.) Who counseled whom wasn't clear.

Several times in the course of her 28-year career, minor scandals, like the
recent one concerning her use of recycled columns, have threatened to blight her
image. Her divorce was an embarrassment - after 35 years of marriage, her
husband left her for a 28-year-old nurse - as has been the sniping between the
two sisters. Neither these family problems nor all the cries from ''Heartbroken
in Hackensack'' could slow Ann Landers pace.

The misery of the masses drove Nathanael West's fictional Miss Lonelyhearts to
despair. His successor, Mrs. Howard implies, has much thicker skin.

LIONS OF THE EIGHTIES The Inside Story of the Powerhouse Law Firms.  By Paul
Hoffman.  370 pp. New York: Doubleday & Co. $17.95.

When former Associate Justice Arthur Goldberg of the Supreme Court of the United
States went to work at the midtown New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,
Wharton & Garrison, there was some discussion about whether his name would
appear before or after that of Simon H. Rifkind, the firm's driving force. Since
Justice Goldberg, not known for his modesty, had already requested that the
partners address him as ''Justice'' rather than ''Mr.,'' it was no surprise that
the name was changed briefly to Paul, Weiss, Goldberg, Rifkind, Wharton &
Garrison.

Gossipy trivia like this fill the pages of Paul Hoffman's ''Lions of the
Eighties,'' a lively sequel to the author's earlier romp through the New York
law firms, ''Lions in the Street.'' The new book also tells you everything you
ever wanted to know about the profession while providing an update on the
situation of women attorneys, post-Watergate legal ethics and the New York City
fiscal crisis . No great insights are offered here, but then Mr. Hoffman's
purpose in taking us up and down Wall Street and into the midtown firms is to
tell us what goes on, not why.

En route we see Wilbur Mills, resuscitated after his tidewater disaster as a
partner and tax specialist at Shea & Gould. We learn why New York City Council
President Carol Bellamy didn't fit in at stolid Cravath, Swaine & Moore: She had
a poster in her office of a woman dressed as Tarzan. Mr. Hoffman refers to Miss
Bellamy's politics as ''militant feminism.''

We are told about the mind-boggling salaries - some associates fresh out of law
school start at $42,500 - and the marathon hours.  (One partner, whose work
included a trip to California, billed a client for a 27-hour day.) The pressure
has become so great that at least one firm, Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin & Soll,
keeps a psychiatrist on retainer.

Some of the ''lions'' Mr. Hoffman discusses, the superstars of the powerhouse
firms, were presented in his earlier book, and they do not become more
interesting the second time around. What sparkles is Mr. Hoffman's vivid account
of the major legal battles of the last 10 years: How the Government won its case
against A.T.&T. and lost it against I.B.M., 13 years and $13.4 million later.

Mr. Hoffman delivers a blow-by-blow account of the American Express Company's
relentless pursuit of McGraw-Hill; its climax features gentlemanly Harold McGraw
ripping up his American Express card in disgust. There is an excellent
discussion of corporate takeovers, which one lawyer has likened to the feudal
wars of the Middle Ages, and colorful portraits of the top lawyers who stage
them. One is reputedly so feared for his skill that some firms keep him on
retainer just to prevent him from fighting a case against them.

Not all of the latest developments are given equal weight. By the end of this
century, nearly one-third of all lawyers will be women, yet Mr. Hoffman devotes
little more space to this phenomenon than he does to ''boutiquing,'' the
practice of opening up one's own firm. He acknowledges the advent of advertising
but dismisses it before the really interesting questions get answered. (What was
the outcome of F.Lee Bailey's front-page New York Times advertisement ''for
airline-accident clients''?)

Chapters on foreign bribes, corporate disclosure and ''crime in the suites''
raise more questions than they answer, but again, Mr.  Hoffman's intent is to
enlighten the layman. One suspects, however, that it is lawyers who will most
enjoy this sprightly portrait of themselves.

ADVENTURES IN IMMORTALITY By George Gallup Jr.  With William Proctor.  226 pp.
New York: McGraw-Hill. $12.95.

People who have trouble accepting reincarnation, ESP and out-ofbody experiences
will be uncomfortable with much of ''Adventures in Immortality,'' a summary of a
recent Gallup Poll on matters less worldly than politics.

Among its findings: More than half of all Americans believe in ESP, 46 percent
believe there is human life on other planets, and 24 percent believe we can
contact the dead. But lest anyone think Americans are too credulous, only one in
nine of us believes in ghosts. In Britain, 20 percent do and 7 percent say
they've actually seen a ghost.

Questions concerning life and death generate some of the book's more interesting
data (70 percent of all Americans believe in what the theologian Paul Tillich
referred to as ''that great American superstition, the immortality of the
soul''). The focus of ''Adventures in Immortality'' is oddly skewed, however, to
the 15 percent of Americans who have had a close brush with death and the few
among them who believe they have witnessed an afterlife. These people fascinate
the authors, who devote pages to recollections such as this: ''I struggled for
breath and then suddenly all pain and panic ceased. All was intensely dark and
cool. ... I began to see the most beautiful, vivid purplish color of radiating
light.''

What is unsettling is not that people have stories like this to tell, but that
the authors seem so willing to accept observations of long, dark tunnels and
purplish lights as evidence of an afterlife.

Scientists have explained that visions can be the effect of pain and loss of
oxygen on the brain, but such logical interpretations are mentioned only in
haste here. It is as if the authors are eager to clear the way for more
extraordinary explanations, although nothing in the survey suggests that any is
needed.

This is strange fodder for a bread-and-butter polling operation, but George
Gallup Jr., head of the Princeton Religion Research Center, has long had an
interest in other-worldly matters. His two previous books, ''The Search for
America's Faith'' and ''My Child on Drugs? Youth and the Drug Culture,'' which
he wrote with Art Linkletter, both have a spiritual bent.

For readers more sociologically inclined, there are plenty of interesting
statistics here. True to our Calvinist origins, twothirds of all Americans
believe that good people are rewarded in heaven and bad people are punished in
hell. We also believe in the devil, a notion the French and the British scoff at
and all but 21 percent of Swedes dismiss as so much nonsense.

Demographic patterns emerge: Less educated Americans believe more in the
afterlife than college graduates, Southerners more than residents of either
coast and women more than men, although only by a few percentage points. Men are
more likely than women to believe in extraterrestrial life.

In a welcome interruption of all the tabular data, Mr. Gallup quotes the
response of one gerontologist, who, asked if he had had a near-death experience,
said: ''I haven't but I can't resist inventing an answer... Jesus Christ kissed
me, and told me I had won the Jehovah Prize which was a bigger honor than the
Nobel Prize.  Then, I noticed that I was whole again - my gallbladder had grown
back and my pimples disappeared.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. GENERAL ACCLAIMS ISRAELIS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 512 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5


A retired United States general says he believes that the Israeli Army was at
''its professional best'' in Lebanon and that it tried hard to be
''discriminating and careful'' in civilian areas.

Lieut. Gen. Harry W.O. Kinnard was one of six retired American generals who
visited Lebanese battlefields and Israel last month on a visit organized by the
Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.  General Kinnard, who organized and was
the first commander in Vietnam of the First Cavalry Division, gave his
impressions in an interview here last week.

General Kinnard, who also visited Israel after the 1967 and 1973 Middle East
wars, said he believed that the Israelis had been successful in devising new
tactics and technology to destroy Sovietmade antiaircraft missiles but that
''they realize this is a transient thing'' and that such military advantages
seldom remain static.

Most Damage Found to Be Old

He said his group had visited Damur, Sidon and Tyre. Most of the damage in
Damur, he said, appeared to have been caused in the Lebanese civil war of the
1970's and not in the recent fighting. He said the generals' group had also seen
single buildings at rural crossroads destroyed by tank fire but surrounded by
structures that had remained untouched by the Israelis.

''I had to deduce that they were not by any means just leveling the places but
were trying to deal with the enemy as he engaged them,'' he said.

General Kinnard said military lessons could be learned from the conflict, for
example, in armored warfare.  Combat against the Soviet-made T-72 tank, the
latest model in operational use in the Soviet Army and in Syria, seemed to
''puncture the myth'' that the tank posed especially difficult military
problems, General Kinnard said.

''The Israelis thought it was a good tank,'' he added, ''but it is just a tank
and not a bugbear they had built up in their own mind.''

Antitank Weapons Described

He said the Israelis had destroyed 400 to 500 tanks, ranging from old T-54's and
T-55's, used by the Palestinians mainly as pillboxes, to the more modern T-62
and T-72 models in the Syrian inventory.

General Kinnard's statements and remarks by other Pentagon officials indicated
that the Israelis had had success with both ''kinetic energy'' and ''chemical
energy'' antitank weapons.  Kinetic-energy weapons are nonexplosive projectiles
that simply punch holes in armor. Chemical-energy warheads have high-explosive
noses that, in effect, burn a hole through armor.

The latest form of kinetic-energy shell uses sharply pointed penetrator rods
composed in part of depleted uranium, a nonfissionable metal even heavier than
lead. The rods are considerably smaller in diameter than the barrel of a
105-millimeter tank gun, but are held in a segmented girdle that fits the
barrel.  The Israelis use an American version of such shells.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STRONG INSURGENT TESTS LEADER OF MINE WORKERS

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W.@Va., Sept. 5


Sam M. Church Jr., the president of the United Mine Workers, flew from coalfield
to coalfield this Labor Day weekend, touting ''one-hundred-dollar day.''

Beginning Tuesday, under a three-year contract Mr. Church negotiated with major
coal operators last June, senior miners will be paid $100 for an eight-hour
shift. The $100 plateau is a first in what is one of the nation's highest-paid
blue-collar trades. Mr.  Church may need all the mileage he can get from that.

Last year, when his opponent, Rich Trumka, announced his candidacy for the union
presidency, it seemed to many in the coalfields an act of reckless audacity.

Among those who may have failed to recognize the 33-year-old challenger's
strength was Mr. Church, 45, the miners' president since 1979.

Insurgent's Strength Considerable

Mr. Church faces an unexpected struggle for survival. He is regarded as being
out-financed, out-organized and out-popularized.  In his campaign speeches, Mr.
Trumka is able to quote John L.  Lewis, the dominating leader of the mine
workers for nearly half a century, without embracing the former union
president's autocratic ways. Mr. Church, as the incumbent, carries the
leadership of a diminished but once-powerful union that finds it difficult to
deal with a troubled industry.

Mr. Trumka's challenge to the union establishment has upset not only the coal
industry, whose leaders have learned to get along with Mr. Church, but other
union leaders. Some mine-worker officials, considering the rank-and-file
insurgency Mr. Trumka is leading to what may be a victory in the Nov. 9 union
election, still ask ''Has he paid his dues?''

Charge of Inexperience

Mr. Church's response to the surprising challenge is to cite what he calls his
opponent's ''inexperience.'' Mr. Trumka has been a lawyer for the union. Running
for his first union office last year, he defeated a member of the powerful
international executive board of the union by a margin of 10 to 1.

Mr. Church's surveys, which have been conducted for him by the Washington-based
campaign consultant, Matt Reese, depict his chances of keeping the
$51,500-a-year U.M.W. presidency as doubtful.

A telephone poll indicated that, while Mr. Church is regarded as strong on such
''union issues'' as a bar of soap missing from a mine bathhouse shower, Mr.
Trumka is perceived, because of his education, as more likely to make an impact
on the unemployment plaguing the coalfields. Twenty percent of the union's
140,000 able-bodied members are on furlough or are on shortened workweeks.

Mr. Trumka has been campaigning since November 1981. This Labor Day weekend, Mr.
Church has intensified his efforts at membership rallies here and elsewhere in
the Eastern coalfields.

Miners Tend to Be Younger

The election comes during a significant change in the makeup of the coal-mine
work force. Miners are younger, with an average age of 32. By and large, they
are better-educated, through experience in Vietnam or college training, than
their fathers.

Mr. Trumka, not a Vietnam veteran himself, chose as his vice presidential
candidate Cecil E. Roberts, 36, who was a sergeant in the Americal Division in
Vietnam and is a college graduate. Mr.  Roberts is regarded as the union's
leading orator. He is vice president of District 17, the union's largest
constituency, which has its headquarters here.

Mr. Trumka was elected to Phi Beta Kappa at Pennsylvania State University. His
law degree is from Villanova. He is of Italian and Polish ancestry; his father
and one grandfather also worked in the mines. At a friend's wedding he attended
Saturday night in southwestern Pennsylvania, he described the event as something
from the motion picture ''The Deer Hunter,'' a mixture of beer, polkas and
sincerity.

Whatever Mr. Trumka's advantages as a credible rank-and-file challenger,
questions are being asked about the management of the Church campaign. Mr.
Church's $200,000 war chest has been raised, for the most part, from union
leaders outside the U.M.W. Much of it has been spent on unproductive
fund-raising appeals.

The Church campaign is so short of cash that the union president may be forced
to accept Mr. Trumka's challenge to a televised debate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sam M. Church Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TO THOSE WHO READ BOOK DEDICATIONS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2186 words


Years ago Arthur Hailey dedicated an original television play to his producer,
but he had sworn off dedications by the time he began writing books. ''I don't
believe in them,'' he said recently. ''I always told my wife that dedicating a
book is like making love in public.''

But Mr. Hailey, author of ''Hotel,'' ''Wheels'' and a half-dozen other big
sellers, is one of the few naysayers. While book publishing has undergone
convulsive changes in recent years, most authors still dedicate their literary
efforts to spouses, relatives and friends.

There are exceptions, of course. James Herriot dedicated ''All Things Wise and
Wonderful'' to his dogs, Hector and Dan. And years earlier, Zane Grey, who
practiced dentistry in Manhattan before turning to fiction, dedicated ''Western
Pacific'' to ''a single strand of iron wire.''

But Mr. Herriot is a veterinarian, and Grey, who wrote 80 or more books, could
afford to look outside his immediate circle of family and friends. By contrast,
few authors write more than a couple of books, so it is hardly surprising that
most dedicate them to the people closest to them.

Sometimes More Than Once

And even prolific authors sometimes feel the need to express their appreciation
more than once. Joyce Carol Oates, for example, has dedicated at least two books
to her husband, ''Them'' and ''The Assassins.'' And Irving Wallace, also
prolific, has dedicated most of his books to his wife, children or parents.

''But twice I had other dedications,'' said Mr. Wallace. '' 'The Plot' is
dedicated 'To Three Loves Plus One. Sylvia, David, Amy and Paris.' And 'The
Seven Minutes' is dedicated 'To Fanny, Constance, Molly, who made it possible,
and to Sylvia, David, Amy, who approved.'' The first three women, Mr. Wallace
explained, are not rivals for his affection, but Fanny Hill, Constance Chatterly
and Molly Bloom, leading characters from three once-banned novels that figure
prominently in Mr. Wallace's novel about the publication of a 1930's
pornographic classic that results in the arrest of a Los Angeles bookseller in
the 1960's.

Dedications seem little affected by political or ideological distinctions. Years
ago John F. Kennedy dedicated ''Profiles in Courage'' to his wife, and this year
Henry A. Kissinger dedicated ''Years of Upheaval'' to his wife. (Mr. Kissinger's
''White House Years,'' published in 1979, is dedicated to Nelson A.
Rockefeller.) Even couples who write together dedicate together: Joan Didion
dedicated ''Play It as It Lays'' to her husband, John Gregory Dunne, and he in
turn included his wife in the dedication to ''True Confessions.''

Changing Wives and Dedications

Because time and circumstance sometimes prompt second thoughts, some writers
reportedly have dedicated one book to one spouse and subsequent books to
subsequent spouses. A veteran editor said that one of her authors changed wives
- and dedications - between the hard-cover and paperback versions of the same
book. And a philandering author of a decade ago supposedly specialized in such
flowery dedications as ''To My Beloved'' or ''For My One and Only,'' each
sufficiently vague for the author to assure each of several women that the book
was dedicated to her alone.

Saul Bellow (''The Adventures of Augie March'') and William Styron (''Sophie's
Choice'') dedicated books to their fathers. J.D.  Salinger dedicated his only
novel (''The Catcher in the Rye'') to his mother, and Thornton Wilder dedicated
one of his earliest novels, ''The Bridge of San Luis Rey,'' to his mother, and
one of his last novels, ''The Eighth Day,'' to his sister. Norman Mailer also
dedicated his recent ''Pieces and Pontifications'' to his sister.  John Cheever
not only dedicated ''The Wapshot Chronicle'' to his mother with love, but also
added his ''best wishes to practically everybody else I know.'' Bette Bao Lord's
novel ''Spring Moon'' is dedicated to her husband, his and her parents and her
editor.

Heinrich Boll's latest novel, ''The Safety Net,'' is dedicated to his two sons,
half the number of sons that John le Carre dedicated ''Smiley's People'' to.
Steven King's ''Cujo,'' a best seller last year and newly published in
paperback, is dedicated to ''my brother, David, who held my hand crossing West
Broad Street, and who taught me how to make skyhooks out of old coathangers.''

Even a Mother-in-Law

Jack Higgins's new novel, ''Touch the Devil,'' is dedicated to Margaret Hewitt,
his mother-in-law. ''She's a nice old lady who kept asking why hadn't I
dedicated a book to her,'' Mr. Higgins explained during a recent visit to the
United States. Since Arthur Hailey wouldn't dedicate a book to his wife, Sheila,
she wrote her own book (''I Married a Best Seller'') and, according to Mr.
Hailey, dedicated it thus: ''To my husband, Arthur Hailey, in the faint hope
that this will shame him into dedicating a book to me. P.S. I'm not holding my
breath.''

Years ago some publishing houses frowned on authors' dedicating books to
editors. Alfred Harcourt, for example, wouldn't allow the following dedication
by Jack Kerouac: Since Kindness be the Venusstar of Friendship, and that Bright
Star Doth light the Lowest Hill, may Praise be Worthy of the Highest Good. To my
Editor, Mentor and Friend Robert Giroux.

But Ernest Hemingway dedicated his ''The Old Man and the Sea'' to Charles
Scribner, his publisher, and Maxwell Perkins, his editor.  John Steinbeck
dedicated ''Travels With Charley'' to Harold Guinzburg, founder of the Viking
Press, and both Steinbeck (in ''East of Eden'') and Saul Bellow (in ''Herzog'')
dedicated books to Pat Covici, a longtime Viking editor. Carlos Baker, editor of
last year's ''Ernest Hemingway: Selected Letters,'' dedicated that book to
Charles Scribner Jr., ''publisher, editor, friend.'' John Updike dedicated
''Month of Sundays'' to Judith Jones, an editor at Alfred A. Knopf, and Joyce
Carol Oates dedicated her best-selling ''Bellefleur'' to the late Henry Robbins,
her editor at E.P. Dutton.

Unofficial Champion

The unofficial champion of book dedications may well be William Shawn, editor of
The New Yorker. His name does not appear in the magazine, but it apppears in the
dedications of at least 39 books beginning with S.N. Behrman's ''Duveen'' in
1952, right up to Jervis Anderson's ''This Was Harlem,'' 30 years later. In the
interim, J.D.  Salinger, Lillian Ross, John Updike, John McPhee, Ved Mehta and
E.B.  White all dedicated books to Mr. Shawn, while Whitney Balliett, Thomas
Whiteside, Joseph Wechsberg and Mollie Panter-Downes each dedicated two books to
Mr. Shawn. ''Naturally, each time a writer compliments me in this way I feel
honored,'' Mr. Shawn said.

A number of books have been dedicated to literary agents. Bernard Malamud's new
novel, ''God's Grace,'' is dedicated to the late Diarmuid Russell, a founder of
the Russell & Volkening literary agency, and to Mr. Russell's widow, Rose. Ken
Follett dedicated ''Triple'' to Al Zuckerman. Andrew Greeley dedicated ''The
Cardinal Sins'' to the late Hilda Lindley. And Norman Mailer remembered Scott
Meredith in dedications for ''The Executioner's Song'' and ''An American
Dream.'' Mr. Mailer's ''Why Are We in Vietnam?,'' recently reprinted in trade
paperback, is dedicated to five friends, including Norman Podhoretz, the editor,
Cy Rembar, the literary lawyer, and Jose Torres, the boxer.

Most authors complain about lack of publicity for their books, but Mickey
Spillane dedicated ''The Girl Hunters'' to Elliott Graham, former publicity
director of E.P. Dutton.

Outliving the Author

Some dedications have outlived their authors. Thomas McCormack, president of St.
Martin's Press, remembers a book dedicated to the sheriff who threw the author
in jail, thereby giving him time to write. Jack Geoghegan, who recently retired
from William Morrow & Company, said, ''I can't remember the author, but I
remember reading something like, 'This book is dedicated to my spouse without
whose constant interruption it would have been finished six months ago.' ''

Edward Weeks did it a little differently. In his recent ''Writers and Friends,''
the former editor of the Atlantic wrote: ''A writer at work is difficult to live
with, absentmindedly leaving mounds of paper in room after room, forever
misplacing his glasses case, or demanding an audience while he reads aloud
passages that defy him.  Phoebe-Lou Adams, whom I married after the death of my
first wife, has sustained me in the writing of three books since our wedding in
1971. She deserves the dedication of this one, in words she never failed to
respond to: 'Phoebe, are you there?' ''

In his book ''The Literary Life and Other Curiosities,'' Robert Hendrickson
notes that authors rarely if ever dedicate their books in order to flatter
someone in a brazen appeal for patronage, as Horace, Virgil and Cicero did. But
just in case such appeals might work, Mr.  Hendrickson dedicated his book ''To
Their Grace, the Exxon Corporation.''

And to Others in the Trade

Many books have been dedicated to other writers. Henry Miller's ''Black Spring''
was dedicated to Anais Nin. Sinclair Lewis dedicated ''Elmer Gantry'' to H.L.
Mencken. C.S. Lewis dedicated ''The Screwtape Letters'' to J.R.R. Tolkien.
Richard Kim's novel ''The Martyred'' is dedicated to Albert Camus. Walker Percy
dedicated ''Love Among the Ruins'' to Shelby Foote, the novelist, Civil War
historian and fellow Mississippian. The mystery writer John Gardner, heir to the
James Bond books, dedicated ''License Renewed,'' the first of his books on the
superhero 007, ''In memory of Ian Lancaster Fleming.'' Morris Philipson,
director of the University of Chicago Press, dedicated his novel ''The Wallpaper
Fox'' to Iris Murdoch.  When he presented her with the book, Miss Murdoch, who
was at that time the author of 22 books, read the dedication and said, ''It's so
nice to see one's name in print.''

Even movie directors have not been overlooked. Carlos Fuentes's recent ''Distant
Relations'' is dedicated to the Spanish-born motion-picture director Luis
Bunuel. Even as far back as 35 years ago, Ireland's feisty Liam O'Flaherty
dedicated ''Famine'' to John Ford, who made a movie of O'Flaherty's ''The
Informer.''

William F. Buckley Jr. dedicated his recent novel, ''Marco Polo, If You Can,''
to Hugh Kenner, the literary critic. ''I've known him for a long time,'' said
Mr. Buckley. ''I was the best man at his wedding. I have tremendous respect for
him.'' Mr. Kenner, pleased by the gesture, said it was the first novel dedicated
to him, although two collections of essays have been dedicated to him, including
a recent collection by the critic Guy Davenport. Meanwhile, D. Keith Mano's
recent novel, ''Take Five,'' is dedicated to Mr. Buckley, and Mr. Buckley's son
Christopher dedicated his recent ''Steaming to Bamboola,'' an account of life on
a tramp steamer, to the late John Lennon, ''son of a merchant seaman.''

Sometimes It's Initials Only

On the assumption that it would be superfluous to spell out the obvious, it is
simply understood that the dedication ''For Delmore and Philip'' in William
Barrett's recent ''The Truants'' means Delmore Schwartz, the late poet, and
Philip Rahv, late founder and co-editor of the Partisan Review. Initials,
however, pose a somewhat tougher problem for the reader, as, for example, Graham
Greene's dedication of ''The Heart of the Matter'' to ''V.G., L.C.G. & F.C.G.''

Some dedications tend to be sweeping, as for example in James Clavell's ''Noble
House,'' a novel about Hong Kong, which is dedicated thus: ''I would like to
offer this work as a tribute to her Britannic Majesty, Elizabeth II, to the
people of Her Crown Colony of Hong Kong - and perdition to their enemies.'' The
coming novel ''Sassafrass, Cypress & Indigo'' by Ntozake Shange is dedicated
''to all women in struggle.''

Some dedications are apparently intended to be understood only after reading the
book. Thus, John Toland's recent ''Infamy: Pearl Harbor and Its Aftermath'' is
dedicated ''To the victims of Pearl Harbor.'' The book contends that the
Administration of Franklin D.  Roosevelt knew in advance about plans for the
Japanese attack on the American naval base on Hawaii on Dec. 7, 1941.

Perhaps the last word in dedications belongs to Dwight Macdonald, who edited
''Parodies,'' a volume published in 1960. In it he wrote: ''To my dear sons
Michael and Nicholas without whose school bills this anthology would not have
been made.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dwight Macdonald photo of James Herriot

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 7, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
River Plunge Kills Man, 36, and Son

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: JERSEY CITY, Sept. 6


A 36-year-old postal worker killed himself and his 3-year-old son when he drove
his car off a boat dock under construction next to Liberty State Park here, the
police said today.

Detective Thomas Franklin said the man, Osvaldo Monserrate Sr., drove his car
off the dock and into the Hudson River at 10:55 P.M.  Sunday. The deaths have
been labeled by the police as the result of a suicide-homicide.

According to Detective Franklin, witnesses said that Mr. Monserrate started the
parked car, turned on the headlights and deliberately drove through a barricade
and into the water. Mr. Monserrate had his son, Osvaldo Monserrate Jr., in the
car with him. Both bodies were recovered from the water by police divers.

Mr. Monserrate had been under treatment for an undisclosed permanent disability
since his tour of duty with the Army ended in Vietnam, where he was awarded
several medals, the police said.

Both of the victims lived in Jersey City, but the boy lived with his mother, who
was estranged from the father, Detective Franklin said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 7, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GROUPS AIM TO COUNTER BOOK BANS

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 741 words


There has been a threefold increase in attempts at book censorship in the
nation's libraries in the last two years, according to publishing, bookselling,
librarian and authors' organizations that have been monitoring such attempts all
over the United States.

The American Library Association, a national organization of librarians that is
coordinating censorship data for a number of groups, said that about 300 such
incidents were reported in 1980, but last year more than 900 cases came to its
attention and this year the number of cases of censorship was expected to come
close to 1,000. The great majority of these incidents involve school and public
libraries pressured to remove books from library shelves or to place them on
restricted lists.

In addition to the booksellers and librarian associations, monitoring of
censorship is conducted by the Authors League, the American Society of
Journalists and Authors, P.E.N., the Media Coalition and People for the American
Way.

'Searching for Something Unreal'

To alert people about the need to preserve ''freedom to read,'' a national
coalition has designated this week as Banned Books Week. The aim is to encourage
resistance by communities against efforts to suppress books. The coalition
includes the American Booksellers Association, the American Library Association
and the National Association of College Stores.

Judith P. Krug, director of the office of intellectual freedom of the American
Library Association, said: ''An atmosphere conducive to censorship hovers over
the country. The trouble is not simply the present Administration's tolerance of
such censorial groups as the Moral Majority - it's more than just a
cause-and-effect thing.  Rather, I really believe these censors are searching
for something unreal - the good old days. It's 'Alice in Wonderland' thinking.

''Last year the Moral Majority sent out letters signed by its leader, Jerry
Falwell, 'suggesting' that certain books might be inappropriate for some
students to check out of libraries. They claim this isn't censorship -but the
climate they create surely encourages vigilantism.''

A Poster Promoted

Shortly after the Falwell letter, plus others by Moral Majority chapters in
North Carolina and Washington, many librarians reported receiving what they
viewed as coordinated protests against such books as ''Our Bodies, Ourselves,''
by the Boston Women's Health Collective, ''The Learning Tree'' by Gordon Parks,
''Kiss Daddy Goodbye'' by Thomas Altman, ''Forever'' by Judy Blume, and J.D.
Salinger's ''Catcher in the Rye,'' a longtime target of censors.'

The anticensorship coalition is encouraging every librarian and bookseller to
display a poster that, in bold red letters, reads: ''CAUTION! ... Some People
Consider These Books Dangerous ...  DANGEROUS.''

A major feature of Banned Books Week is a program on the Public Broadcasting
Service called ''Books Under Fire,'' a half-hour show with Barbara Jordan. It
will show various cases of censorship, including the banning of ''365 Days'' by
Dr. Ronald J. Glasser, by a school board in Woodlands, Me. The book describes
some of the horrors of the Vietnam War in the language of the wounded in an
American hospital. .

Sellers Compile List

The American Booksellers Association has compiled a list of the books that have
come under attack in the last few years as ''dangerous'' to read and suggests
that they can be placed below the Banned Books poster.

The list of modern and ancient classics, and the reasons why they were
condemned, includes: ''The Divine Comedy'' by Alighieri Dante (obscene,
political and pornographic); ''An American Tragedy'' by Theodore Dreiser
(obscene); ''The Great Gatsby'' by F. Scott Fitzgerald (objectionable language);
''The Odyssey'' by Homer (too political); ''Brave New World'' by Aldous Huxley
(political, pornographic, religious); ''The Rights of Man'' (political); ''The
Age of Reason'' (religious) by Thomas Paine; ''Charlotte's Web'' and ''Stuart
Little'' by E.B. White (both inappropriate for young readers); ''Leaves of
Grass'' by Walt Whitman (objectionable language).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 7, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A MAN WHO CARED TOO MUCH

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BLUMSTEIN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1876 words


On Friday night, Aug. 20 - two months after he had been elected chairman of the
New York Cotton Exchange and two weeks before his wedding date - Philip Leland
Hehmeyer went home to his luxurious apartment on Manhattan's East Side, bolted
the door and abruptly ended his life with the blast of a shotgun.

Why did a man at the peak of his professional life and personal life feel so
desperate that he would turn the gun he used to hunt geese on himself? The
police, in their initial evaluation, said Mr.  Hehmeyer was apparently
distraught over losing money in the stock market during the last week of his
life.

But the family, fiancee and friends of Mr. Hehmeyer say he was a much more
complicated person, and the reasons for his death are no doubt as tangled. Their
belief is that he cared too much: he cared too much about the state of the
economy, he cared too much about cotton, and he cared too much about his own
image. Then, days before his death, he hinted that he did not have the strength
to care anymore.

Traders are not supposed to care much at all. Those who spend their days
shouting bids in the electric atmosphere of the New York Cotton Exchange say
only one thing matters: the bottom line at the end of the day. And when they do
not win, they try to be philosophical; they say that traders only borrow money,
and some just get to keep it longer than others.

A Frenetic Week

Mr. Hehmeyer rolled up his final losses during the week of Aug. 16, the
spectacular Wall Street week during which the stock market suddenly did an
about-face and the Dow Jones industrial average soared 81 points.

Mr. Hehmeyer, according to his 27-year-old brother, Christopher, lost almost
$64,000 in cotton trading on Monday morning, but was able to cover it. He made
some money on gold Thursday, but on Friday he lost $58,803.75 on Standard &
Poor's stock index futures. The police say they believe he shot himself that
night.

Why was Mr. Hehmeyer, a successful trader for a decade, losing money? His
brother wonders whether he lost that detached attitude a trader needs.

''The most successful traders are the discliplined traders,'' said Christopher
Hehmeyer, a broker and trader on the Chicago Board of Trade. ''They cut a loss;
they realize when they're wrong. You don't let your ego get to it and say 'I'm
right, the market's wrong.' When you're wrong, you're wrong, and you get out.''

Opposing Views on Market

Mr. Hehmeyer, he said, may have believed that the stock market should be falling
when it was rising and that cotton should be rising when it was falling.

That the economy was troubled was clear to Mr. Hehmeyer. Before his death, he
had been reading ''Paper Money'' - Adam Smith's book about preserving the worth
of currency -for the third time. Fascinated by Peter Pan, he had his
''Tinkerbell theory'' on the stock market.

''The play wouldn't go on unless everyone clapped,'' said Susan McCadden Carr,
25, his fiancee since Christmas. ''He saw everyone starting to trade because
they had to believe.''

His convictions of doom firmed even further when, at the end of his last week,
the Mexican economy went into a tailspin and the value of the peso plummeted.

Larger Implications

''With the peso thing, he was worried about the structure of the banking
system,'' said James P. Reichert, his assistant on the trading floor. ''He would
get very upset with people not realizing the implications of something that
important.''

Mr. Hehmeyer may also have been too emotionally involved with cotton, viewing it
as something to treasure rather than as something merely to trade. He grew up in
Memphis, a cotton center, and knew all the people in every aspect of the
business. His father, Walter Hehmeyer, now of Oxford, Miss., spent two decades
with the National Cotton Council. Miss Carr's father is a prominent cotton
grower in Clarksdale, Miss. Even a boat he once owned was named ''High Cotton.''

''He was a perpetual bull in cotton,'' said W. Thorpe McKenzie, a close friend
and former roommate. However, the price of cotton has been sliding almost
steadily since December 1980. ''He was fighting the markets,'' Mr. McKenzie
said. ''He always liked the rally.''

''He would constantly go in and buy the market,'' Christopher Hehmeyer said.
''He would lose, and he would do it again. It's one of the big things that
contributed to his depression. It's almost as if every morning he was getting up
and saying, 'I have to go down there and lose money again.' ''

'Cotton Has Sunk'

''He didn't want cotton to sink,'' Miss Carr said. But recently she found a
piece of paper in their apartment with words she never thought she would see:
''Cotton has sunk.''

Trading losses could not have come at a worse time for Mr.  Hehmeyer. Although
the chairman does not run the Cotton Exchange on a day-to-day basis, his
election to the post, overseeing the exchange, which trades futures in cotton,
orange juice and propane gas, was a proud moment for him. He did not sleep the
night before the vote and came home gloating about his margin of victory, Miss
Carr recalled.  He was said to be the youngest cotton exchange chairman in
recent memory.

But the victory led Mr. Hehmeyer to exert increased pressure on himself. ''He
was keenly feeling a need to be successful in the eyes of his peers on the
floor,'' Mr. McKenzie said. ''As the chairman of the exchange, there was a
geometrically higher level of pressure on him to be successful in his trades.''

Mr. Hehmeyer left no suicide note, but did scrawl a cryptic note on a blackboard
in his apartment: ''Someone had to do it. Self-awareness is silly.''

Set High Standards

No one will ever know his exact meaning. But to Miss Carr, he was trying to say
that he knew it was silly, yet he was embarrassed that he was not living up to
the high standards he had set for himself.

Looking back at Mr. Hehmeyer's upbringing, it is not surprising that he felt a
need to succeed. Born Jan. 3, 1945, he grew up as an only child for 10 years,
the son of intellectuals who met while serving in Washington as aides to Senator
Harry S. Truman. His grades at East High School, from which he graduated in
1963, were uneven, but he was an acolyte at church and excelled at baseball,
thriving on the action at second base. Christopher Hehmeyer still laughs about
the day his brother hit a ball through the church window.

Walter Hehmeyer, who served as general manager of the Memphis Symphony Orchestra
after leaving the National Cotton Council, made clear the high expectations he
had for his two children. When young Philip passed the presidency of his high
school fraternity to a friend who needed the honor to get into a favorite
college, he was strongly reprimanded at home, Christopher Hehmeyer recalled.

In February 1966, halfway through the University of the South in Sewanee, Tenn.,
Mr. Hehmeyer decided that enlisting in the Army would give him more control over
his destiny than the local draft board. He wound up at Fort Devens, Mass., and
then spent nine months in Quinhon in Vietnam, far from the front lines.

Three years later, Mr. Hehmeyer returned to Sewanee, and graduated with an
English degree in 1970. He worked three months as a newspaper reporter in
Memphis, and then captained his sailboat from New York to St. Thomas, V.I. He
stayed a year to manage a bar.

Back to Cotton

But cotton was his calling. Mr. Hehmeyer moved to New York to represent a
Memphis cotton company owned by the father of a college friend. Like most
traders, he started as a clerk on the New York Cotton Exchange. A couple of
years later, he bought a seat. Then the price of cotton began climbing as the
price of oil-derived polyester skyrocketed following the 1973 oil embargo. Mr.
Hehmeyer began making money.

''He was a young guy coming into a old man's game,'' Mr. McKenzie said. ''It was
a hell of a time to be a young guy in commodities in New York.''

On the floor of the exchange, Mr. Hehmeyer was respected for his ''very quick,
acute brain,'' said Frank Knell, a former partner.  ''The milliseconds between
your brain working and your voice working mean making money or losing money.
There's a lot of snap judgment.''

The pressure on Mr. Hehmeyer grew in 1979 when he split from Mr.  Knell and his
other partner, Donald B. Conlin. Mr. Knell and Mr.  Conlin had been indicted on
charges of participating in a plan to create millions of dollars in fraudulent
tax losses by manipulating the market for crude-oil futures. Mr. Hehmeyer kept
the business going until the two were cleared, then decided he was good enough
to be on his own.

Traded for Others

Mr. Hehmeyer primarily traded for his own account but also served as a
''broker's broker,'' executing orders for some of the big investment houses. In
addition, he had traded for seven or eight private investors, including Mr.
Reichert's mother, but stopped about a year ago because the market was depressed
and relatively inactive, said Mr. Reichert, his assistant.

Mr. Hehmeyer always admired winners. An avid and talented golfer, he went to the
Masters championships every year in Augusta, Ga. When Jack Nicklaus won for the
fifth time in 1975, he framed the newspaper page containing accounts of the
tournament.

Mr. Hehmeyer also liked to live well. He owned an antique Jaguar, went tarpon
fishing off Florida and belonged to both a country club on Long Island and a
health club in New York - frequenting them often while worrying that he smoked
too many Winstons. He liked his liquor, drinking Dom Perignon champagne when the
market was good.  Otherwise, he enjoyed bullshots - a vodka and beef broth
combination.

Those closest to him say they believe Mr. Hehmeyer's estate will eventually be
solvent, although it is difficult to say because much of his money is tied up:
He owned fine paintings that were on loan to museums and had venture capital
invested in new businesses.

This summer had been odd for those close to Mr. Hehmeyer. They say he was
looking forward to his wedding to Miss Carr, but in retrospect, there were hints
that he was upset.

At one point, Miss Carr said, he told her that he was having a ''midlife
crisis'' and did not know if he was ''emotionally capable'' of continuing as a
trader. He talked about becoming a consultant.  Then, over dinner at a Cuban
restaurant two months ago, Mr. Hehmeyer told Miss Carr that suicide might be
''courageous.'' She told him it would be selfish, and he agreed that he could
never hurt his parents that way.

Miss Carr last saw Mr. Hehmeyer on Thursday, Aug. 19, the day before he died. He
put her in a taxi for the airport and then stood on the curb, continuing to wave
peacefully even as the car moved far down the street.

A week later, he was buried next to his grandparents in Caldwell, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Philip Hehmeyer

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PEREZ DE CUELLAR CONCEDES THE U.N. IS BEING IGNORED

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 7


In an unusually candid report on the state of the United Nations, Secretary
General Javier Perez de Cuellar acknowledged today that the organization was
being largely defied or ignored by many nations. He called for measures,
including a special Security Council meeting, to strengthen the organization.

The first yearly account by Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who became Secretary General
on Jan. 1, was a sharp break with the reports of Kurt Waldheim and other United
Nations leaders, who typically despaired of the state of the world but stressed
United Nations achievements. The new Secretary General's blunt appraisal
reflected the crisis that longtime officials here believe has overtaken their
organization.

The past nine months have been a period of almost unrelieved failure for the
United Nations in its major task, preventing or halting war. Mr. Perez de
Cuellar, a Peruvian, made an intensive effort to mediate the dispute between
Argentina and Britain over the Falkland Islands and did not succeed. The Council
repeatedly and unanimously demanded a cease-fire in Lebanon, called on Israel to
withdraw its troops and insisted on inserting United Nations observers between
Israeli forces and those of the Palestine Liberation Organization. All these
demands were rebuffed.

Other Recent Failures Listed

The Secretary General listed other examples of ''an alarming succession of
international crises'' in which ''the United Nations has been unable to play as
effective and decisive a role as the Charter envisaged.'' Among them are the
refusal of the Soviet Union to withdraw its 100,000 troops from Afghanistan; the
failure of Vietnam to remove its forces from Cambodia; the turbulence in
Nicaragua, El Salvador and Honduras, and the war between Iraq and Iran.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar said that the only ''signs of a possibility of a solution''
were in South-West Africa, where the United Nations seeks to create an
independent Namibia from the territory now ruled by South Africa. The Secretary
General did not mention that the central role here is being played by the United
States, negotiating secretly with Angola and South Africa to remove Cuban troops
from Angola.

Even if Namibia proves an ''exception to the general rule,'' Mr.  Perez de
Cuellar said: ''We are perilously near to a new international anarchy. I believe
we are at present embarked on an exceedingly dangerous course, one symptom of
which is the crisis in the multinational approach to international affairs and
the concommitant erosion of the authority and status of world and regional
intergovernmental institutions.''

He singled out the 15-member Council, which ''often finds itself unable to take
decisive action to resolve conflicts, and its resolutions are increasingly
defied or ignored by those who feel themselves strong enough to do so.''

''Too frequently, the Council seems powerless to generate the support and
influence to insure that its decisions are respected, even when they are
unanimous,'' he said. ''Debate without effective action erodes the credibility
of the organization.''

Rivalry Is a Problem

The Secretary General named no names but observed that the United Nations'
attempt at collective security assumes ''a working relationship among the five
permanent members,'' the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and
France.

The world, however, is split by superpower rivalry, Mr. Perez de Cuellar said in
an interview. ''My role is to dilute this polarization, which goes against the
principles of the U.N.,'' he said. He admitted that ''what I am saying is not
realistic'' politically, but he added: ''I have to be a kind of Pope of my
religion. I cannot concede in matters of faith.''

Pointing to a bound copy of the United Nations Charter, which prohibits force to
settle disputes, he said, ''This book is my religion.''

In his report, the Secretary General complained that peacekeeping in Lebanon
broke down in part because ''member states in a position to bring influence to
bear'' did not do so. This appeared to be a criticism of the United States for
not restraining Israel, but Mr.  Perez de Cuellar said later that other nations
and his own office had influence over the Palestine Liberation Organization and
Syria.

Recommendation to Council

Mr. Perez de Cuellar's report urged the Council to bolster its peacekeeping
edicts with ''explicit guarantees for collective or individual supportive
action.'' He meant that members should agree to impose some form of sanction
against nations that defy it. Until now, the United States has been unwilling to
penalize Israel and, with France and Britain, has declined to punish South
Africa with more than an arms embargo. The Soviet Union would veto any attempt
to impose sanctions on it or its allies.

Among his specific remedies, the Secretary General urged the Council to act on
crises before they boil over and not wait until a nation formally brings a
complaint. He promised to use his own authority to call Council meetings at an
earlier stage and said he would develop systematic fact-finding to pinpoint
potential conflicts.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar is trying to defuse the 16-year-old territorial quarrel
between Venezuela and Guyana. Caracas claims 53,000 square miles of Guyana,
five-eighths of its land. Today, the Secretary General saw Foreign Minister Jose
Alberto Zambrano of Venezuela. He met earlier this month with Guyana's delegate
to the United Nations, Noel Sinclair.

The Secretary General urged the Council to meet ''at the highest possible
level'' to examine ways of making its will felt. Later, Mr.  Perez de Cuellar
said he thought that either foreign ministers or heads of government should
consult.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Javier Perez de Cuellar

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 898 words


International
Israel has begun to press Lebanon to move toward negotiating a formal peace
treaty to help guarantee the security of its northern border.  Otherwise, it is
believed, Israel will insist that southern Lebanon be controlled by a
pro-Israeli Christian militia, possibly supported by an Israeli military
presence, at least in the form of periodic patrols. (Page A1, Column 6.)
Philip C. Habib was honored with the Medal of Freedom. President Reagan
presented the nation's highest civilian honor to his special Middle East envoy
for ''skillful diplomacy'' in bringing about a cease-fire in Lebanon and ending
the siege of Beirut. (A10:4-6.)
The U.N. is being largely defied or ignored by many nations, according to an
unusually candid report by Javier Perez de Cuellar, who became Secretary General
eight months ago. He called for urgent measures, including a special Security
Council session, to strengthen the organization. (A1:4.)
Gunmen holding the Polish Embassy in Bern have released all but five of their 13
hostages and extended by 48 hours their deadline for Poland's Government to lift
martial law, Swiss officials reported.  (A3:4-6.)
Martina Navratilova was eliminated in the quarterfinals of the United States
Open tennis championships by her doubles partner, Pam Shriver. The 1-6, 7-6, 6-2
defeat was only the top-seeded player's second in 70 matches this year and ended
her 41-match winning streak. (A1:2-3.)
National
A furlough was averted in the Treasury Department because of pressure by the
Democratic chairmen of two House committees and pleas by Treasury Secretary
Donald T. Regan. As a result, the Republican leaders of two Senate committees
reversed themselves and approved a transfer of funds that averted the layoff of
19,000 employees of the Internal Revenue Service. (A1:1.)
Opposition to military spending is increasing, according to members of Congress
returning from the late summer recess. They said they had found their
constituents more resistant than previously to large increases in the Pentagon's
budget while they appeared to be mildly encouraged by recent economic news.
(A1:1-2.)
George C. Wallace took a strong lead in the Democratic primary for Governor of
Alabama, but the former Governor appeared headed for a Sept. 28 runoff against
one of his two leading opponents. (A18:3-5.)
Record spending for a House seat occurred in a Republican primary in southern
California, where $2.7 million was spent by 18 candidates.  Costs for the
general election are still to come. Johnnie R. Crean, a 33-year-old businessman,
won the nomination by 92 votes, or 16.5 percent of 83,025 cast. He also won a
reputation for shoddy campaign practices. (A18:3-6.)
Segregation of blacks increased in the Northeast from 1968 to 1980 while it
declined in all other regions of the country, according to a report by the Joint
Center for Political Studies. (A14:2-4.)
A Lutheran-Episcopalian unity move is in prospect. Lutherans in the United
States and Canada plan to establish communion fellowship with Episcopalians even
though they do not agree fully on doctrine.  (A14:1.)
Metropolitan
An auxiliary subway patrol program that has been experimental is being made
permanent, Mayor Koch announced. He said that the number of auxiliary police
officers who patrol the stations had grown from 12 in January to 1,500 today.
William L. McKechnie, president of the transit patrolmen's union, asserted that
the unpaid volunteers' lack of training and equipment jeopardized the public
safety. The volunteers receive 50 hours of training. (A1:5.)
Charges against Anthony N. LaBorde in the Brink's armored-car robbery last Oct.
20 are likely to be dropped. The Rockland County District Attorney moved to drop
all charges against Mr. LaBorde in the robbery in which two police officers and
a guard were killed. In court papers, the prosecutor said that three of six
witnesses had failed to pick the defendant out of a lineup and that the other
witnesses now had doubts about their identification of Mr. LaBorde, a former
member of the Black Panthers. (B1:5-6.)
A Buffalo newspaper will close Sept. 19, the Cowles Media Company, owner of The
Courier-Express, announced. The company said it had lost more than $25 million
in the three years since it bought the morning newspaper and saw no likelihood
of a turnaround. The closing will leave Buffalo, New York State's second-largest
city, with only one newspaper, The Evening News. (B2:2-4.)
The gubernatorial campaign heated in New York State. On the Democratic side,
Lieut. Gov. Mario Cuomo vowed that taxes would not increase if he became
Governor while they would have to rise if Mayor Koch kept his pledges for new
state aid. On the Republican side, Paul J. Curran charged that Lewis E. Lehrman
had ''lied or played games with the facts.'' (B5:5-6.)
The Vietnam War debate is revived in a clash of viewpoints in an upstate
Democratic Congressional primary. At odds over policy in Central America and the
proposed nuclear freeze are Representative Samuel S. Stratton, an unrepentant
hawk on Vietnam, and John G. Dow, a former Representative and early dove.
(B1:5-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IT'S HAWK VERSUS DOVE IN STRATON-DOW BATTLE

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1358 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Sept. 3


There is a clash of ideas going on here in the Democratic Congressional primary
that harks back to the Vietnam War, encompasses El Salvador and then dwells on
the present nuclear-freeze debate.

The two protagonists, Representative Samuel S. Stratton, an unrepentant hawk on
Vietnam and the most influential member of the House Armed Services Committee,
and his challenger, John G. Dow, a former Congressman who was one of the
earliest doves, debate on local television and radio with repartee like this:

Mr. Dow: ''He is such an extremist in promoting the belligerence between the
United States and Russia that if it continues I think we're all going to be
blown to bits.''

Mr. Stratton: ''The only thing I'm trying to do is make sure we in the United
States have a defense to deter the massive buildup of the Soviet Union. It is
the most extreme buildup. It outpasses the buildup of Hitler in the early
30's.''

Mr. Stratton, who is seeking a 13th term and is considered one of the most
invincible elected officials of the New York Democratic Party, views the
challenge with a mixture of exasperation and resignation.

''I've had primaries almost every year,'' he said. ''They figure I'm the major
obstacle to peace in the United States.'' While it is clear that Mr. Dow's race
is the longest of long shots because of a relative lack of financing, the
contest pits two men against each other with absolutely firm, diametrically
opposed views on defense and foreign policy.They are both spirited in their
arguments and vigorous. Mr. Stratton, 65 years old, is a jogger and swimmer; Mr.
Dow, 77, often campaigns 12 hours or more a day.

Both men are intrigued to see the impact of the nuclear-freeze movement at the
polls.  ''I think it is bigger than the anti-Vietnam, antidefense movements in
the past because it has the churches in it, including the Roman Catholic
Church,'' Mr. Stratton said. ''But I don't think it is as big as the exponents
suggest. You don't have someone coming up and saying, 'Get me the nuclear
freeze.' They say, 'Get me a job.' ''

Mr. Dow is not unaware of the economy as a factor at the polls, but rather than
treat the nuclear freeze and unemployment as mutually exclusive, he ties them
together.

''If we could cut the costs down on defense or get an agreement with the
Russians, it would make infinite relief to the economy,'' he said. He believes a
nuclear freeze will have considerable weight at the polls in November. ''It
touches everyone,'' he said.

The new 23d District drawn in the reapportionment process is much the same as
Mr. Stratton's old one. An urban-rural mix, it is anchored by the city of
Albany, takes in all of Albany and Schenectady Counties, the city of Amsterdam
in Montgomery County, and as a new element, adds the city of Troy. Economically,
the residents of the rolling countryside around Albany are not as pinched as
those in the western part of the state, where unemployment has climbed well
above the national average.

Defense-Related Jobs

Since so much of the employment here, outside of the major employer, the state
government, is defense-related, and the widely known Mr. Stratton has been so
successful in maintaining a flow of Federal dollars for defense contracts, this
in many ways seems an implausible place for such a stark dialogue.

A radio debate the other day revealed the ideological chasm between the two.
''Since Vietnam the United States has had the belief that any people rebelling
against servitude are under a Communist plot from Moscow,'' said Mr. Dow in his
deep, slow voice. ''We have to appreciate that people at the grass roots in
Vietnam, El Salvador and the Philippines have some legitimate reason to revolt
against their oppressors just like our forefathers rebelled against George
III.''

Replied Mr. Stratton, who sat in the studio while Mr. Dow phoned in: ''It is
obvious now in retrospect that the North Vietnamese practice a form of Communist
oppression probably as severe as exists in the Soviet Union, perhaps more. They
have brought genocide to Laos, spattered yellow rain over the peoples of their
country.''

To which Mr. Dow rejoined: ''You speak of yellow rain. What about Agent Orange,
which we not only dropped on them but on our troops.  How about that, Sam?''

To which Mr. Stratton responded, a little impatiently: ''You know yellow rain is
a poisonous gas and Agent Orange is a defoliant. We weren't doing it to kill
anyone.''

Opposed 1965 Appropriation

Mr. Dow served in the House from 1965 to 1968, representing Rockland and Orange
Counties. He was defeated after two terms, in part due to his opposition to the
Vietnam War. He was one of six Congressmen, informally known as ''the group,''
to vote against the first appropriation for the war in 1965. He returned to
Congress in 1971 and lasted for one term in the predominantly Republican
district.

After his Congressional defeat, Mr. Dow worked as the director of the New York
State CETA program and became active in liberal foreign policy groups and
antinuclear organizations.

Mr. Dow's effort is hampered by a lack of money. He has raised only $10,000 -
much less than when he ran in the 60's. Liberal groups have ignored the race.

''You have to be hardheaded in this business,'' said Russell D.  Hemenway,
director of the Committee for an Effective Congress, which is supporting 60
Congressional candidates who support the nuclear freeze this fall but not Mr.
Dow.

A former Mayor of Schenectady who has been running for office since 1949, Mr.
Stratton has been on the Armed Services Committee since he went to Congress in
1958. So that he can concentrate on military affairs, it is his choice to have
only the one committee assignment.

He is third in seniority, but through his combativeness and the comparative
disinterest of the chairman, Representative Melvin Price, Democrat of Illinois,
and the second in seniority, Representative Charles E. Bennett, Democrat of
Florida, Mr. Stratton ends up as the dominant force. He is recognized by the
Pentagon, he says, as one Democrat who will speak up for it.

Guided Defense Measure

He shepherded this year's defense authorization bill - the largest ever -through
both the House and the conference committee and was a co-sponsor of President
Reagan's nuclear arms-reduction resolution, which defeated the nuclear-freeze
resolution by two votes. Mr.  Stratton says various defense-related
manufacturing plants in the area would together receive $1.6 billion from the
1983 defense authorization bill.

Mr. Stratton is vehement in his belief that a ''mutual and verifiable'' freeze
of nuclear weapons by the United States and Russia would leave this country in
an inferior position.

A vocal proponent of the MX missile, Mr. Stratton believes it is ''far more
accurate and has a larger yield than anything we have.'' Mr. Stratton, who looks
tanned and slim, says he is in good health, despite asthma, which he contracted
three years ago. He takes a bronchial dilator, Proventil, he said. The drug,
according to the Physicians Desk Reference, is a brand of albuterol and causes
tremor and nervousness in some patients. According to Mr. Stratton, the drug
causes the visible shaking of his hands.

When people know about his effort, reaction has been favorable, Mr. Dow says.
''I emphasize the nuclear issue because it applies to everyone,'' he told a
group the other night. ''I've been out on the street.  People tell me you've got
to emphasize jobs. But when I go out and say I'm running against Mr. Stratton
because he wants to elevate the arms race, I've hardly met anyone who has said
that ain't so.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of New York (page B5) photo of Samuel Stratton (page
B5) photo of John Dow (page B50

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS VIETNAM TAPING PUT OFF

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 365 words


CBS News has postponed ''Counting the Enemy in Vietnam,'' a program scheduled
for Sept. 15 that was intended as a follow-up to ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception,'' which encountered criticism after it ran in January.

Taping of the program, a one-hour panel discussion featuring opposing views on
the enemy's troop strength during the Vietnam War, had been planned for today.
The postponement came after one of the proposed panelists, Lieut. Gen. Daniel
Graham, notified CBS that he would not participate. Two other generals, William
C. Westmoreland and Phillip B. Davidson, have also notified CBS in the last week
that they would not appear.

The follow-up program was promised by Van Gordon Sauter, president of CBS News,
in a memorandum on July 15 that also acknowledged five violations of CBS News
practices in the preparation of the original documentary.

Planning for the program by CBS News has been hampered not only by the
unwillingness of several key figures to participate, but also by the likelihood
that General Westmoreland will soon file a libel suit against CBS. In the
January documentary, General Westmoreland, formerly commander of the United
States forces in Vietnam, was said to have headed a conspiracy to underreport
the size of enemy strength during the war.

Last week, General Westmoreland turned down a CBS request to appear on the
follow-up program because Mr. Sauter would not meet his conditions for
participation, including an apology for the way CBS portrayed him in the
documentary.

General Davidson, who had served as General Westmoreland's chief of intelligence
in Vietnam, asked to see a transcript of the introduction to the panel
discussion so that he would understand the program's context. He said that after
CBS News informed him that he could not see the transcipt, he declined to
appear.

General Graham, who has charged that he was unfairly portrayed in the January
documentary, said he mistrusted CBS. He also said that he declined to appear
after ''I found that legal action by General Westmoreland was really very much
under consideration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Doonesbury' Creator To Take a Long Leave

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 196 words

DATELINE: FAIRWAY, Kan., Sept. 8


Garry Trudeau, creator of ''Doonesbury,'' will take a leave of absence early
next year and temporarily cease production of his Pulitizer Prize-winning comic
strip in more than 700 newspapers, officials of the Universal Press Syndicate
said today.

''I need a breather,'' the 34-year-old comic strip artist told Universal Press
officials in a telephone conversation from his home in New York City.

John P. McMeel, president of Universal Press, said ''Doonesbury'' would be
suspended beginning next Jan. 2 and that Mr. Trudeau's leave of absence could
last up to 20 months.

''There are a few problems that need to be ironed out,'' Mr.  Trudeau said in
prepared statement. ''For almost 15 years, the main characters have been trapped
in a time warp and so find themselves carrying the colors and scars of two
separate generations. It was unfair to stretch their formative years to embrace
both Vietnam and preppy.''

Mr. Trudeau, who introduced the pencil-nosed Doonesbury and the other members of
the Walden Puddle Commune to 28 subscribers on Oct.  26, 1970, won the Pulitzer
Prize for editorial cartooning in 1975.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA IS FEARFUL OF A REBEL INVASION BACKED BY HONDURAS

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Sept. 7


On a wall-size operational map in an army briefing room, Nicaraguan military
commanders have marked the locations of nine guerrilla bases in Honduras, just
across the border from Nicaragua.

It is from these bases, the commanders say, that rightist military bands have
conducted sabotage attacks, mortar shellings and raids on Nicaraguan villages.

On two occasions recently, the Government says, light planes have crossed into
Nicaragua from Honduras. The planes were ''armed with bombs and rockets'' and in
one instance fired at gas storage tanks in the port of Corinto, according to
Envio, a monthly publication of the Central American Historical Institute, which
is part of the University of Central America here.

A Question of Timing

For many Nicaraguans, leaders, shopkeepers and peasants, it is becoming a
concern of when, not whether, the Hondurans will openly support the rightist
insurgents, crossing the border with tanks and air strikes. Daniel Ortega
Saavedra, the head of the Nicaraguan junta, said in a recent interview that the
guerrilllas ''would advance first and the Honduran Army would protect them from
the rear.''

In a conventional war with Honduras, it appears that the Nicaraguan forces would
be at a decided disadvantage.  John H. Buchanan, a retired United States Marine
Corps lieutenant colonel who recently spent a week with the Nicaraguan military,
said that he was ''not very impressed with'' the Nicaraguan Army and that, in
his opinion, Nicaragua is ''not a significant threat to its neighbors.''

Mr. Buchanan, who retired from the Marine Corps in 1979, is now with the Center
for Development Policy, a research and policy organization based in Washington
that has generally been sympathetic to the Sandinists.

Three Helicopters and Three Jets

The Nicaraguan Air Force consists of three helicopters and three old training
jets, according to Government officials and foreign diplomats. The country's
military transport planes are also old, and Mr. Ortega said that because of
mechanical failures there had been three crashes killing 47 soldiers in recent
months.

The Honduran Air Force, on the other hand, is the most potent in Central
America. It has at least 18 modern jets and about 20 helicopters, according to
Honduran military officers.

The Nicaraguans have sought to buy more advanced jets from the Soviet Union and
France, but a well-informed foreign diplomat here said last week that there were
no indications they would be coming.

Even if the Nicaraguans get the jets, they still lack pilots to fly them or a
fuel system capable of keeping them in the air, according to Mr. Buchanan, who
flew 265 combat missions in Vietnam.

Armies of Equal Size

As for the Nicaraguan infantry, Government officials and foreign diplomats put
its size at between 20,000 and 25,000 soldiers, which is about the same size as
the Honduran Army.

The regular army, all volunteers, is young and lacks experience and training in
conventional warfare. Above all, it has a severe shortage of officers.

Nicaragua also has 25,000 reservists and 80,000 militia, the army spokesman,
Roberto Sanchez, said recently. The reserves receive three months of active duty
training. The militia are civil defense groups, organized by neighborhood of
workplace, which are taught basic military principles.

In recent weeks, the number of militia volunteers has increased considerably in
response to the perceived threat of an invasion.  ''The revolution is lousy, but
it's our revolution,'' one Nicaraguan said, explaining why he was at a training
session Saturday.

Fewer Than 100 Cubans

While there once were a considerable number of Cuban military advisers here, Mr.
Ortega said there were now fewer than 100, a figure confirmed by a European who
has close contacts with the Sandinist leadership.

As for tanks that the Nicaraguans have received from the Soviet Union, Mr.
Buchanan said they were ''nice for prestige'' but ''not suitable'' for the
Nicaraguan terrain.

For the moment, the Nicaraguans are having to defend against stepped-up raids
along the border. A senior military officer in Honduras recently confirmed
reports by international relief workers there that the Honduran Army was
providing arms, training and logistical support for the insurgents.

Last week, well-armed guerrillas attacked a Government construction site near
Waslala, about 180 miles northeast of Managua. The Government said they killed
one construction worker and, using sophisticated explosives, damaged 31 trucks
and other construction equipment being used to construct a road and hospital in
the jungle region.

In late August, soldiers in Santa Tomas, a small village astride the border in
Esteli Province, pointed into the Honduran hills where they said anti-Government
guerrillas had a base.

As they talked, the crackle of machine guns and thud of mortar rounds ruptured
the muggy afternoon air and the soldiers scurried for cover.

A few weeks earlier, in an attack on San Francisco del Norte, which is a few
kilometers east of Santo Tomas, 15 members of the town's civil defense force
were killed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF SAKHAROV'S LETTER TO PUGWASH PARLEY ON SOVIET POLICY

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1543 words


Following is a letter sent by Andrei D. Sakharov to the Pugwash Conference. The
letter was written for delivery to the anniversary meeting of the group in
Canada earlier this year, but was not received in the West until August.

This is the second time that I am addressing the Pugwash Conference (the first
time was in 1975).  Scientists and the international community as a whole can do
a great deal to preserve peace in the world and to further international trust
and security, disarmament, the progress of humanity and the defense of human
rights. I have tried to express my views on these subjects on many occasions
(the Nobel Peace Prize lecture, The Responsibility of Scientists, What the
U.S.S.R. and U.S.A. Should Do to Preserve Peace, and in my other writings.) Here
I would like again to formulate certain theses which, to my mind, are of
essential importance.

The problems of peace and security should be discussed with the utmost
objectivity and impartiality. The same standards should be applied to both sides
while bearing in mind their individual features, the varying degrees of openness
in their societies, their differing levels of democracy and their differences in
politicalstrategic doctrine and practice. Unfortunately, many of the public
figures and groups in the West who are speaking out on the problems of peace and
disarmament are, due to a variety of reasons, (insufficient knowledge of the
issues or naivete, political fashion, the predominance of transient domestic
political and economic factors) taking quite a different position, a position
that is onesided and therefore futile and even dangerous. To some degree this
might well apply to the Pugwash movement itself. The work of the Pugwash
conferences and many other international meetings as well is marked by a
negative feature typical of the position taken by the representatives of the
Soviet Union. In all discussions of critical problems they always in effect
behave like well-disciplined functionaries of one gigantic bureaucratic machine.
And this to a considerable degree diminishes the significance of such contacts
for resolution of difficult questions especially if this feature is not taken
sufficiently into account.

Beginnings of 'Detente'
Some 10 to 13 years ago when what is called ''detente'' came into existence,
there was an approximate strategic equilibrium in the world (although the West
had yielded to the U.S.S.R. and its allies in the field of conventional
weapons.) It was then possible to hope that favorable conditions had been
created for disarmament, international trade, for the peaceful resolution of
conflict and for joint efforts in solving such global problems as surmounting
the backwardness of the underdeveloped countries, in preserving the environment
and the course of progress as a whole, in overcoming the closed nature of the
socialist countries and the violation of human rights. Unfortunately, the
apprehension of those who pointed out that the U.S.S.R. might try to use detente
to shift the equilibrium to its own advantage have proved justified.

In the last decade there has been a very substantial increase in the Soviet
Army, Navy, missile arsenal, and Air Force while the countries of the West
(Europe especially) have weakened their (defense) efforts. The SS-20 missiles
have changed the strategic equilibrium in Europe although those who take part in
pacifist demonstrations seem not to notice this fact. The Paris Agreements were
followed by North Vietnam's rush to the South and by the genocidal actions of
Pol Pot's followers. Despite the highly important Camp David accords, the
situation in the Middle East remains extremely complicated and tragic for both
sides. The Soviet Union continues to expand its zone of influence throughout the
world - in Africa, Asia, Latin America. All these events culminated in the
intervention in Afghanistan which has led into a dead end, a brutal war.
Poland's attempt at pluralistic development has been replaced by military rule.

Soviet society remains as closed as ever. The most important decisions are made
in antidemocratic fashion. The freedom to exchange information, the freedom of
conscience, the freedom to choose one's country of residence are violated.
Conditions for monitoring Soviet compliance with the international agreements to
which it is a signatory are practically nonexistent. The persecution of
dissidents has increased.

Problems of Peace
All the above does not of course mean that the principle of resolving conflicts
peacefully and by compromise is itself flawed. This principle remains the only
alternative to global destruction. The problems of peace, international security
and disarmament have absolute priority over other problems, including some which
are extremely important. Disarmament negotiations must be held constantly and
persistently despite all the difficulties entailed. But there is no question
that these principles should be supplemented by a number of other elements. I
consider it especially necessary to inform the publicabout the truth of the
world situation, including what has been said above, and to conduct a practical
policy which corresponds to these realities.

It is necessary to restore strategic parity in the field of conventional
weapons. Both sides have to be confident of their security without relying on
atomic and thermonuclear weapons and the other weapons capable of mass
destruction which imperil the existence of mankind and civilization. Today,
according to widespread opinion, the West would be unable to withstand the
forces of the U.S.S.R. and its camp if such weapons were excluded from the
balance. For that reason equilibrium in the field of conventional weapons is a
necessary condition for a general repudiation of atomic and thermonuclear
weaponry and other means of mass destruction. Such a repudiation is an
imperative historical necessity but advances in this direction must be careful
and gradual.

Steps must be taken to help stop the expansion of the pro-Soviet sphere of
influence for otherwise this expansion will threaten the equilibrium of the
entire world. Steps must be taken to overcome the backwardness of the
underdeveloped countries and the U.S.S.R. has to participate in this process.
The world which, in our epoch, is a single entity cannot continue to exist with
the great disparity of development so typical of the present. Thus far the
U.S.S.R. and the socialist countries have avoided participating in the joint
efforts to provide economic aid to underdeveloped countries, preferring to
elicit political gains from the military and, to some degree, economic aid it
provides solely to those countries within its sphere of influence.

There must be international efforts, efforts made by all honest people to defend
human rights, to overcome the closed nature of the U.S.S.R. and the other
socialist countries. These efforts reflect the spirit of the Helsinki Accords
and the other international agreements signed by the U.S.S.R. Soviet propaganda
always claims that the international defense of human rights in the U.S.S.R. and
the socialist countries constitutes interference with the internal affairs of
those countries, but this is hypocrisy.

Appeal to Scientists
A detente in which one of the partners hides his face behind a mask is
dangerous. I spoke of this as early as 1973. I appeal to the participants of the
Pugwash Conference to discuss this letter and the thoughts I have expressed here
and I am, at the same time, appealing to the entire community of scientists and
to all people of good will. I would like to take this opportunity to request the
participants in this important international gathering to speak out in defense
of prisoners of conscience. Their number includes the ornithologist Mart Niklus,
the philologists Vasil Stus and Victoras Petkus, the lawyers Ivan Kandyba and
Levko Lukyanenko, the teacher Oleksa Tikhyi, the writer Anatoly Marchenko, Balis
Gayauskas who has been sentenced to 10 years imprisonment and 5 years of exile,
the computer scientist Anatoly Shcharansky sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment,
the corresponding member of the American Academy of Sciences Yuri Orlov, the
priest Father Gleb Yakynin, the psychiatrist Anatoly Kariagin, the pharmacist
Victor Nekipelov, the Kovalyov family, the Rudenkos and the Matuseviches (both
the husband and wife in both cases), the Podrabinek brothers, the recently
convicted musicologist Merab Kostava and many others. The defense of your
colleagues and all convicted for their beliefs and their nonviolent activity has
a most direct bearing on the free exchange of information, on international
trust and on international cooperation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Andrei Sakharov

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE EVENING HOURS

BYLINE: By Ron Alexander

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 799 words


THE talk Tuesday evening was all about Yves. At least it was at L uchow's, where
Mr. Montand was given a party on the occasion of his o pening at the
Metropolitan Opera House. (This was at the new uptown L uchow's, which is down a
flight of steps, as opposed to the old d owntown Luchow's, which was up a couple
of steps and is now a c abaret disco called the Palace, not to be confused with
the Palace, t he restaurant, or even the Palace, the theater. ).

Among those who dined on seafood casserole, cold bass and salmon and toasted the
star with French wines were Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward, Myrna Loy, Maureen
Stapleton, Jack and Madeline Gilford, Sidney Lumet, Joan Fontaine, Ben Gazzara,
Kevin Kline, Hermione Gingold, Pauline Trigere and Bella S. Abzug.

''I feel at home,'' said Mr. Montand, who was accompanied by his wife, Simone
Signoret, and her daughter Catherine Allegret, to the assembled guests. ''It
could have been very dangerous,'' he said, because his program was almost
entirely in French. ''But when the audience knows you are not cheating, the
contact is fantastic.''

''I was enraptured, and I don't even speak French,'' Mr. Newman told him.  Miss
Stapleton confided that she didn't speak French either but said she had had ''a
swell time.'' Doing a one-man show, she added, ''takes the guts of a whale.''
She thought about that for a moment, then decided to dig into the seafood
casserole anyway.

''E VERYONE, it seems, has put their white shoes away,'' Susan DiSesa observed
as the well-shod guests made their way up the red-carpeted staircase of the New
York Yacht Club. Which was a most appropriate place for a reception launching
''Atlantic High,'' an account by the prolific William F. Buckley Jr. of his
30-day ocean crossing during the summer of 1980 in a 71-foot ketch. The party
for about 125 guests was given by Christopher Little, the crew member who took
the photographs that illustrate the Doubleday book.

Patricia Buckley, the wife of the skipper-author, wore a black and white Oscar
de la Renta dress, carried a Christian Dior clutch and said, ''Oh, I didn't know
he was coming,'' when Bill Blass arrived.  Had she ever considered a monthlong
Atlantic crossing with her husband? ''I've cooked, creweled and cleaned for him,
but a 30-day cruise is not my idea of bliss,'' she replied.

Many of those navigating their way around the room - George Plimpton, Theodore
H. White, Schuyler Chapin, Barbara Walters among them - were the sort who would
be as likely to write books as to read them on a 30-day voyage. And who would
Miss Walters, who looked terrific, choose for her crew on such a crossing? After
some consideration she settled on Fidel Castro, Bette Midler, the Buckleys,
Clint Eastwood (''Even though he doesn't talk too much''), Katharine Hepburn and
Edward M. Kennedy (''Someone aboard should know how to sail'').

Now that would make a book.
ASLIGHTLY larger vessel - the 900-foot, 41,000-ton U.S.S. Intrepid, the aircraft
carrier that w as christened in 1943, served in the Pacific during World War II,
int he Gulf of Tonkin during the Vietnam War and as the primary recoverys hip
for the Mercury and Gemini space missions - will be pressed i nto service
tomorrow night for a black-tie gala.

It will be the first party to be held aboard the former warship since she was
saved from the scrapheap by the builder and philanthropist Zachary Fisher. Last
month, she was renamed the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, and is now permanently
berthed in the Hudson River at Pier 86, on West 46th Street.

The party, which will benefit the museum, is being given by a group of young
Wall Street people - attorneys, accountants, stocks and bonds people. ''Young
Wall Streeters are not as stiff as people might think,'' insists Lawrence H.
Oshin, a 28-year-old investment banker who, as chairman of the benefit, likes to
remind people that his name is pronounced ''ocean.''

More than 1,800 people have paid $25 each to be on board tomorrow.  During World
War II, the Intrepid carried more than 3,000 servicemen; the extra space should
give the Wall Streeters more room to jitterbug to Stan Rubin and his Swing Era
Big Band.

The scenario, in fact, sounds like an old Eleanor Powell musical.  The event,
however, is being billed as ''A Night to Remember,'' which was also the title of
a movie about the Titanic.  Ron Alexander

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
ABC Picks Executive For Leisure Magazines

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


At ABC Publishing, Ronald W. Stuart, 35, has been named president of ABC Leisure
Magazines, which includes such titles as Modern Photography, High Fidelity,
McCall's Needlework and Crafts and the Schwann Record and Tape Guides.

In all, the leisure magazine division has some 25 titles, Mr.  Stuart said
yesterday, and the division plans to reposition some of its publications in the
high-technology areas of electronics.

Mr. Stuart got his start in magazine publishing when he joined Los Angeles
magazine in 1974. ABC Publishing bought the magazine in 1977 and Mr. Stuart
became the magazine's treasurer. Los Angeles magazine is operated separately
within ABC publishing, which itself is a divison of the American Broadcasting
Companies.

''The last couple of years got me exposed to a lot of areas - circulation,
production and advertising,'' he said. Mr. Stuart has been serving as vice
president for finance of ABC Publishing. His new post had been vacant since last
year when Robert G. Burton, now president of ABC Publishing, was promoted.

Mr. Stuart is a Vietnam veteran who saw combat as an Army sergeant. His hometown
is Thomas, W.Va., and he is a graduate of Fairmont Junior College in West
Virginia and Strayer College in Washington.  Daniel F. Cuff

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN A LESS VIOLENT BEIRUT, STARK FEAR IS DISSOLVING INTO MERE NERVOUSNESS

BYLINE: By JAMES F. CLARITY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Sept. 10


The cement layers of rubble and the twisted steel that were offices and homes
remain, monuments to war and death in this once-charming capital by the blue,
wind-scalloped waters of the Mediterranean.

But in the week and a half since the withdrawal of the Palestine Liberation
Organization guerrillas and the Syrian Army, life in Beirut has begun to change,
in some ways that are visible, in others that are felt rather than observed. For
the first time in seven years, people move freely between east and west Beirut,
the streets are being cleaned, a few sidewalk cafes stay open after dark. These
visible changes reflect and produce a changing mood in the people of Beirut.

Fear of death is dissolving into anxiety, apparently on its way back to mere
worry, the normal mental condition of the city in the last 10 years.

People are not afraid to walk in the streets at night, but many of them still
work their fingers nervously, compulsively, around small rings of worry beads,
as they do in time of war or peace.

P.L.O. Flag Still Flies

The red, black, white and green flag of the P.L.O. still flutters from the
balcony of the organization's third-floor office on the Boulevard Mazraa, and
its title sign, in red letters in English and Arabic, is also intact and
visible. But the building, which was moderately damaged in the fighting, is
closed for repairs.

There is not much more easily identifiable Palestinian presence in the city,
although 300,000 Palestinian refugees still live here.  There is still tension.
The militiamen, mostly Moslem leftists in west Beirut and Maronite Christian
Phalangists in east Beirut, are supposed to start giving their weapons to the
army before disbanding as paramilitary units. Civilian residents think the
militias may turn in some of their heavier weapons, such as armored cars and
rocket launchers that would be difficult to hide. But no one thinks that many
automatic rifles, grenade launchers or machine guns will be turned in.

Although the Palestinian guerrillas are gone, and are no longer a potential
source of violence, the Israelis still surround west Beirut and control the
major routes into the city, except for the inner port, where 800 American
marines have been on duty as part of the multinational force that came to
supervise the withdrawal.

The Americans are departing today, leaving about 1,300 French and Italian troops
deployed along the no man's land that has divided the city since the civil war
of 1975-76. By the time the multinational force is gone, the Lebanese Army is
supposed to have at least 3,000 soldiers maintaining peace and order. If they
do, it will be the first time they have been able to since the civil war. But
for now at least, people can cross the city in either direction freely on foot
or in cars.

Last Sunday evening, most of the armed militias were gone from the center of
west Beirut. A stroll along the Hamra, once the fashionable street roughly
comparable in style to the Rue de Rivoli in Paris or East 57th Street in
Manhattan, indicated that it would be safe enough.

Farther up the Hamra, there was suddenly a group of people yelling, surrounding
a car stopped in the street. A young man, his eyes and mouth wide open with
apparent terror, ran out of an alley to see.  The tension broke into laughter;
the small blue Fiat was smoking because it had overheated. The driver dumped a
plastic bucket of water on the engine. Cars behind him honked. A uniformed
policeman in a white cap stood motionless on the sidewalk and watched.

Aladdin's Lamps for Sale

By the sea, where the luxury hotels flourished eight years ago, the St. George
Hotel is still a vacant, gutted shell. But the adjacent terrace and swimming
pool are open and beginning to attract Beirutis with time and money, but no
foreign tourists. Cheap gift shops, with brass Aladdin's lamps and low-priced,
smuggled foreign cigarettes, are open, selling more Winstons than Aladdins.

For many Beirutis, as well as diplomats and journalists, a necessary horror of
the 1975-76 civil war was the trip across the no man's land separating the
warring camps in west and east Beirut.  During that war, the only crossing open
was often the one called the Museum Crossing, so called for the Siroche Museum,
at the eastern end of the broad avenue that was the crossover thoroughfare.

Snipers perched in buildings around the crossing fired at each other and at
civilians in cars trying to race through what had become an obstacle course of
burned-out buses and cars, miscellaneous twisted metal war debris and the
10-foot-high protective dirt barriers each side built on its side of the
crossing.

In June 1976, the United States Ambassador to Lebanon, Francis E.  Meloy Jr.,
and an assistant were kidnapped on an approach to the crossing and murdered. A
Lebanese correspondent for Le Monde, Edouard Saab, was killed by a sniper bullet
as he crossed in a car. No one kept statistics on Museum Crossing victims, but
probably no fewer than 100 people were killed there.

Museum Crossing Is Open

The Museum Crossing is now open, as it has been for a week, without disheveled
Lebanese leftist militiamen waving automatic rifles and checking identifications
every 100 yards. At either end of the crossing, the checkpoints were guarded by
Lebanese Army security troops in neat uniforms. In the middle, three French
armored cars with bored-looking soldiers in blue berets watched the traffic
pass.

Walking from west to east, on the left side of the boulevard, one could see that
the destruction and defacement of buildings by shells and bullets was still
unrepaired. On a building that had been a leftist Moslem stronghold, a motto,
written in French in green paint said, ''If they are stronger than America, then
we are not weaker than Vietnam.''

In view, a mile or so away, was the collapsed cement grandstand of the local
racetrack, which the Israelis destroyed when they attacked the area in early
August. Three men were digging a trench from east to west on the side of the
boulevard. Three others were splicing wires in the four-foot deep dugout.
''Kableh,'' the workers explained - telephone cables, presumably to help people
in the east and west to talk to each other without having to wait several hours
for an open line, as is now the case.

At the Commodore Hotel, where foreign journalists and television crews stay, the
checkouts exceed the check-ins every day, as there is no more war to put on the
breakfast tables and television sets of the rest of the world. In the bar a
television crewman recited obscene limericks at lunchtime.

And Coco, the gray parrot who lives in a cage off the bar, repeated occasionally
what he had been taught during the wars: a loud whistle simulating very well the
traditional sound of a descending bomb or shell. Coco is now being tutored by
bar clients in the four famous notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. But the bird
has trouble prolonging the fourth note.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

RABBI JACOB RUDIN, 80, DEAD; HEADED MANY ORGANIZATIONS

BYLINE: By WALTER H. WAGGONER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


Jacob Philip Rudin, rabbi emeritus of Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I., and a
Jewish scholar, author and lecturer, died yesterday at the Sarah Newman Nursing
Home in Mamaroneck, N.Y., after a long illness. He was 80 years old.

Rabbi Rudin had been the spiritual leader of Temple Beth-El from 1930 until
1971, when he was named rabbi emeritus. Before that, he had served as assistant
rabbi at the Stephen S. Wise Free Synagogue in Manhattan and as assistant to the
president of the Jewish Institute of Religion in New York City.

Rabbi Rudin was president of the Synagogue Council of America when he was named
by President Lyndon B. Johnson to an observer team for the Vietnam elections in
1967. As president of the council, he represented the Jewish community at the
funeral of the Rev. Dr.  Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968.

Rabbi Rudin was a former president of the Central Conference of American Rabbis,
past president and treasurer of the New York Metropolitan Association of Reform
Rabbis and a member of the executive board of the New York Board of Rabbis.

Author and Editor

He was the author of ''So You Like Puzzles,'' published in 1934, and ''A
Children's Haggada,'' published in 1936. A collection of his sermons, ''Very
Truly Yours,'' was published in 1971.

Rabbi Rudin was also a past editor of The Jewish Institute Quarterly, a former
member of the editorial board of the Central Conference of American Rabbis
Journal and in 1944, a member of the advisory board for the ''Book of Jewish
Thoughts.''

He was born in Malden, Mass., in 1902. He received a bachelor's degree from
Harvard College in 1924 and a master's degree from the Jewish Institute of
Religion in 1928. He received a Doctor of Divinity degree from the institute in
1948. He served as president of the institute's alumni association and of the
Hebrew Union College Alumni Association.

Rabbi Rudin was a member of the Chaplain Corps in the Naval Reserve during World
War II, and he had also served as a chaplain of the Merchant Marine Academy.

Rabbi Rudin is survived by his wife, Lili; a son and daughter by a previous
marriage, Stephen, of Manhasset, L.I., and Priscilla Sarah Stern of Scarsdale,
N.Y., and eight grandchildren

A funeral service will be held at 11 A.M. Sunday at Temple Beth-El in Great
Neck.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS REPORTEDLY OFFERS TIME TO WESTMORELAND

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 45, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 646 words


CBS News has offered Gen. William C. Westmoreland 15 minutes of unedited time
during a proposed one-hour prime-time program to follow up the documentary ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which ran into criticism after it was
broadcast last January, according to a source close to General Westmoreland.

The unusual offer was contained in a letter written to the general on Sept. 8 by
Joan Richman, executive producer of the follow-up program. The source familiar
with the letter but who asked not to be named, stated that the general would be
granted the first 15 minutes of the program ''to say what you wish to say in the
manner you wish to say it.''

General Westmoreland, the former commander of United States military forces in
Vietnam, was depicted in the original documentary as the leader of a conspiracy
to underestimate deliberately to his superiors the size of enemy forces during
the Vietnam War.

After the documentary generated criticism regarding its fairness and accuracy,
CBS News conducted an internal investigation. Although the network stood by the
documentary, Van Gordon Sauter, president of CBS News, issued a memorandum on
July 15 saying that five violations of CBS News practices had been committed in
its preparation.

Libel Suit Is Hinted

General Westmoreland has repeatedly asked CBS to apologize for his portrayal,
and sources close to him say that he plans to file a libel suit against CBS News
next week.

In his July 15 memorandum, Mr. Sauter also promised the follow-up program to
re-examine the issues raised in the original program.  However, planning for the
program has been stalled by the insistence of General Westmoreland and other
representatives of the military command in Vietnam that they would participate
only under certain conditions, including an apology and access to a 68-page
report resulting from CBS's internal investigation.

Because of these problems, CBS this week postponed its planned broadcast of the
program next Wednesday.  The source familiar with Miss Richman's latest letter
to General Westmoreland said that his statement would be followed by a panel
discussion among proponents of various views on the issue of enemy troop
strength.

Proposal for the Panel

The source asserted that the letter said that General Westmoreland could choose
whether to participate in the panel. If he declined to participate, the letter
reportedly stated, ''we request you to use your good offices to secure the
participation of either Gen. Phillip Davidson or Gen. Daniel Graham or another
mutually agreeable individual who can represent the position'' of the military
command during the discussion.

General Davidson was chief of intelligence under General Westmoreland in Vietnam
and General Graham served as one of General Westmoreland's deputies. Three other
proposed panelists have agreed to appear. They are Samuel Adams, who served as
CBS's paid consultant for the original documentary and who appeared in it; Col.
Gains Hawkins, a Vietcong analyst, who was also interviewed in the documentary;
and George Carver, a Central Intelligence Agency official in charge of
Vietnamese affairs during the period examined by the documentary.

CBS's offer to General Westmoreland is not unprecedented. In July 1981, for the
first telecast of ABC News' ''Viewpoint,'' a periodic program treating issues
raised in the network's news programs, the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical
Corporation was given four unedited minutes in prime time to complain about its
depiction in an ABC News report.

General Westmoreland was on vacation and unailable for comment on the CBS
letter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia Mass Grave Found; Attributed to Pol Pot Regime

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 79 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 11


The Cambodian authorities have uncovered a fresh mass grave near Phnom Penh
containing the remains of about 1,500 people, the Hanoi radio said today.

The radio, monitored here, said the grave contained the victims of the Pol Pot
regime, which was overthrown by Vietnamese-backed Cambodian forces in January
1979.

The Pol Pot regime has been accused of killing hundreds of thousands of people
during its four years in power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN PARKING PINCH, CITIES THE WORLD OVER TRY SOME NEW TACKS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 68, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 849 words


New York's 65,000 parking meters are expensive to maintain and subject to
vandals, irate drivers, thieves and schemes to avoid payment. They are tended by
a force of 1,100 city agents, 376 of whom have been assaulted this year. From
time to time, officials of the city's Division of Parking throw up their hands
and say there must be an alternative.

There are several. Chaos is one, a system now popular in cities throughout the
world: Rome, Mexico City and Jakarta, Indonesia, to name a few. Singapore
alleviates its parking problems by selling daily permits to drive in the
downtown area.

Some countries, Japan, for instance, have effective meter systems, largely
because meters are rarely vandalized and motorists do not seem to cheat much.
Others have few parking problems by virtue of having few cars, Vietnam and the
Soviet Union being notable examples.

An alternative gaining popularity throughout the world is one in which motorists
purchase cards or stickers that are displayed inside the windshield and indicate
what time the driver parked.

Irate, Nonetheless

In London and Paris, that system is being used on a limited basis, and in both
cities, long-term stickers allowing drivers to park in certain neighborhoods are
sold.

London officials are working on a system that employs magnetic cards. The cards
would be purchased by drivers and used to activate meters, eliminating the need
for coin collection. It is pointed out that under London's new system, motorists
continue to scorn the traffic agents.

In Paris, drivers heap scorn on ''periwinkles,'' agents so-called because of the
light blue color of their new uniforms - a change from the old system, when they
cursed purple-uniformed aubergines, or eggplants.

Many cities in West Germany are adopting a system of ''parking disks,''
cardboard clocks placed inside the windshield that show what time the car was
parked.

Munich has eliminated all meters in favor of the disks, because maintaining the
meters and converting them to accept ever larger denominations proved to be more
costly than the income earned.  Several cities in Israel have also adopted such
systems, and others, such as Amsterdam and Sydney, Australia, are experimenting
with it.

Mexico's Attendants

Mexico City is using the windshield card system in a small downtown area in the
hope of alleviating what one motorist called ''a parking nightmare.'' The city,
which installed meters by the thousands 10 years ago only to see them stolen or
reduced to tangled wreckage by errant motorists, also has 22,000 auxiliary
police officers who serve as parking attendants.

Motorists park their cars wherever they can - sometimes on sidewalks -then hand
over their keys to these ''auxiliaries,'' who move the cars about in exchange
for a tip, not unlike Manhattan doormen. The auxiliaries, in turn, tip the
police so the illegal parking will be ignored.

A similar system is used in Jakarta, where the Government hires private parking
attendants to collect fees for on-street parking - although it is believed the
Government sees little of the revenue.

Veil of Legitimacy

In Rome, self-styled parking attendants stake out the streets and charge
motorists to park. The motorists do not have to pay, but they may not have much
of their car left to drive home if they do not.  Some of these entrepreneurs
wear caps and give receipts to drivers, adding a thin veil of legitimacy to a
parking system known in some corners as extortion.

There is a similar practice in Bangkok, Thailand, where the price for having
your car ''protected'' by menacing youths is about 40 cents.

Even where there are few cars, parking problems exist. In the Soviet Union,
parking in an unsecured area can result in the car being stripped of its parts.
These car strippers have apparently developed because of the shortage of car
parts.

$21 Million From Meters

''We considered the windshield card system and rejected it,'' said Clarence
Nelson, chief of the New York City's Division of Parking.  The division notes
that despite all of the meter system's problems, it brought in more than $21
million last year, with less than half that amount used for maintenance and
collection.

Mr. Nelson noted that the city of Albany had taken out all of its meters and
instituted the card system only to abandon it after one month. Part of the
problem, he said, was that merchants were selling the cards and they were
receiving abuse from the drivers - along with the parking agents, of course.

''We saw problems in setting up a vast distribution system,'' he continued, ''in
confusing the great number of transients who come to New York and in the
enormous potential for scam.

''It may work in other countries, but people here would be printing up
fraudulent cards and everything else. This is New York. We always have to
recognize that fact.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOLLYWOOD HAS SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2388 words


After a summer spent watching the adventures of a boy and his extraterrestrial,
romance at a military base and horror in 3-D, audiences will see movies take
some new twists this fall.

Even more so than in past seasons, movies for and about children will now be
much in evidence But Hollywood isn't giving up on adults entirely, and will do
its best to cover all bases by appealing to all sorts of tastes. Religious
subjects and opera figure prominently in the fall line-up. There will also be
comedy, history and a smattering of nostalgia.

While fancifulness and escapism still remain paramount, some filmmakers -
perhaps following the lead of TV's docu-dramas - will focus on issues fresh from
the headlines and carrying significant import for society at large, among them
the after-effects of Agent Orange and the dangers of biological warfare.

The season will begin unofficially on Sept. 24, as the New York Film Festival
celebrates its 20th anniversary. Opening night will feature ''Veronika Voss,''
the third film in the trilogy on post-war Germany by the late Rainer Werner
Fassbinder. Closing night, Oct. 10, will bring Werner Herzog's ''Fitzcarraldo,''
Mr. Herzog's tale of a robber baron who is determined to build an opera house in
an Amazon port city, so that he can invite Enrico Caruso to sing there.
''Fitzcarraldo,'' which stars Klaus Kinski and reportedly took four years to
make, has a screenplay that called for a boat to be carried over a mountain, and
Mr. Herzog, a director of by now legendary perseverance, saw to it that a real
boat was indeed transported that way.

Elsewhere on the Festival roster are Jerzy Skolimowski's ''Moonlighting,''
starring Jeremy Irons as a Polish foreman renovating a London getaway home for
his boss; Peter Greenaway's ''The Draughtsman's Contract,'' a 17th century-tale
starring Janet Suzman and Anthony Higgins; ''Yol,'' the Turkish film that was
cowinner of this year's Grand Prix at Cannes; Michelangelo Antonioni's
''Identification of a Woman,'' which stars Tomas Milian as a middleaged film
director; ''The Night of the Shooting Stars,'' by Italy's Taviani brothers;
Miklos Jancso's ''The Tyrant's Heart''; Joseph Losey's ''The Trout''; and
another Fassbinder film, ''The Stationmaster's Wife.'' Among the Festival's
American selections will be ''Tex,'' Tim Hunter's version of the S.E. Hinton
novel about two teen-age boys growing up alone, starring Matt Dillon.

''Fitzcarraldo'' is hardly the only opera-related film on the fall schedule,
what with ''Yes, Giorgio,'' a non-Festival film opening in late September, in
which Luciano Pavarotti will be making his screen debut. Mr. Pavarotti, playing
an opera star who has an extramarital love affair with a doctor, will sing
various operatic and popular selections. September will also bring a reissue of
a filmed ''Aida,'' starring Sophia Loren, and the premiere of ''The Divine
Emma,'' a Czech film about the soprano Emma Destinn. Hans-Jurgen Syberberg, a
German director given to lengthy movies, will weigh in with ''Parsifal,'' to
open sometime in the early fall.

Among the films for and about children, several will feature some form of
nonhuman characters. ''The Dark Crystal,'' directed by the Muppeteers Jim Henson
and Frank Oz, is due in December; it's a fantasy-adventure about a hero named
Jen, a girl named Kira, and their efforts to save the (good) Urrus from the
(wicked) Skelsis.  Then there's ''Twice Upon a Time,'' another Christmastime
feature, an animated film directed by John Korty with George Lucas as executive
producer. It is described as the story of how ''two apprentice heroes, one an
all-purpose animal, do battle with Synonamess Botch and his murk workers, trying
to save the Rushers of Din from nonstop nightmare bombs.'' From Hanna-Barbera,
there's the animated ''Heidi's Story,'' a version of Johanna Spyri's children's
classic with a score by Sammy Cahn and Burton Lane. It's due at Thanksgiving.
(An animated film less likely to be for children is Ralph Bakshi's ''Hey, Good
Lookin','' which opens in October.)

Even Francis Coppola is aiming at the young audience; his ''The Outsiders,''
like ''Tex,'' is also based on an S.E. Hinton novel for and about young people.
Matt Dillon is the star of both movies, and Mr. Coppola's also features Leif
Garrett and Diane Lane.

Among the films dealing with religious matters, ''Monsignor,'' directed by Frank
Perry, arrives in October, starring Christopher Reeve as the title character who
is on his way to becoming a cardinal but who also has Mafia ties. In Sidney
Lumet's ''The Verdict,'' due in December, Paul Newman will play a Boston lawyer
who takes on a malpractice case; since the victim has been treated in a Catholic
hospital, the lawyer runs into difficulties with the church. And in Ted
Kotcheff's ''Split Image,'' scheduled for October, Michael O'Keefe is cast as a
young man who joins a religious cult led by Peter Fonda.

Speaking of religious cults, ''Inchon!'' a Korean war battle epic, will open in
September with financing from the Unification Church and a ''special adviser''
credit for the Rev. Sun Myung Moon.

Among those new films that will draw their inspiration from current affairs is
''First Blood,'' also directed by Mr. Kotcheff and starring Sylvester Stallone
as a Vietnam veteran who discovers that at least one of his army buddies has
been harmed by Agent Orange. It is scheduled for October, as is Alan Rudolph's
''Endangered Species,'', a mystery-thriller about the consequences of biological
warfare based on a story about cattle mutilations in the Southwest.  It stars
Robert Urich as a formerly alcoholic New York detective who moves to Colorado
and meets Jobeth Williams, who plays a sheriff.  Then there's Larry Peerce's
''Love Child,'' again in October, with Amy Madigan and Beau Bridges in the true
story of a woman convict who is raped by a prison guard. She then bears a child
and struggles to gain custody of the baby.

An actress, a world leader and a detective will all be subjects of screen
biographies this fall. In ''Frances,'' opening in December, Jessica Lange will
play Frances Farmer, the tragic and troubled film star. Sam Shepard and Kim
Stanley (in her comeback after a long absence) will co-star. Also coming in
December is Sir Richard Attenborough's ''Gandhi,'' with Ben Kingsley in the
title role and Sir John Gielgud, Martin Sheen and Candice Bergen also in the
cast.  Wim Wenders's ''Hammett,'' opening in October and starring Frederic
Forrest and Peter Boyle, isn't strictly a biography. But it's based on a novel
by Joe Gores that loosely chronicles Dashiell Hammett's early days as a
detective in San Francisco. Another San Francisco detective is the one Nick
Nolte plays in Walter Hill's ''48 Hours,'' coming in December.

One rather surprising star of the fall film lineup will be Jean-Paul Sartre. He
will be seen in December in the 190-minute ''Sartre Lui-Meme,'' in which, with
the help of Simone de Beauvoir, he reminisces in great detail. ''Sartre
Lui-Meme'' will play at the Film Forum, as will the French documentary
''Reporters,'' which follows a group of reporters from the Gamma agency as they
pursue Catherine Deneuve, Jean-Luc Godard, Gene Kelly, Christina Onassis and
Francois Mitterrand, among others.

There'll be a few major movies set in the 30's, 40's and early 50's this season.
Clint Eastwood will play a Depression-era roughneck who writes country music in
''Honky Tonk Man,'' due to be released at Christmas. Sean Connery and Betsy
Brantley will star in Fred Zinnemann's ''Five Days One Summer,'' a romance set
in 1932 in the Swiss Alps. In ''My Favorite Year,'' directed by Richard Benjamin
with Mel Brooks as executive producer, Peter O'Toole will play an Errol
Flynn-like swashbuckling star who in 1954 is making his first live television
appearance on something very like ''Your Show of Shows.'' It opens in early
October. In December, Meryl Streep will star in ''Sophie's Choice,'' directed by
Alan Pakula and co-starring Kevin Kline and Peter MacNichol. Based on William
Styron's novel of a concentration camp survivor and two men who love her, it has
a late-40's setting.

Miss Streep also stars, along with Roy Scheider and Jessica Tandy, in ''Still of
the Night,'' which was formerly titled ''Stab'' and is the first film from
Robert Benton since ''Kramer vs. Kramer.'' Scheduled for November, it's the
story of a psychiatrist falling in love with a beautiful and possibly dangerous
patient. Another successful star-director team, Martin Scorsese and Robert
DeNiro, once again work together in ''The King of Comedy,'' which is slated for
Christmas unless Mr. Scorsese delays the release for some additional
fine-tuning. Mr. DeNiro plays an aspiring comedian who decides to kidnap a talk
show host, played by Jerry Lewis, and hold him for ransom. This, he hopes, will
get him his own big break in television.

Among comedies which promise to be more offbeat are Sydney Pollack's
''Tootsie,'' with Dustin Hoffman as an actor who can't get work unless he
pretends to be an actress, and ''The Toy,'' with Richard Pryor playing a clerk
who happens to be on duty when a rich man, played by Jackie Gleason, tells his
son he can have anything in the store. Both open in December. A couple of more
familiar-sounding entries will be ''National Lampoon's Class Reunion,'' starring
Shelley Smith and opening in October, and ''Airplane II: The Sequel,'' which
stars Robert Hays, Julie Hagerty, Sonny and Susie Bono and some members of the
first ''Airplane!'' cast. It opens in December.

Then there's ''Best Friends,'' with Burt Reynolds and Goldie Hawn playing two
pals who decide to find out whether getting married will improve their
relationship. It was co-written by Barry Levinson, the director of ''Diner,''
and Valerie Curtin, with Norman Jewison directing. ''Trail of the Pink Panther''
is due at Christmas and will feature Peter Sellers in routines that were never
included in his Pink Panther movies; the pretext will be that a female reporter
is searching for Inspector Clouseau and is visiting all the sites of his old
adventures. Bette Midler will star in Don Siegel's ''Jinxed,'' which reportedly
blends comedy, suspense and romance against a gambling-casino background; it was
co-written by Frank Gilroy and David Newman. There will also be a new Woody
Allen film, but it may not be a comedy and it has not yet been named. It stars
Mr. Allen and Mia Farrow, and it opens in December.

In the horror field, as in comedy, there are plenty of follow-ups on the way.
Among them: ''Halloween 3: Season of the Witch,'' due on Oct. 22 and telling of
a diabolical maskmaker who tricks millions of unsuspecting kids into wearing his
masks on Halloween; and ''Amityville II: The Possession.'' This one is more
prequel than sequel, since it tells of the people who lived in the Amityville
haunted house before ''The Amityville Horror.'' But either way, the territory
may not be new. Other horror entries will be ''The Sender,'' about a
message-transmitting psychic, and ''Creepshow,'' with George Romero directing
five Stephen King stories. ''Creepshow'' opens in late October.

What won't there be much of this season? The ''sentimental'' film would appear
to be in short supply. But December will bring ''Six Weeks,'' with Mary Tyler
Moore and Dudley Moore as the mother and employer, respectively, of a dying
young girl played by Katherine Healey. Another movie about a sensitive young
girl will be ''Independence Day,'' with Kathleen Quinlan in a coming-of-age
story about someone eager to leave her small home town. Co-starring David Keith
and Frances Sternhagen, it opens in October.

Finally, A series of Cuban documentaries made in the past decade will run Nov.
3-9 at the Film Forum. And, beginning Nov. 10 there will be a Scandinavian film
festival, featuring 9 premieres from five Scandinavian countries. Their Royal
Highnesses King Carl XVI Gustav and Queen Sylvia of Sweden will be on hand to
introduce the series.  Everybody goes to the movies.

''Fitzcarraldo,'' starring Klaus Kinski, about a mad robber baron determined to
build an opera house in an Amazon port. Directed by Werner Herzog. New York Film
Festival. October.

''Tex,'' based on the S.E. Hinton novel about a young man coming of age.
Directed by Tim Hunter and starring Matt Dillon. New York Film Festival.
October.

''Still of the Night,'' starring Meryl Streep and Roy Scheider -the tale of a
psychiatrist who finds himself falling in love with a beautiful, possibly
homicidal patient. Directed by Robert Benton.  November.

''Tootsie,'' wherein Dustin Hoffman, portraying an out of work actor, disguises
himself as an actress to win a soap opera role.  Directed by Sydney Pollock.
December.

''Sophie's Choice,'' based on the William Styron novel about an Auschwitz
survivor and two men who love her. Starring Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline, Peter
MacNichol. Directed by Alan Pakula. December.

''Sartre Lui-Meme,'' a 190-minute reminiscence by the French philosopher and
author, with the assistance of Simone de Beauvoir.  December.

''The Verdict,'' about a Boston lawyer who takes on a malpractice case involving
a patient in a Catholic hospital. Starring Paul Newman. Directed by Sidney
Lumet. December.

''Gandhi,'' a full-scale screen biography, with Ben Kingsley as the Indian
leader. Directed by Sir Richard Attenborough. With Sir John Gielgud and Candice
Bergen. December.

''The King of Comedy,'' starring Robert DeNiro and Jerry Lewis -the story of a
would-be comedian who will stop at nothing to get his big break. Directed by
Martin Scorsese. December or possibly later.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Mary Tyler Moore and Dudley Moore in ''Six
Weeks'' (Page 18) Photo of new movies

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GUATEMALANS ARE ADDING A FEW TWISTS TO 'PACIFICATION'

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: GUATEMALA


Pointing at a strategic map of Guatemala's highlands, the senior army officer
could not resist boasting that Guatemala was more successful than El Salvador in
combating its leftist guerrillas. ''Their trouble,'' he said, referring to the
Salvadoran armed forces, ''is that they're taking too much American advice.''

In contrast, with United States military aid to Guatemala suspended since 1977
because of human rights concerns, the fivemonth-old military regime of Gen.
Efrain Rios Montt says it has developed its own counterinsurgency strategy
emphasizing food distribution, creation of ''civil defense'' units and an
unrelenting military offensive against the Indian communities that support the
rebels. Results are encouraging, officials report.

''Early this year, we were losing,'' a Guatemalan colonel said.  ''Now the war
is becoming more balanced.'' General Rios Montt, who imposed a state of siege
July 1 to coincide with the start of the offensive, is predicting that the
guerrillas will cease to be a major problem by December.

While the main guerrilla organizations challenge this official optimism, the
human cost of the campaign is already huge and is continuing to mount. ''We
declared a state of siege so we could kill legally,'' the President, a
born-again Christian, told a group of eight politicians Aug. 18, according to
two members of the group.  ''Many people are being killed, but we have also lost
many officers.''

Reliable estimates of the number of victims so far are hard to find, although
the army reported 452 deaths in July alone. Catholic workers and Guatemalan
refugees arriving in Mexico also charge the army with responsibility for
numerous massacres of Indian villagers in recent months. The country's
traditionally conservative Conference of Bishops noted May 27 that ''never in
our history have such extremes been reached, with the assassinations now falling
into the category of genocide.''

The army insists that all massacres are carried out by the guerrillas and, since
many Indians are executed before dawn by men dressed in civilian clothes, it is
sometimes difficult to prove official responsibility. In the strategic area
bordering Mexico, however, the army has sought to create a ''free-fire zone''
and refugees in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas assert that their villages
have been attacked and burned by uniformed soldiers who landed in helicopters.

According to Guatemalan officers, their strategy has been taken essentially from
that of the guerrillas, although it also has echoes of Algeria and Vietnam. ''We
take the villages, put them under protection and keep them under our control,''
an officer said. ''The Salvadorans go out on search-and-destroy missions, then
leave and lose the area again.''

The key to the strategy, the Guatemalan Army explains, lies in the formation of
civil defense units in every community. Critics of the approach question the
effectiveness of the units because, while some members join voluntarily, many do
so through fear of being called subversive. Under its ''beans and rifles''
program, the army provides villagers and refugees with ''food for work'' and
medical assistance.

Already, the army has begun to distribute some 4,500 tons of emergency food
supplies donated by the United Nations World Food Program, while specially
trained army officers using battery-powered loudspeakers work through Indian
interpreters to call villagers into nearby towns ''where the army will protect
you.'' To date, some 25,000 men have been enrolled in civil defense units.

But no fundamental social reforms have taken place. ''We're in the phase of
pacification and survival,'' a senior officer said. ''We can't think of serious
reform plans for at least another two years.''

Although Lieut. Gen. Wallace H. Nutting, head of the United States Southern
Command in Panama, recently argued it was ''imperative'' that American military
aid to Guatemala be resumed, some foreign diplomats here feel the Reagan
Administration has, in fact, so far been saved the embarrassment of close
identification with the bloodbath taking place in this country's highlands.
Americans Give Advice

General Rios Montt, who at first brushed aside the suggestion of seeking
American military assistance, recently said he would accept it under certain
conditions. ''The conditions would be that they come to give to their brothers,
but not to their slaves, because we're not dogs,'' the President said in an
interview. Guatemala's most urgent need appears to be for spare parts for its
depleted military helicopter fleet.

Many officials in the State Department are also known to favor a resumption of
military aid, although to date they have encountered resistance in Congress.
Since the March 23 coup that toppled Gen.  Romeo Lucas Garcia and brought
General Rios Montt to power, the American officials have repeatedly argued in
public that human rights conditions have improved in Guatemala.

American diplomats in Washington and Guatemala City have also provided the Rios
Montt Government with advice on improving its reputation abroad. One Guatemalan
official acknowledged he was following the American suggestion of giving greater
emphasis to alleged abuses and killings by the Left. In contrast to the Lucas
regime, which threatened and harassed foreign journalists, the new Government is
now more accessible to diplomats and visiting correspondents. Recently, General
Rios Montt even invited the Inter-American Human Rights Commission to visit the
country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of soldiers accompany a 'civillian defense
force'recruited from a small town

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A LEADER FOR THE LITTLE GUY

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN; William Serrin is a labor correspondent for The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words


JERRY WURF Labor's Last Angry Man.  By Joseph C. Goulden.  Illustrated. 296 pp.
New York: Atheneum. $14.95.

JERRY WURF was one of the most remarkable union men of this century. Born in New
York City in 1919 to immigrant parents from Austria and Hungary, he was stricken
with polio when he was 4 years old, spent much of his youth in a wheelchair and
always walked with a limp. The family settled in the Brighton Beach section of
Brooklyn where the bookish boy came into early contact with the politically
militant left-wing groups of the Depression Era, including the Young People's
Socialist League, in which he was active before the war.  After graduating from
Madison High School, Wurf took the subway to New York University at Washington
Square, but, more a radical than a student, he dropped out without graduating.
Through a Socialist named Max Siegel, Wurf became involved with the Hotel and
Restaurant Workers Union, working as a cafeteria cashier as well as an
organizer. In the early 40's Wurf was so militant that he was known to the
Yiddish-speaking cafeteria owners he was opposing in New York as Mal'ach Hamaves
or ''angel of death.''

Then, in 1947, following an unsuccessful period as a delicatessen operator, he
joined the staff of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal
Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) in New York. He went on to build District Council 37,
the union's large New York City affiliate, into a potent labor organization,
successfully fighting, among others, Robert Moses, the tough-minded executive
responsible for so many of New York City and State's large public works
projects.

In 1964 Wurf ousted Arnold Zander, the man who had brought him into the
organization, and became president of the national union, which he went on to
build into one of the major American unions, with more than a million members.
In the years that followed, A.F.S.C.M.E. became the principal union organizing
public workers, and Wurf himself became one of the most important liberal labor
leaders in America.  As A.F.S.C.M.E. president, Wurf cleansed the union of links
to the Central Intelligence Agency, came to oppose the Vietnam War and was often
a lone dissenter on the executive council of the American Federation of
Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations, opposing the often authoritarian
policies of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president, George Meany. He idolized the old
Socialist leader Norman Thomas and kept a picture of him in his office. In 1980,
having supported various Democratic candidates over the years, Wurf remarked
that he had not cast a happy ballot in a Presidential election since he voted
for Thomas years before.

His physical problems always bothered him immensely. During an interview in 1981
with this writer at his summer home at Wellfleet, Mass., he seemed to take pills
constantly. He remarked to a friend that he seemed to have more afflictions than
Job. Jerry Wurf died last December.

It was in the summer of 1981 that Wurf, apparently desiring a record of his
career, approached the journalist and author Joseph C.  Goulden about a
biography, promising cooperation, financial backing and no censorship. In Wurf's
words, ''warts and all.'' Mr. Goulden, author of several other books including
''The Superlawyers,'' ''Meany: The Unchallenged Strong Man of American Labor''
and ''Korea: The Untold Story of the War,'' has quickly produced a credible book
in terms of its quasi-official account of Mr. Wurf's many years in the American
labor movement, his liberality and his important role in organizing public
workers, whom many other labor leaders, including George Meany, often ignored.

Indeed, it was Jerry Wurf who, in 1958, successfully lobbied Mayor Robert F.
Wagner Jr. to issue Executive Order 49, giving unions the right to organize New
York City employees and to serve as exclusive bargaining agents for them. Wurf,
Mr. Goulden says, considered this his most significant achievement in the city.
Wurf also took personal pride in the fact that the Executive Order issued by
President John F. Kennedy in 1962, which gave limited organizing rights to many
Federal employees, was, in his view, largely patterned after the New York
executive order.

Mr. Goulden's account shows that throughout his career Wurf was personally
allied with civil rights causes. He organized low-paid, often black government
workers such as those in the hospital and sanitation fields. It was his union
that was leading a strike of sanitation workers in Memphis, Tenn., in April 1968
during which the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., was assassinated. Mr. Goulden
says that as a result of that strike the union gained a reputation as ''an
organization that would fight for its members, regardless of the cost,'' and
Wurf emerged as a ''unionist of national stature.''

BUT there was another side to Wurf, and while Mr. Goulden touches on it, he does
not give it the importance it deserves. Jerry Wurf could be, and often was,
petty, mean-spirited and extremely jealous of potential rivals, such as the New
York A.F.S.C.M.E. leader, Victor Gotbaum. His meanness drove a substantial
number of highly qualified people from his union. Respected labor people say
that Wurf would often make promises, then cut other deals and not keep the
promises.  The attempts by Wurf and other liberal labor leaders, including
Douglas A. Fraser, president of the United Automobile Workers, to form an
alternative labor organization, the Progressive Alliance, in the late 1970's
failed in large part because Mr. Fraser and others could not abide Wurf's
strident personality.

It was Jerry Wurf's personal tragedy, unmentioned in this biography, that
despite his unwavering liberal politics and his many significant labor
victories, abrasive personality traits prevented him from becoming a stronger
and better leader than he was.

It is also a comment on contemporary American society that labor leaders, for
all their impact on the lives of millions of people, are not regarded as
sufficiently important to justify authors spending more time on their
biographies to give their subjects depth and fuller critical evaluation. The few
books that are written, like this one and ''George Meany and His Times'' by
Archie Robinson, which came out last year, are published with the understanding
that the unions involved will make large purchases, effectively subsidizing the
effort. Less than a year after his death, there is now a standard book on Jerry
Wurf, and no doubt he deserves it. But much more could have been done.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAN WHO HAD THE DREAM

BYLINE: By ERIC FONER; Eric Foner is professor of history at Columbia
University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1212 words


LET THE TRUMPET SOUND The Life of Martin Luther King, Jr.  By Stephen B. Oates.
Illustrated. 560 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $19.95.

MORE than 25 years have passed since the Montgomery, Ala., bus boycott, 22 since
the sit-ins and 17 since Congress guaranteed voting rights to Southern blacks.
Too recent to be considered history, too distant to inform the memory of younger
Americans, the civil rights movement has only begun to receive the sophisticated
historical analysis it deserves. Stephen B. Oates's ''Let the Trumpet Sound'' is
the latest addition to a growing literature on the glory days of the Movement.

Mr. Oates, who teaches at the University of Massachusetts, has long since
established his reputation as a biographer. This study of Martin Luther King Jr.
follows his lives of John Brown, Nat Turner and, most recently, Abraham Lincoln
- all martyrs in the cause of racial justice. The leap from Lincoln to King
seems especially fitting, for if King's life revolved about a single theme, it
was the attempt to make American society confront the unresolved legacy of
Emancipation.

Drawing on interviews with those who knew King, previously unutilized material
at Presidential libraries and the holdings of the Martin Luther King Jr. Center
in Atlanta, Mr. Oates has written the most comprehensive account of King's life
yet published. King emerges as a charismatic leader, a brilliant tactician of
the civil rights struggle, but also a deeply troubled man, subject to periodic
bouts of depression and indecisiveness and, like Lincoln, wracked by
premonitions of his own death. Nonetheless, as Mr. Oates makes clear, he was
uniquely qualified to fulfill the role that was thrust upon him.

Mr. Oates treats King's personality with insight and tact, but his focus,
understandably, is on the public man. He is particularly successful in tracing
the origins of King's ideas in his early upbringing and preparation for the
ministry. The grandson of a slave, King grew up in an Atlanta family solidly
middle-class in status and aspirations but not indifferent to the plight of less
fortunate blacks. His father, later viewed by youthful activists as a moderate,
was a militant figure during the Depression in Atlanta. He refused to let whites
call him ''boy'' and in 1936 led a voting rights march to City Hall, a
spectacle, he said, that ''no living soul in that city had ever seen.''

It was the Montgomery bus boycott of 1956 that propelled King, then only 25 but
already pastor of Montgomery's Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, into the national
spotlight. Since the end of Reconstruction, integrationist black leaders had
been unable to command the mass following attracted by separatists like Marcus
Garvey. In the black church, King found the springboard W.E.B. Du Bois, A.
Philip Randolph and other intellectual and union radicals had lacked, and he
used it to build a movement in the cradle of the old Confederacy that
demonstrated the power of both nonviolent protest and community solidarity.

Montgomery, Mr. Oates argues, also taught King the lesson he learned better than
any other black leader of his generation: that racial progress required the
dramatic kind of action that could draw national media attention while
presenting a public image of blacks as underdogs and victims of racial
injustice. These were years when the pictures of Freedom Riders beaten with lead
pipes, of black children attacked by the police dogs of Birmingham's sheriff,
Bull Connor, and of peaceful marchers dispersed by Selma's police penetrated
every American living room, galvanizing Northern support for the movement.  So
too the media brought King's eloquence to millions of whites never before
exposed to the powerful cadences of black preaching.

Nonviolent protest was effective in the South but less so when King turned his
attention to the North. The uprisings in Watts and other ghettoes, the 1966
campaign for fair housing in Chicago (where King encountered whites who he said
could teach those in Mississippi ''how to hate'') and the war in Vietnam forced
King to confront issues both more subtle and more intractable than legalized
segregation and disenfranchisement.

APPEALS to the moral conscience of the nation were not effective in dealing with
the issues of poverty and militarism, especially after the emergence of ''white
backlash.'' At the time of his assassination, King was a leader in search of a
new tactical approach to social change.

''Let the Trumpet Sound'' provides more than just a chronicle of King's life; as
his story is unfolded the roles of other prominent personalities of the period
become clearer. And the portrait of American political leaders that emerges is
not a pretty one. Mr.  Oates does not hesitate to take to task Presidents
Eisenhower (for abdication of moral leadership), Kennedy (for appointing ardent
segregationists to the federal bench) and Johnson (for scuttling social programs
in order to fight the Vietnam War).

Most shameful was the vendetta conducted against King by J. Edgar Hoover's
F.B.I. This involved illegal wiretaps (initially authorized by Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy), attempts to induce the press to slander King and not too
subtle suggestions that King commit suicide or face the release of tape
recordings supposedly revealing him in sexually compromising activities.
Originally inspired by the notion that King was somehow a dupe of the Communist
Party, the F.B.I. campaign persisted because of Hoover's voyeuristic obsession
with King's private life and Johnson's bitterness over his criticisms of the
war.

Believing narrative should take precedence over analysis, Mr. Oates never stops
to assess King's achievements and failings or his legacy. The closest he comes
to a thesis is his contention that King's greatest gift to Southern blacks lay
in enabling them to escape their heritage of fear and self-doubt, to believe
themselves capable of successfully confronting an unjust system.

Such an approach nearly equates a mass movement with a single individual. Mr.
Oates is certainly correct in emphasizing the debilitating psychological impact
of generations of slavery and segregation on Southern blacks, but he fails to
delineate the conditions, apart from the appearance of a charismatic leader,
that enabled them to confront and overcome that legacy.

Mr. Oates never penetrates the black community to provide a sense of the
resources, both personal and institutional, that sustained those humble men and
women who walked the streets of Montgomery and filled the jails of Birmingham.
He displays a remarkable understanding of King's individual role in the civil
rights movement, but the world from which King sprang - the wellspring of his
movement - remains only a shadow.

Today ''White'' and ''Colored'' signs have long since come down across the
South, and Birmingham, Ala., the ''Johannesburg of America'' 20 years ago, has a
black mayor. But a look at the unemployment statistics and at our city streets
reveals how little, in other ways, has changed. As the Federal Government
abandons the commitment to racial justice that Martin Luther King Jr., more than
any other individual, forced upon it, Stephen B. Oates's biography helps us
appreciate how sorely he is missed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


1 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.45.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to Last week 9 Weeks on list 2

2 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.  Last week 1 Weeks on list
6

3 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, which two children of
those antagonists marry one another.  Last week 2 Weeks On List 15

4 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the Cave
Bear.'' Last week 11 Weeks on list 2

5 THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam's, $13.95.) A
psychiatrist finds that an aberrant 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of
Florida's Gold Coast, where she lives.  Last week 3 Weeks on list 8

6 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, By Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.  Last week 4 Weeks on list 26

7 THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $14.50.) A Russian
terrorist collides with his own romantic past, during a mission to Britain on
the eve of World War I.Last week 6 Weeks on list 18

8 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in the
lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.  Last week 8
Weeks on list 3

9 TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (Stein & Day, $14.95.) Terrorist stalks
terrorist at the behest of Britain's antiterrorism chief.  Last week 12 Weeks on
list 5

10 CINNAMON SKIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Harper & Row, $13.95.) Travis McGee
investigates a suspicious accident that befalls a friend's family at sea.  Last
week 7 Weeks on list 11

11 EDEN BURNING, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $15.95.) Romance and political
upheaval on a Caribbean island.  Last week 10 Weeks on list 14
32 NORTH AND SOUTH, by John Jakes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) The
friendship of two wealthy families - one in Pennsylvania, the other in Carolina
- is strained by the Civil War.  Last week 13 Weeks on list 32

13 THE ONE TREE, by Stephen R. Donaldson. (Ballatine/Del Rey, $14.50.) Book Two
in the fantasy series ''The Second Chronicles of Thomas Covenant.'' Last week 14
Weeks on list 13

14 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle.  (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.  Last week 5 Weeks on list 3

15 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Arbor House, $14.95.) A loving couple
sets out to bring down a Mafia operation that ''respectable'' bankers have taken
over.  Last week 15 Weeks on list 2

NONFICTION

1 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.  Last week 2 Weeks on list 34

2 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Holt/Stack, $13.50) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.Last week 1 Weeks on list 7

3 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.  Last week
3 Weeks in list 21

4 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S. Kushner.  (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.  Last week 4 Weeks on list 31

5 EDIE, by Jean Stein, edited with George Plimpton. (Knopf, $16.95.) Edie
Sedgwick, minor celebrity of the 60's, remembered by friends and acquaintances.
Last week 5 Weeks on list 7

6 RICHARD SIMMONS' NEVER-SAY-DIET COOKBOOK. (Warner, $15.95.) than 100 recipes
by the Hollywood television personality and exercise guru.  Last week 6 Weeks on
list 13

7 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.) The scandal at Columbia
Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.  Last week 11 Weeks on list 2

8 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, By Barbara Woodhouse. (Summit, $12.50.) Advice
on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.  Last week
7 Weeks on list 24
9 PRINCESS, by Robert Lacey. (Times Books, $16.95.) The life of the Princess of
Wales in words and pictures.  Last week 8 Weeks on list 9

10 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Humor in
cartoons and verse.  Last week 9 Weeks on list 45

11 A FEW MINUTES WITH ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Atheneum, $12.95.)
Reflecitons on contemporary life by the journalist and television commentator.
Last week 10 Weeks on list 40

12 HOW TO MAKE LOVE TO A WOMAN, by Michael Morgenstern. (Clarkson N.  Potter,
$10.95.) A lawyer tells men ''what women want.'' Last week 12 Weeks on list 9

13 AMERICA IN SEARCH OF ITSELF: The Making of the President, 1956-80, by
Theodore H. White. (Harper & Row/Cornelia & Michael Bessie, $15.95.) A
summing-up by the historian of the modern Presidency.  Last week 13 Weeks on
list 15

14 THE UMPIRE STRIKES BACK, by Ron Luciano with David Fisher.  (Bantam, $12.95.)
Memories of the oddball baseball umpire.  Last week 14 Weeks on list 16

15 WEIGHT WATCHERS 365-DAY COOKBOOK. (New American Library, $14.95.) A
compilation of more than 500 new recipes.

Weeks on list 26
The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the

United States.

FOOTNOTES
It's a sign of the times that the bookstores reporting to our bestseller lists
say that their sales are running well behind last year, when ''The Beverly Hills
Diet'' sold more than this week's top two ''Never Say Diet,'' sold as well as
either this week's No. 1 or No. 2 titles. There are two new runners-up for the
fiction list.  ''The 13th Valley'' by John M. Del Vecchio is set in Vietnam in
1970; ''Cloak of Darkness'' by Helen MacInnes, her 20th novel of intrigue and
suspense, covers the activities of an antiterrorist organization and is set in
places as various as Djibouti, Paris, Chamonix, Zurich, New York and Washington.
The two new runners-up on the nonfiction list are ''Lana'' by Hollywood's
''sweater girl,'' Lana Turner, now 61. In this autobiography she tells ''the
truth'' about her seven marriages, serious drinking problem and discovery of
God. The second newcomer is ''Six Armies in Normandy'' by John Keegan, an
account of the 1944 Normandy campaign, from D-day, June 6, to the Liberation of
Paris, Aug. 25.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDITOR'S CHOICE

BYLINE: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 6.50.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 98 words

DATELINE: AUNT JULIA AND THE SCRIPTWRITER, by Mario Vargas Llosa.


four previously published reviews, articles and essays. FAMILY INSTALLMENTS, by
Edward Rivera. (William Morrow, $14.50.) A family chronicle about growing up
Hispanic in both Puerto Rico and New York's El Barrio. GOD'S GRACE, by Bernard
Malamud. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.50.) A fable, with talking animals, about
man's fall. THE 13th VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) A
large novel about Americans in the Vietnam War. THOMAS E. DEWEY AND HIS TIMES,
by Richard Norton Smith. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A political biography of
the G.O.P. Presidential nominee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY JOURNAL

BYLINE: By Robert Hanley

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 3, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1668 words


IT ISN'T such a long way from Waldwick, a small town in western Bergen County,
to Broadway. Just ask Allison Smith and Alyson Kirk, 12-year-old neighbors,
playmates and -until both made it to stardom in ''Annie'' - classmates at
Waldwick's Traphagen School.

Last week, Miss Smith gave her last of more than 1,000 performances at
Manhattan's Uris Theater as the high-spirited orphan with the big mop of curly
red hair. Immediately, she was succeeded by Miss Kirk.  Their successes have
generated considerable pride among their parents, at their former school and in
their community. And some envy, too.

''I think every little girl in Waldwick wants to be in 'Annie' now,'' said
Marilyn Kreismer, the music teacher in Waldwick's two elementary schools.

During a fourth-grade Christmas musical program that Mrs. Kreismer arranged four
years ago, Miss Smith sang a song from ''Annie.'' ''She did extremely well,''
Mrs. Kreismer recalled. ''Her mother was dumbfounded.'' Private lessons and some
parts in local productions followed. Then Miss Smith landed a role in the chorus
of ''Evita.'' Her starring role came next.

Meantime, Miss Kirk drew inspiration from her friend's good fortune. She, too,
got private tutoring in music, and last year won a role as the orphan Kate in
the national touring company of ''Annie.'' Since June, she had been Miss Smith's
understudy. Next came a round of auditions from which she emerged as a star in
her own right.

''I'm not taking credit for what they are,'' Mrs. Kreismer said.  ''They both
have natural voices, natural ability and a great enthusiasm and eagerness to
perform. They used to both come in after school, just begging me to play this or
that on the piano, and I would give them that little extra time. As a teacher,
if you reach one or two children, you've done a job. And I think I've touched a
couple of children.''

In her storied role in war and peace, the battleship New Jersey has known
glorious days in battle and dreary ones in dry dock. While she was at sea, her
officers' ward room was graced by an exquisite sterling silver service
manufactured by Tiffany & Company in Newark in the early 1900's.

Throughout the 70's, the New Jersey's glory seemed behind her and her future as
a floating museum certain. As for the silver service, it had wound up at the
State Museum in Trenton and was expected to remain there.

But President Reagan ordered the vessel refitted for more duty, and now the Navy
wants the silver service back. Governor Kean balked, but then relented. Curators
at the museum are preparing to pack 74 of the remaining 98 pieces and send them
to the battleship at her berth in Bremerton, Wash.

As with most ship treasures, the silver set has known some mystery, some
untraceable history and perhaps a bit of plundering. Originally, there were 119
pieces. Although museum curators have drawn up a chronology of the set's
existence, there are some gaps.

The Legislature appropriated $10,000 in 1902 to have the service manufactured,
and gave it to the Navy for the first battleship New Jersey in 1907. In 1923, it
was transferred to the cruiser Trenton after the Navy doomed the New Jersey to
an ignominious death as a target in gunnery practice.

When the Trenton was decommissioned in 1943, the set went to the Philadelphia
Navy Yard. That year, the current battleship was commissioned; however, the
silver set could not be found and, in the urgency of wartime, the battleship
sailed without it.

Eventually, the set turned up in the Brooklyn Navy Yard and stayed there until
the New Jersey sailed for Korea in 1950. The set was left in Hawaii for
safekeeping, and then returned with the ship in 1953.

''With all the shifting around over the years, things disappeared,'' said Karen
Cummins, assistant to the director at the State Museum. ''At least 44 pieces
vanished without trace.''

''They're in people's homes somewhere, I'm sure,'' said Suzanne Krilley, the
museum's Curator of Cultural History.  In 1953, the State Society of the
Battleship New Jersey donated $10,000 to have the set fully restored. Eighteen
service plates, 18 goblets, three pepper shakers and five salt dishes with
spoons were manufactured. In 1957, the set wound up in Morven, the former
gubernatorial mansion in Princeton, and remained there until the New Jersey
sailed for Vietnam in 1968. When the vessel returned in 1970, the set was
presented to former Gov. William T. Cahill, who turned it over to the museum.

''In the Byrne administration, it was divided between the museum for display and
Morven for ceremonial functions,'' Mrs. Cummins said.  Between 1953 and now, 21
more pieces vanished.  Mrs. Krilley estimates the value of the set at $150,000,
but doubts that the missing pieces can be duplicated. ''To find the craftsmen to
do it would be quite wonderful,'' she said.

The 24 biggest and most ornate pieces will stay at the museum, including an
elaborate punch bowl with relief figures of Liberty and Plenty and handles of
eagle heads entwined in laurel wreaths. The 74 pieces to be shipped compose a
dinner service.

''We wanted to preserve it for the people of New Jersey,'' Mrs.  Krilley said.
''We're hoping it's taken care of well and travels safely with the battleship.''

Since retiring some years ago as an industrial painter, John Malyar has devoted
much of his time to his backyard garden in Woodbridge Township. Cucumbers,
zucchini and tomatoes are his pride and joy, especially fat, firm tomatoes.

Last month, one of them one first prize - $1,000 - among 87 entries in the
state's fifth annual Championship Tomato Weigh-In at the Monmouth Mall in
Eatontown. It weighed 3.9 pounds, and was 10 inches in diameter and 4 1/2 inches
high.

Mr. Malyar is 67 years old, a bit hard of hearing and reticent. He lets his son,
John Jr., do the talking about his tomatoes.  The younger Mr. Malyar is quick to
say that his father has no special secrets, even though his tomatoes usually
average between 2 and 2 1/2 pounds.

''It's not really a trick,'' he observed. ''It's like anything else. Some can do
it and some can't.'' Each March, Mr. Malyar plants Burpee's Supersteak tomato
seeds in trays of Miracle Grow Potting Soil and places them, under plastic, near
a garage window that catches four hours of western sun each afternoon. When the
seedlings reach 18 inches, he transplants them in soil nurtured by Miracle Grow
18-18-21 fertilizer.

For support poles, Mr. Malyar uses 3/4-inch galvanized pipe; for support ties,
Orlon yarn because it stretches and does not damage the plants. He works oak
leaves and grass clippings into the soil.

Only two or three buds are permitted to grow in a cluster and, once a plant
reachs 6 1/2 feet, its top is cut off to preserve the plant's strength.

''He gets about 60 tomatoes a plant, and they're all fantastictasting,'' Mr.
Malyar's son said.  The winning tomato this year was sponsored by Cerlione's
Greenhouse in Holmdel, one of 87 garden centers around the state that puts up
the prize money. It's the third time in five years that Cerlione's has had the
winner.

''Mr. Malyar had never even heard of us until he came in with the tomato,'' said
Marie Cerlione, the owner. ''We haven't done anything special to win for three
years. We're just lucky.''

The fate of missing links in two of northern New Jersey's busiest Interstate
highways (I-78 and I 287) has been kicked around now for about 25 years - from
drawing boards, to protest rallies, to the courts. And it seems that a good many
more months, if not a few years, will pass before it's known whether they will
ever be built.

These last proposed portions of the highways have both been in the news again
this summer.  In July, Federal Judge Frederick B. Lacey, sitting in Newark,
dismissed a variety of objections to a proposed 5.5-mile section of I-78 between
Berkeley Heights and Springfield. However, opponents already have filed an
appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for the Third District in
Philadelphia.

They are Springfield and two conservation groups, the Parkland Preservation Fund
and the Watchung Nature Club. One of their key objections is the roadway's
dooming about 30 acres of the 2,000-acre Watchung Reservation, a natural
recreation preserve in Union County.

As for I-287, the Federal Highway Administration early this month approved the
state's final environmental-impact statement for a 20-mile link that would slice
through 11 towns in Morris, Passaic, and Bergen Counties, in this case dooming
some homes and businesses and portions of public parkland and golf courses.

''We will absolutely sue,'' said William J. Vichiconti, Mayor of Franklin Lakes,
one of the 11 towns. He said that about 30 homes in his community, including
some with market values of $400,000 and $500,000, were on the proposed
right-of-way. Several others of equal valve, including one owned by Tommy John,
a former New York Yankees pitcher, would be 200 to 300 feet from the new road.

Another prime foe is the community of Riverdale, which stands to lose about 23
percent of its tax ratables to the highway.  The existing stretch of I-287 links
Perth Amboy with Montville in Morris County to form a broad loop around the
busier, more easterly highways of North Jersey, especially the New Jersey
Turnpike. The proposed section would run from Montville north to New York
State's Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, just north of Mahwah.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of battleship

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

2,000 Mass Graves Are Found In Cambodia, Vietnam Says

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 189 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 13


More than 2,000 mass graves have been found in the Cambodian provinces of Kandal
and Soairieng, and initial excavations have uncovered the remains of about
54,000 people, Vietnam's official Hanoi radio reported today.

More than 1,400 mass graves have been discovered in Kandal, six miles south of
Phnom Penh, and initial reports indicate about 16,000 people were killed and
buried in 386 of them, the radio said.

It said the skulls of most of the victims were smashed by sticks, and other
victims had been stabbed in the belly.  In Soairieng, about 31 miles southeast
of Phnom Penh, 650 mass graves containing the remains of 38,000 people were
recently discovered, Radio Hanoi said. The broadcast did not indicate how old
the remains were.

Vietnam estimates 3 million Cambodians out of a population of about 8 million
died under the former Pol Pot regime between 1975-78. Other estimates put the
figure at a million or fewer.

In late 1978, Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia, and the Government of Prime
Minister Pol Pot was ousted in January, 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EPISCOPALIANS MOVE FORWARD QUIETLY

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 999 words


The Episcopal Church closes its 67th General Convention in New Orleans tomorrow,
intent on mending old wounds in the 2.75-millionmember denomination and
carefully choosing the struggles it will enter in the 1980's.

The convention acted yesterday to approve a national budget of $20.9 million a
year, up about 11 percent.  Episcopalians were not totally serious when they
briefly discussed how the church might select new bishops if a nuclear attack
decimated the hierarchy. But the device helped raise the issue of nuclear war
and depicted the way many Episcopalians view their church: an eternal,
essentially unchanging entity that God smiles on, preserves and more often than
not frets over.

The 1,000 deputies, composed of clergy and lay delegates, and about 200 bishops
gather every three years to approve a budget, make changes in the church's laws
and review programs.

As the convention shuttled stacks of resolutions between the House of Deputies
and the House of Bishops, the work went on placidly, and even the potentially
explosive issue of a new hymnal was settled with gentle discussion.

New Style of Change

It was not always so, for the Episcopal Church, like many denominations, fought
bitter battles at conventions in the 1960's and 1970's, over civil rights,
ordination for women, the war in Vietnam and contemporary forms of worship.

This year the church seemed intent on keeping things civil and setting aside old
quarrels. The picture presented to outside observers is that of a church trying
to regain its reputation for cultured, if sometimes stuffy, gentility.

The earlier disputes were ''family fights,'' the Presiding Bishop, John Allin,
said in an interview. Bishop Allin, who is beginning the final three years of
his term, added, ''We fought, but we are still family.''

''We don't have the same controversial issues before us,'' said Bishop Robert
Fisher Gibson of Virginia, who has retired and seen many conventions in 33 years
as a bishop. Dr. Mary Francis Wagley of Baltimore, a deputy from her diocese,
said, ''I'm so pleased that this year this many people can talk so charitably to
one another.''

Controversial issues are present, but groups with opposing views on modern
Christianity kept a low profile and a gracious courtesy prevailed at the
two-week meeting.

Issue of Ordaining Women

The Evangelical and Catholic Mission, for instance, formed in 1977 to oppose the
ordination of women, is still pressing the issue, albeit without heated
polemics. To Don Moorhead, who manned the group's booth in the convention
exhibit hall, the women wearing clerical collars at the convention are not
priests.

Mr. Moorhead calls them ''women who have undergone services of ordination.'' A
number of bishops support the group, and there are reportedly more than 30 who
will refuse to ordain a woman or have a woman priest in their diocese.

But the Episcopal Women's Caucus, also present at the convention, is not
impatient. The Rev. Linda Grenz, rector of St. Paul's Episcopal Church in
Camden, Del., said that the women's caucus had organized an arts festival,
rather than a political lobby, at the New Orleans meeting. The caucus sponsored
presentations by various artists, musicians and dramatic groups. ''We think we
can reach people through their esthetic sense,'' explained the Delaware priest.

She said that she accepted the fact that women's concerns were not highly
visible at the church's convention. ''After you have pushed ahead,'' she said,
''sometimes there is a small setback, a breather before you start again.''

One sign of that new start may be seen in the T-shirt that one retired Bishop,
Edward Welles of West Missouri, wore over his purple clerical shirt. The T-shirt
read, ''Women belong in the House ... of Bishops.''

Advocacy Role Accepted

Plans to advance the church's ministry in urban areas also reflected the changes
of the past decade. This year, few challenge the advocacy role that the church
takes on questions such as poverty and housing, and, as on other issues, widely
diverging opinions are tolerated. The convention readily approved an urban
concerns program called ''Jubilee Ministries,'' which the delegates hope will
strengthen central city parishes.

The parish-oriented nature of the Jubilee Ministries proposals make the program
markedly different from earlier efforts in national programs that led to
tensions between the church headquarters and congregations that felt left out of
the planning.

Ecumenically, the Episcopal Church is trying to move out on several fronts. It
approved plans for joint celebrations of communion with Lutherans, with only
five clergy delegations and four lay delegations from the 113 jurisdictions
objecting. Conversations of this sort with Roman Catholics continue, although
Rome has reacted coolly to a recent report of an international Anglican-Roman
Catholic dialogue group.

There remain conservative Episcopalians who are unfailingly grumpy about the
direction their church has taken. The Prayer Book Society campaigned vigorously
against the new hymnal. Delegates from the Milwaukee diocese announced as they
voted against joint communion with Lutherans that they did so ''clinging to the
faith.''

While slow in reaching its current position as an essentially liberal
denomination, the church does not show signs of turning back from the course it
set. Already widespread hope has been expressed that, after following the
low-key, some would say lackluster, leadership of Bishop Allin, the church will
ready by its 1985 convention to elect a successor who will step up the
progressive pace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ALAN HOLMES, FEDERAL RESERVE MONEY EXPERT

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. BENNETT

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 610 words


Alan R. Holmes, who had been one of the most powerful men in the nation's
financial system, died yesterday morning in his Brooklyn apartment from coronary
artery disease, according to Elliot Gross, New York's chief medical examiner. He
was 62 years old.

Until his retirement last year, Mr. Holmes had worked for 33 years at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, where from 1965 to 1979 he was manager of the
Federal Reserve System Open Market Account. In that position, he was responsible
for the creation of money in the United States.

''The Government's 'printing press' is literally in the Bureau of Engraving and
Printing, which turns out currency notes,'' wrote The New York Times in 1976.
''But the true printing press,'' the article continued, ''is a little-known man
named Alan R. Holmes, who sits in an office in the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York and decides every day how much money to create.''

Despite his power, Mr. Holmes, who was a chain smoker, was described as
self-effacing by most of those who knew him. ''He was the guy whose presence you
felt more than you saw,'' said Donald B.  Riefler, senior vice president of the
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.

'Enormous Amount of Power'

''A person in that position has an enormous amount of power and many of us in
the private marketplace were concerned that one man could have so much influence
over the well-being of the entire world,'' Mr. Riefler continued. ''But knowing
that a man of Alan Holmes's capabilities and integrity was in that job gave us
confidence that that power would not be abused.''

Although the responsibility of Mr. Holmes was to put policy into effect rather
than to make it - that was the job of the Federal Open Market Committee - he was
given wide latitude in interpreting the instructions given him.

''I worked with Alan closely for 10 years or more on very delicate, confidential
and touchy types of situations, and although there was a lot of room for
differences, he was always above board and he was never underhanded on
anything,'' said Stephen H. Axilrod, staff director for monetary affairs of the
Federal Reserve Board.  ''Alan was the world's most honorable man.''

Mr. Holmes's responsibilities, however, went beyond creating money. He was also
deeply involved in every major domestic and international financial crisis
during his long tenure.

'Very Competent'

''I recall working with him on the failure of the Franklin National Bank and the
problems of the failing real estate investment trusts in 1974 and New York
City's financial crisis in 1976,'' said J. Charles Partee, a governor of the
Federal Reserve Board. ''Alan always was very competent, stable and dependable
and a source of advice and information.''

A graduate of Millsaps College in Jackson, Miss., Mr. Holmes joined the New York
Fed in 1948 as a research assistant and became an officer in 1958 with the title
of manager of the research department. He became vice president in 1962 and
senior vice president in 1969.  He acted as an economic adviser to the Sudan and
also in Vietnam, where at times he was caught in cross-fire.

Mr. Holmes, whose wife died last year, lived in South Orange, N.J., until his
retirement in 1981. He is survived by his son, Robert R., of Fort Plain, N.Y.,
and his sister, Ruth Hingle, of Dunbarton Center, N.H. Funeral services are
scheduled for 2 P.M. Thursday at the McGrath Funeral Home, 5 West James Street,
Richfield Springs, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 904 words


International
Israeli air strikes continued all day against Syrian and Palestinian positions
in central and eastern Lebanon. Officials in Jerusalem said bombings were being
made because of a long run of attacks on Israeli troops, mostly by forces of the
Palestine Liberation Organization using Syrian-held territory as cover. (Page
A1, Column 6.)
The Reagan Administration reacted to the latest outbreak of fighting in Lebanon
with the statement that it was ''extremely concerned,'' adding that the fighting
underscored the need to negotiate ''as quickly as possible'' the withdrawal of
all foreign forces from Lebanon. (A1:5.)
Forty-six passengers died when a Spantax Airlines DC-10 bound for New York
crashed on takeoff from Malaga, Spain, and caught fire. They were among 393
people aboard, many of them Americans. Spanish officials said 113 people were
injured. (A3:3.)
Deng Xiaoping was elected chairman of the newly formed Central Advisory
Commission to China's Communist Party. The council was created at the 12th party
congress, which concluded last weekend, as a vehicle to get older leaders to
surrender their posts to younger men and go into semi-retirement as a party
elder. The 78-year-old Mr. Deng joined the commission almost immediately.
(A6:3.)
National
A proposed railroad merger that would combine three major Western and
Southwestern lines, the Union Pacific, Missouri Pacific and Western Pacific, was
approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission.  Officials said final details of
the acquistion by Union Pacific of the two other lines would probably be
approved by Oct. 20, and the merger could become effective 30 days later.
(A1:1.)
New hospital regulations developed by the Reagan Administration to replace
requirements regarded as ''costly and unnecessary'' would relax or repeal many
of the current standards governing qualifications of the hospital staff,
sanitation, social services, medical libraries and food served to patients.
(A1:2.)
Insufficient evidence to prosecute Labor Secretary Raymond J.  Donovan was found
in a reopened investigation by a special Federal prosecutor, Leon Silverman. The
prosecutor said some of allegations made against the Secretary of Labor had been
fabricated. (A1:3.)
The insanity defense would be limited under legislation proposed by President
Reagan that also includes two other measures limiting the rights of criminal
defendants. The measures have been debated in Congress. Mr. Reagan said that the
legislation would ''make it more likely that those who commit crimes pay a
price.'' In addition to limiting the insanity defense, the legislation would
revise the ''exclusionary rule'' for barring evidence in criminal trials and
reduce defendants' rights to Federal court review of state court convictions.
(A1:2.)
CBS Cable will close down within 90 days, CBS Inc. announced. The
performing-arts network, the first major programming casualty in the cable
industry, reportedly lost more than $30 million during the last year because of
insufficient advertising revenues, its sole support.  (A1:1.)
CBS Inc. is being sued for libel by Gen. William C. Westmoreland, the former
commander of United States military forces in Vietnam because of its portrayal
of him in a documentary on the Vietnam war. In ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception'' General Westmoreland was described as the head of ''a conspiracy at
the highest levels of American intelligence, to suppress and alter critical
intelligence on the enemy.'' He is seeking $120 million in compensatory and
punitive damages. (C9:5.)
Hearings on a nuclear fallout lawsuit brought by more than 1,100 people against
the Government are scheduled to begin today in Federal Distict Court in Salt
Lake City. The plaintiffs are current or former residents of a region in
southern Utah and northern Arizona near the Nevada desert, where for a 12-year
peiod beginning in 1951 more than 100 atomic bombs were detonated in a testing
program. They contend that they or their relatives developed cancer and other
diseases caused by the radioactive fallout. (A16:1.)
T. Claude Ryan, pioneer aircraft manufacturer and builder of the plane, ''The
Spirit of St. Louis, in which Charles A. Lindbergh made his nonstop solo flight
from New York to Paris, died at his home in San Diego at the age of 84. (A25:1.)

Metropolitan
Governor Carey's endorsement of Mayor Koch's candidacy for Governor might be
near, despite his earlier pledge of neutrality. He has discussed his endorsement
with the Mayor, aides of the Governor and the Mayor said. They said Mr. Carey
was leaning to an endorsement before the gubernatorial primary on Sept. 23.
(B1:5.)
The proposed Lincoln West housing seems likely to win approval from the Board of
Estimate on Thursday if certain modifications are made, officials indicated.
Some members of the board have reservations about the project's size, but a
willingness to compromise runs through intense, last-minute negotiations with
the developers.  Lincoln West would be erected on the largest remaining tract of
undeveloped land in Manhattan and would house 10,000 people. (B3:5.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND FILES LIBEL SUIT AGAINST CBS

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 938 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland, former commander of United States military forces
in Vietnam, filed a libel suit yesterday against CBS Inc. for its portrayal of
him in January in a documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

The documentary said he was the head of ''a conspiracy, at the highest levels of
American military intelligence, to suppress and alter critical intelligence on
the enemy'' during the Vietnam War.

The suit asks for $120 million in compensatory and punitive damages. General
Westmoreland said that if he were to win, he would donate the money to charity.

''Let me emphasize the issue here is not money, not vengeance,'' the general
told a crowded news conference in Washington. He said he decided to enter a
legal battle with CBS because ''there is no way left for me to clear my name, my
honor and the honor of the military.''

Technicalities in Libel Law

The suit, filed in the United States District Court in Greenville, S.C.,
asserted that CBS had damaged the general's personal and professional
reputations by knowingly and recklessly broadcasting false statements in the
documentary. South Carolina is General Westmoreland's home state; also, because
of technicalities in its libel law, it is one of the few states in which lawyers
generally concede that the advantage is with the plaintiff.

Named in the suit were Van Gordon Sauter, president of CBS News; George Crile,
producer of the documentary; Mike Wallace, the program's narrator and
interviewer, and Samuel A. Adams, a former employee of the Central Intelligence
Agency who was CBS's paid consultant for the program.

''CBS will mount a vigorous defense of this lawsuit,'' Mr. Sauter said, ''not
only because we see this suit totally devoid of merit but because it constitutes
a serious threat to independent journalism in our society.''

Open to Intensive Scrutiny

Beyond the prominence of the individuals and institutions involved, the suit
could raise significant issues.

''General Westmoreland is certainly now opening himself up to intensive scrutiny
of his conduct of the Vietnam War,'' Floyd Abrams, a New York lawyer who has
specialized in First Amendment cases, said.

In assembling its defense, CBS could have the opportunity to vigorously
investigate General Westmoreland and the Army's conduct throughout the war.

In filing the suit, which has been expected for weeks, General Westmoreland
rejected an offer made Sept. 8 by CBS of 15 minutes of unedited time at the
beginning of a proposed program to re-examine the issues of enemy troop strength
raised in the documentary.

Follow-Up Program Pledged

''There was no opportunity in that 15 minutes to undo the harm unless CBS
admitted they were wrong,'' Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer said.
''All he would have done would have been to dignify a lie.''

Mr. Sauter pledged the follow-up program in an eight-page memorandum he issued
July 15 to a report on a six-week internal investigation into charges made by TV
Guide that the program had violated CBS News standards of fairness and accuracy.

General Westmoreland had been asking CBS for a public apology since January and
had termed the in-house investigation a ''whitewash.'' On Aug. 10, he sent
Thomas Wyman, president of CBS, a letter outlining his grievances against CBS
News and requesting that the network ''publish a complete apology, approved in
advance by me in the same manner and the same media in which you advertised the
program.''

All Requests Rejected

The general also asked for a compensatory payment for the harm he has suffered
and ''a full retraction, of not less than 45 minutes duration,'' in which CBS
would present ''the actual facts and methods of preparation, concerning the
story you published. The material in this retraction and the production itself
must be subject to my complete approval.''

On Aug. 24, Mr. Sauter rejected all of the requests but reiterated an invitation
to appear on the follow-up, a discussion with representatives of diverse views
on the troop-strength question.

Must Prove 'Malice'

In his statement on the suit, Mr. Sauter expressed regret that General
Westmoreland had declined CBS's offer, which he said ''still stands.'' ''A
15-minute, unedited statement of his position and opinions followed by a
balanced and unedited discussion of the issues would well serve the public's
interest in this matter,'' Mr.  Sauter said. '' A spokesman for CBS News said
that the follow-up was still ''temporarily postponed.''

As a public figure, General Westmoreland must prove not only the falsity of
CBS's statements, but also that they were made with ''malice,'' which has been
defined by the Supreme Court of the United States as knowledge of their falsity
and reckless disregard for whether they were true. In the complaint, Mr. Burt
listed 15 charges against General Westmoreland that he said were ''false,
unfair, inaccurate and defamatory.'' In addition, Mr. Burt noted that the
conspiracy charge was ''a crime punishable by imprisonment and fine.''

Mr. Burt, president of the Capital Legal Foundation, a nonprofit public-interest
law firm, said that much of General Westmoreland's legal costs would be pro
bono. He estimated that CBS could spend as much as $4 milllion a year.

''CBS will try,'' Mr. Burt said, ''to spend us to death.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Debt to the Philippines

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


The rulers of the Philippines, President and Mrs. Marcos, are in the United
States this week to be seen as much as to see. Their visit is meant to dispel
any rumors, or hopes, about the failing vitality of the House of Marcos. Indeed,
they seem to be rehearsing a husbandto-wife succession in the Peron mode.

After 17 years in office, 10 of them with authoritarian powers, Mr. Marcos is
taking a six-month leave and yielding authority to an executive committee whose
most formidable member is Imelda Marcos.  Their state visit to Washington is
meant to augment the legitimacy of the regime, one long burdened by charges of
corruption and cruelty.

In giving the couple a hearing, Americans should not assume that what is good
for the Marcos family is best for the United States.  America has important
military assets in the Philippines. The value of air and naval facilities at
Clark Air Base and on Subic Bay has grown since the Russians took over America's
Vietnam harbor at Cam Ranh Bay. But that security link deserves a longer-term
American view that treats the Filipino people as more than base relations.

Vice President Bush gave a memorable example of the wrong appoach last year
when, in Manila, he toasted Mr. Marcos for his ''adherence to democratic
principles and the democratic process.'' Even by the Reagan Administration's
solicitous standards to allied dictators, that statement was a clanger.

Mr. Marcos's main service to democracy has been to demonstrate how much of it
his countrymen have lost.  The Philippine Constitution, at the time of
independence in 1946, was modeled on America's. Its Presidents were freely
elected, their power checked by an independent Congress, judiciary and civil
service. The press was the liveliest in Southeast Asia;, two parties vigorously
competed for power; the army kept out of politics.

All that vanished in 1972 when Mr. Marcos imposed martial law. In the name of
security and economic growth, personal rule has ever since supplanted
constitutional rule.

Mr. Marcos has contained insurgencies, from Moslem separatists and leftist
guerrillas, while shrugging off the persistent criticism of a Catholic Church
that speaks for most Filipinos. With heavy borrowing, his regime has increased
exports; until fuel costs intervened, economic growth was dramatic. He has
supported American foreign policy and has been duly rewarded with $500 million
in aid for a five-year lease on those military bases. Sensing foreign dismay
with his repressive rule, he lifted martial law last year - but only formally.

The Marcoses, in sum, have been useful but embarrassing allies.  However much
their reign prospers, it is not difficult to distinguish between their
cooperation with America and their betrayal of democratic values. Making that
distinction is what America most owes its former colony.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

KEY COMPONENTS OF THE U.N. OUT OF STEP WITH ITS CHARTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 510 words


To the Editor:

United Nations Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar has demonstrated during
his short term in office a rare quality of executive leadership at the
international level. He should be commended for his refreshing candor this week
in admitting that the U.N. is largely defied or ignored (news story Sept. 8).

In his 1982 annual report, the Secretary General suggests that the U.N. has
reached this sad state by ignoring or defying its own mandate. ''An important
first step'' to restore the credibility of the U.N., ''would be a conscious
recommitment by governments to the Charter,'' he writes.

The U.N. Charter, which Mr. Perez de Cuellar rightly regards as the bible of the
U.N., makes the promotion of peace and security a core principle of the
organization. Yet the General Assembly has repeatedly attacked the peace treaty
between Egypt and Israel and the Camp David accords.

The Charter requires the peaceful settlement of disputes. Yet the General
Assembly has repeatedly endorsed armed struggle against governments and states
unpopular among the undemocratic majority, denying them the equal protection due
a U.N. member state.

Even within the Secretariat one can find a violation of the Charter. Article 100
calls for an impartial international civil service, one that refrains from
seeking or receiving instructions from any external authority. Instead, the
Secretariat contains a Special Unit which acts as a public relations arm of the
P.L.O., attempting to make the P.L.O. seem as benevolent as a P.T.A.

The Secretary General gives special attention to the Security Council, which,
under the Charter, has the primary responsibility to cope with threats to peace
and security. In 1981, it met 60 times but failed to deal even once with the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, with Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia, with Iraq's
invasion of Iran or with Libya's invasion of Chad. Instead, 21 of its 45
meetings devoted to substantive issues dealt with complaints by Arab states
against Israel.

From June to August of this year, the Council adopted 10 resolutions dealing
with Israel's strike against the P.L.O. in Lebanon. But in the previous seven
years it adopted not a single one dealing with the carnage in Lebanon by Syria
and the P.L.O. Passed over were 100,000 deaths and widespread devastation of
sections of Beirut and more than 100 Lebanese villages.

If we attain a serious commitment to the Charter, we can begin to think about
the efficacy of trying to resolve conflicts in the Security Council by placing
15 sovereign states in the position of passing judgment on a 16th, based on the
standard of their own national interests. At this point it is worth repeating
the hope expressed by the Secretary General ''that we can rally once again to
the standards of the Charter, beginning with the peaceful settlement of disputes
and steadily branching out towards the other objectives of that prophetic
document.''
HARRIS O. SCHOENBERG, Director, United Nations Office B'nai B'rith
International, New York, Sept. 9, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BANKS EASE POLISH INTEREST PAYMENTS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 534 words

DATELINE: BONN, Sept. 14


In a highly unusual move, Western banks have agreed to postpone interest
payments owed by Poland as part of an agreement to reschedule $3.4 billion in
Polish debts that fall due in 1982, according to banking officials of Western
Europe.

Final details have not been reached, but the broad outlines of the agreement
have been laid out, the bankers said.  Of the $3.4 billion, $2.3 billion
represents principal and $1.1 billion represents interest. Although banks often
agree to stretch out payments of principal for countries in financial
difficulties, it is rare for banks to agree to postponements of interest
payments. In the United States, the failure of a borrower to make interest
payments as originally scheduled requires the bank to list such credits among
its ''nonaccruing,'' or problem, loans.

Under the agreement, Poland would actually pay the banks only onethird, or $366
million, of the $1.1 billion in interest it owes this year. Another $366 million
would be credited to a special account that Poland would use for short-term
loans to finance essential imports. The remaining third apparently would be part
of the rescheduling of principal payments.

In addition to the payments of interest, Poland would pay about $115 million in
principal, or about 5 percent of the amount of principal it owes this year.
Poland would not have to pay anything on the remaining $2.18 billion of
principal due this year for the next four years. After that grace period, Poland
would have to repay the $2.18 billion over a four-year period in semiannual
installments.

The money is owed to about 500 banks scattered throughout the non-Communist
world. The biggest lenders, however, are West German banks.  Polish bankers and
their Western counterparts had set a Sept. 10 deadline to reach an agreement,
but the deadline was extended two months by mutual agreement late last month.

The talks, held in Frankfurt, between representatives of the 500 Western banks
and officials of Poland's Handlowy Bank for Foreign Trade were complicated by
Poland's insistence that, in contrast to 1981, it would be unable to meet
payments of principal and interest.

Earlier this year, Poland's creditor banks in the West agreed to roll over the
payment of most of the $2.4 billion in principal owed by the Poles to Western
banks in 1981. But they insisted, in accordance with customary rescheduling
practices, on payment of interest totaling roughly $500 million.

The banks forged ahead with the negotiations despite last January's agreement by
governments of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization not to reschedule Poland's
1982 debt to NATO governments until martial law is lifted in Poland.

Poland's overall debt to the West is estimated at $25 billion.  Despite
continuing discussions in the Reagan Administration on whether to declare Poland
in default, the agreement to reschedule the bank debt has found wide support
among Western banks, including American banks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 16, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAROCS ASSERTS U.S. SOMETIMES FORGETS

BYLINE: By LYNN ROSELLINI, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15


President Ferdinand E. Marcos arrived here today for talks with President Reagan
and other Administration leaders concerning American economic aid and military
bases in the Philippines.

Mr. Marcos's Philippine Airlines jet touched down shortly after 11 A.M. at
Andrews Air Force Base, where in brief remarks to State Department officials and
about 100 Filipino-American well-wishers, he reminded Americans of their debt to
the Philippines.

''I bring the fraternal greetings,'' Mr. Marcos said, ''of the 50 million
Filipinos who are your friends and have been your friends in the most critical
days of the past and continue to maintain the reservoir of good will for America
and the Americans - even if you occasionally forget about them.''

Last Visit Was 16 Years Ago

Mr. Marcos last visited Washington 16 years ago, shortly after he was elected
president. In 1972, he established martial law in the Philippines, creating an
authoritarian regime that has drawn criticism at home and abroad.

Mr. Marcos and his wife, Imelda, boarded separate helicopters at the airfield
for a short flight into town. At the Washington Monument grounds, Mrs. Marcos,
wearing a long, green, traditional Filipino dress, was escorted to a limousine
by an aide with a parasol.

Seconds later her husband was greeted by Secretary of State George P. Shultz and
several hundred cheering, flag-waving Filipino-Americans. While Mr. Shultz
waited at his side, Mr. Marcos waved to the crowd, which had been assembled by
pro-Marcos groups and the Philippine Embassy here.

The Philippine leader did not seem to notice about 20 demonstrators, partly
hidden in a grove of trees, who chanted and held signs protesting his visit.

A 'Private' Agenda

Later, the Marcoses were taken to quarters at the Sheraton Washington Hotel.
Blair House, traditionally used by state visitors, is being renovated.

Mr. Marcos's schedule this afternoon was billed as ''private.'' Mrs. Marcos, who
in addition to being First Lady of the Philippines is also Minister of Human
Settlements and Governor of the Manila Region, met with Treasury Secretary
Donald T. Regan, Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige and United States Trade
Representative Bill Brock.

On a separate matter, the University of Pennsylvania said today that, contrary
to reports from Manila that the university was to award Mrs. Marcos an honorary
degree, no such award was planned.  According to a Philippine Embassy spokesman,
the Manila Government had heard that Mrs. Marcos would be ''honored'' at the
university and mistakenly presumed this meant the award of an honorary degree.

The official schedule for the Marcos visit begins Thursday when President Reagan
greets the couple in a White House ceremony including full military honors. In
subsequent meetings with Mr.  Reagan, Secretary Shultz, Defense Secretary Caspar
W. Weinberger and Congressional foreign affairs committees, Mr. Marcos is
expected to initiate discussions of American bases at Clark Field and Subic Bay.


Importance Assessed

The facilities, once vital to American military operations in Vietnam, are
considered by the Administration to be a key link in the communication,
transport and supply lines that connect United States Naval forces in the Indian
Ocean with the American mainland and Hawaii.

Equally important, officials say, the bases have become crucial to United States
monitoring of Soviet naval forces traveling from Vladivostok to Da Nang or Cam
Ranh Bay in Vietnam and on into the Indian Ocean. The Russians have built
listening posts at former American bases in Vietnam and often fly reconnaissance
missions to the edge of Philippine air space.

President Marcos is also expected to raise the subject of economic assistance.
The Philippines, whose economy is faltering, currently receive more than $100
million a year in United States aid. It seems likely that Mr. Marcos will get a
friendly hearing. ''It's very important,'' a senior American official said
earlier this week, ''that we maintain a good working relationship with the
Philippines.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ferdinand Marcos supporters

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 16, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Americans in Laos Visit 1972 Crash Site

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 15


Four Americans looking for relatives missing in the Vietnam War said today that
they had found the wreckage, in Laos, of an Air Force C-130 and the remains of
its crew, convincing a Florida woman that her husband was dead.

Ann Hart, of Pensacola, Fla., part of the first group of private United States
citizens to search for Americans missing in action, said in a telephone
interview that she was convinced that her husband, Maj. Thomas T. Hart 2d of the
Air Force, could not have survived the crash of the C-130 Hercules shot down
Dec. 21, 1972. A Laotian pilot flew the group Tuesday to a point near the crash
site, 215 miles south of Vientiane, and the delegation then trekked the rest of
the way through underbrush.

Mrs. Hart is a member of a delegation of the privately financed National League
of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, currently on
the first such tour of Laos and Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 16, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. ASSAILED ON DELAYING AGENT ORANGE STUDY

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 683 words


The chairman of the informal Vietman veterans' caucus in Congress charged
yesterday that ''certain parties in the V.A. are deliberately trying to delay
the Agent Orange study.''

The chairman, Representative Thomas A. Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, warned
that unless the Veterans Administration finishes plans for a proposed study of
the effects of the chemical defoliant within seven days and begins a pilot
effort within a month, he will introduce legislation to relieve the V.A. of
''all responsibilities relative to this long-delayed study.''

A public relations spokesman for the Veterans Administration said the agency
felt it had pursued scientific research on the Agent Orange issue ''as
vigorously as possible.''

Mr. Daschle issued his criticism at a hearing in Washington called by the
Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee of the House Veterans Affairs
Committee, of which he is a member. He said the delays had been caused by the
V.A.'s inability ''to face the ultimate decision of compensating Vietnam
veterans and their families'' because of exposure to Agent Orange. He called the
delays ''an unconscionable affront to the dignity of Vietnam veterans and their
families.''

Joined in Criticism

He was joined in his criticism by other members of Congress.  Representative
Margaret M. Heckler, Republican of Massachusetts, characterized the $5 million
allocated by the V.A. to study Agent Orange as ''an incredibly small amount,''
when compared to the agency's total research budget of $140 million. And
Representative Robert W. Edgar, Democrat of Pennsylvania, accused the V.A. of
failing to do anything until it had been ''hit over the head with a
two-by-four.'' He urged that the V.A. or some other agency be required to do the
study at a faster pace.

Agent Orange was the name of a chemical defoliant used by the United States in
Vietnam. Made of a 50-50 mix of the butyl esters of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, two
herbicides, the defoliant also contained TCDD, a dioxin contaminant, which is
known to be a powerful carcinogen.

Veterans suspect that Agent Orange may have caused or contributed to a spectrum
of symptoms, including cancer, deformed children, stillbirths, miscarriages,
loss of sex drive, low sperm counts and changes in personality. The Government
says there is no evidence that Agent Orange is the cause of the ailments, but
the veterans have clamored for a responsible epidemiological study to settle the
question. The V.A. was ordered to do such a study by Congress more than three
years ago, but thus far has been unable to start one or even agree on the
scientific methodology that such a study might employ.

Mr. Daschle said that evidence was already at hand that Vietnam veterans
suffering from rare cancers of the soft tissue were entitled to compensation,
since three studies conducted in Sweden had established a link between such
cancers and Swedes who were exposed to dioxin-contaminated herbicides.

'A Statutory Framework'

Mr. Daschle criticized the Veterans Administration for failing to develop ''a
statutory framework for the resolution of veterans' claims'' and emphasized that
the estimated completion date of the stalled V.A. study, 1988 or 1989, was
unsatisfactory to him.

The V.A. spokesman said the agency had encouraged other arms of Government to do
independent studies of the Agent Orange issue. He said that the V.A.'s activity
caused the Air Force to decide to do a study that will require about 25 years
and will trace any health problems encountered by former members of Operation
Ranchhand, the Air Force unit that sprayed Agent Orange in Vietnam.

The spokesman also said that the V.A. had encouraged the Centers for Disease
Control in Atlanta to undertake a study now underway of birth defects that might
be suffered by Vietnam veterans and their families.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DOWNTOWN SITE CHOSEN FOR A VIETNAM MEMORIAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 512 words


A brick plaza in lower Manhattan has been selected by the city as the site for a
Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Mayor Koch announced yesterday.

The design of the memorial, to be built at Jeannette Park, adjacent to 55 Water
Street, will come from a public competition. The city is putting no money into
the project, but hopes to raise the entire $1 million cost from private
contributions.

Officials said that about half the money would be used for counseling and
employment programs for the 250,000 New Yorkers who were in the armed services
from 1964 to 1975.

''Whatever one thinks of the Vietnam War, veterans of the conflict deserve
recognition,'' Mr. Koch said at a City Hall news conference.  He said he hoped a
ground-breaking could be held on Memorial Day, 1983.

Decision Pleases Veterans

Mr. Koch was joined by representatives of 15 veterans' groups, who praised the
decision to include money for services.  ''The services are something that we
really need,'' said John Rowan, president of the Queens chapter of Vietnam
Veterans of America. ''Not just stones and mortar for those long gone.''

Regarding the relatively modest cost, Mr. Rowan said he hoped the city was
underestimating the amount of money that would be raised.  The site selection
comes nearly two years after Mr. Koch formed a task force to study the
establishment of a memorial for Vietnam-era veterans.

Robert Watson, an investment banker who was co-chairman of the task force, said
the group had looked at about 30 sites and had considered placing a memorial in
each borough. He said the group settled on Jeannette Park because it was
relatively central to the whole city and was available.

No Plans for Raising More

He agreed that the $500,000 planned for services would not go far in helping to
solve unemployment and other problems experienced by many Vietnam veterans. He
said the city did not have any plans to raise money after that amount was spent.

Jeannette Park, slightly larger than an acre, is between 55 Water Street and the
American Express headquarters. Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive separates it from the
East River.

It contains water fountains, reflecting pools and seating areas.  Its
stepped-design creates several levels and there is a shopping mall underground.

It became a park in 1884, taking its name from a ship that participated in an
Arctic expedition financed by The New York Herald, according to Joseph Bresnan,
the city's Director of Historic Parks.  The ship was crushed by ice during the
expedition.

The developers of 55 Water Street, the Uris Brothers, were permitted to build a
larger building than the zoning laws would have allowed in exchange for
replacing the park grass and shrubbery with bricks and creating the plaza. The
owners of the building, Olympia & York, are responsible for maintaining the
plaza, which is popular among lunchtime crowds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of lower Manhattan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 18, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Thais Urge 9 Nations To Take More Refugees

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 17


Thailand warned the United States and other non-Communist nations today that it
would force thousands of Indochinese refugees back to their homelands unless
other countries increased their refugee quotas.

The National Security Council leader, Prasong Soonsiri, called in the
Ambassadors of the United States, Canada, Australia, Britain, France, West
Germany, Italy, Belgium and Japan and told them Thailand had no intention of
becoming permanent host to more than 175,000 refugess from Laos, Cambodia and
Vietnam.

In addition to the 175,000 Indochinese in holding centers in Thailand, about
300,000 Cambodians live in makeshift settlements along the Thai border.

He said the number of refugees being accepted by Western nations had dropped
considerably. He said only 24,123 refugees left Thai camps in the first eight
months of 1982, compared with 70,395 in the same period last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SURVEY OF TEACHERS REVEALS MORALE PROBLEMS

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2284 words


Most public school teachers in New York State enjoy their work, think they are
doing a good job and are proud of their profession, but nearly half say they
would choose another field if they had it to do over again, according to a
survey conducted by The New York Times.

Evidence that even dedicated teachers would look elsewhere is one sign of what
appears to be a significant morale problem among public school teachers across
the state. Respondents complained about excessive paper work and lack of support
from their superiors, and the survey found evidence that violence, or the fear
of it, was part of daily life for more than a third of the teachers.

Running through their comments was a feeling that teachers no longer commanded
the respect they once did -from students, parents and the community at large -
and that teaching, while important and personally gratifying, was simply not
appreciated by society.

'Anyone Can Do This'

''You are constantly trying to justify yourself as a professional,'' wrote a
physical education teacher in Pine Bush in Orange County. A high school Spanish
teacher in Jamaica, Queens, complained that ''the attitude of the public tends
to look down on teachers,'' while a special-education teacher in District 20 in
New York City suggested that low salaries, a widespread source of concern, were
rooted in public attitudes toward the profession.  ''The salary seems to say
anyone can do this,'' she said.

In conducting the poll, The Times sent questionnaires to 13,623 teachers
throughout the state asking their views on a variety of topics, from what they
liked or disliked about teaching to curriculum content. Surveys were returned by
5,702 teachers, considered an unusually high response for a mail survey.
Interviews were also conducted with a number of teachers who volunteered to
elaborate on their responses with a reporter.

The survey found that the majority of teachers in New York State agreed with
Rosemarie Perez, a special-education teacher at an elementary school on the
Lower East Side of Manhattan, that ''the quality of public education is very
high.''

Helping or Motivating Children

Another conclusion of the survey was that most teachers felt good about what
they were doing. Asked whether they were ''proud or not so proud to be a teacher
today,'' nearly two-thirds said they were proud. This figure was somewhat lower
in New York City, where slightly more than half said they were proud. Women were
more likely than men to be proud of being a teacher.

Teachers across the state also seemed to be in general agreement about the
rewards of their profession. When asked what they liked most about being a
teacher, nearly two-thirds gave responses that boiled down to helping or
motivating children.

''I love children,'' replied a teacher of severely emotionally disturbed
children in an elementary school in District 24 in Queens.  ''I enjoy watching
them grow intellectually, socially and emotionally. Teaching is the most
challenging experience that I've ever encountered.''

Builder Levy, a 39-year-old special-education teacher in the Bushwick section of
Brooklyn who uses photography in his teaching, said that he liked ''giving
students a feeling of excitement and inspiration with knowledge'' but was quick
to add that the giving was reciprocal. ''They introduce me to a whole new world
that they are much more sophisticated about, the life of Bushwick and the life
of the streets, and they manifest an awful lot of humanism,'' he said.

The teachers also seemed to be in agreement about the problems and frustrations
of the profession. Asked what they liked least about their job, one-third cited
excessive paper work, insensitive or incompetent superiors or other irritations
of an administrative nature. Running through many of the responses was the theme
that the system in which they must operate got in the way of the things that
attracted them to teaching in the first place.

'Need an Outside Job'

Respondents suggested that administrators frequently made decisions for
political rather than educational reasons. Nearly one in 10 said that an
inadequate salary was their biggest problem. ''I think teaching is the greatest
job going, but you really need an outside job to support yourself,'' said Elaine
Wishnow, a fifth-grade teacher at Public School 46 in Brooklyn who teaches dog
training in the evening.

Miss Wishnow said she spent $120 to $150 every Christmas buying a library book
or a stuffed animal for each student. ''It makes the children happy,'' she said.
''You have to see the looks on their faces to appreciate it. But I'm single. I
can afford it.''

Men were twice as likely as women to cite low salaries as either the thing they
liked least about teaching or the biggest problem they faced. ''I have a son who
has just been accepted at Harvard, and two more teen-agers will be following
within the next few years,'' said a teacher of American history at Forest Hills
High School in Queens.  ''And I can't finance their education.''

Teachers in New York City start at an annual salary of at least $11,821 and,
after a period of years, can reach a maximum annual salary of $25,822. This is a
fairly typical salary schedule for teachers across the state, who are paid at
rates determined by the more than 600 school districts.

'Correcting Papers for 2 Hours'

One theme that ran through the questionnaires and interviews was that the public
did not understand or respect what teachers do.  ''People think teachers have a
very easy job,'' said a Spanish teacher at a high school in Queens. ''They see
you on vacation for two months, but they don't see you coming home at 3:30 and
correcting papers for two hours.''

Perhaps the most notable response to emerge from the survey was that while
two-thirds said they were proud to be teachers, nearly half, 47 percent, said
they would go into another profession if they had it to do over again. The
figure was even higher, 55 percent, in New York City. It was lowest in
Westchester County, where only 35 percent said they would not go into teaching
again.

Women, teachers less than 29 years old or more than 50, those less well
educated, teachers from minority groups and those who teach in elementary
schools, work with gifted students or teach remedial education were more likely
to say they would become teachers again.

Not surprisingly, those who said they would choose teaching again tended to be
more positive about the quality of education in their schools and were less
likely to have been assaulted or to be afraid that they would be.

'A Way Not to Get Drafted'

By contrast, men, the middle aged and those concerned about personal safety were
more likely to say they would look into another profession. Those who thought
that disadvantaged or handicapped students were getting too much attention were
also more likely to say they would try another field.

Responses to interviews suggested -although the survey was not designed to
isolate such factors - that one especially disenchanted group of teachers might
be men who entered the profession between 1966 and 1968 as a way of avoiding
military service in Vietnam.

Harvey Brandwein, a 37-year-old mathematics teacher in a junior high school in
the South Bronx, said in an interview that he had become a teacher when he
graduated from City College in 1967 ''as a way not to get drafted,'' and had
stayed on even after he no longer faced the prospect of military service. ''I
was single,'' he said.  ''I enjoyed the summer vacation and being in a system
with a lot of young people. I was also more liberal about what I might do for
society. I thought I would help the poor and underprivileged.''

Mr. Brandwein said that his idealism had been short-lived. He came to realize,
he said, that school was a place to keep children ''so that businessmen would be
safe during the day.''

'Can't Really Deal With Them'

''I don't see kids learning,'' he added. ''You don't have time to help the best
kids because you spend 25 minutes in every class dealing with the troublemakers,
and you can't really deal with them.  You can only suspend a kid two times for
five days, and the kids know this. It's tough being 37 years old and dealing
with 13-year-old kids who are laughing in your face.''

Asked about the responses indicating that only half the teachers would return to
the profession, Frank Macchiarola, the New York City Schools Chancellor, called
the figure ''lower than I would have hoped for, but probably realistic.'' He
attributed it to a lack of status cited in many of the questionnaires and to the
limited opportunity for advancement. ''There is something troublesome about a
system where you hold people in the same position for 20 years without a
promotion,'' he said.

Albert Shanker, president of the United Federation of Teachers, called the high
percentage of those who said they would not choose teaching again
''disturbing.''

''It shows a basic moral problem,'' he said. ''If I felt that 50 percent of my
staff here at the U.F.T. would not return, I would be very concerned.''

'Doing Something Worthwhile'

One interesting group was the 26 percent who said they were proud of being
teachers but still would not do it again. One of them was Marsha D. Delaney, who
teaches vocal music at a junior high school in Clifton Park, north of Albany.

In an interview, Miss Delaney said she took pride in ''knowing that I am doing
something worthwhile and that I am a professional person with quite a bit of
training.'' She said she still enjoyed teaching but added that ''a lot of my
original enthusiasm is waning'' and that she was beginning to think of other
ways to use her musical abilities. ''I can only take it a couple of more
years,'' she said.

Teachers from minority groups were often among those expressing profound
ambiguities about their job. Roman Foster, a 31-year-old black who teaches
social studies and English at Junior High School 232 in East Flatbush, Brooklyn,
said that he had become a teacher because the job offered him a chance to ''be
among young kids and to influence and shape lives in positive ways.''

''Kids need heroes,'' he said. ''They need people they can look up to, but they
don't have role models. It would be a hard struggle for a black to reach levels
of being influential within the Board of Education.''

'Doesn't Have That Much Future'

Mr. Foster said that while he would choose teaching again, he was now thinking
of changing to another career, possibly journalism.  ''Teaching doesn't have
that much future for a young person who wants to get ahead in life,'' he said.
''Being black puts me at a disadvantage.''

One element in the morale problems faced by teachers is that violence is a daily
concern for nearly four of 10 in the survey.  More than a quarter of the
teachers said that they worried about their personal safety, 7 percent of those
in the poll saying they worried ''a great deal'' and 20 percent saying they
worried ''somewhat.'' Moreover, nearly a quarter said they had actually been
''physically assaulted by a student while on school premises.'' When asked about
the biggest problem facing them as teachers today, one out of seven cited
concerns for personal safety.

The problem of violence is especially strong in New York City.  Nineteen percent
of city teachers, but only 10 percent of those elsewhere, cited physical safety
as their biggest problem, and onethird of city teachers, twice as many as
elsewhere, said they had been assaulted.

Male teachers were more likely to report that they had been the victims of
assaults than women, but women were just as fearful.  Perhaps not surprisingly,
those who had been assaulted were significantly more likely to say that they
would go into another profession if they had it to do over. Fifty-eight percent
of those who had been assaulted said they would try a different profession,
while 44 percent of those who had not been assaulted said they would reject
teaching.

'Threatened to Kill Me'

One junior high school teacher in the Bronx recounted an incident in which a
15-year-old student ''threatened to kill me'' after the teacher pressed her to
return her report card signed by her parents.  ''I told the principal I wanted
to press charges, but he ordered me not to,'' the teacher said.

In this case the incident had a happy conclusion. The teacher began helping the
child, who was living with a court-appointed guardian because her mother was an
alcoholic and because she had been sexually abused by her father.

The teacher said she had written a note to the guardian saying that the student
had to come to school every day, ''and she eventually realized that I was trying
to help her.''

''I spent many times alone with her trying to get her to get rid of her hate,
and eventually she graduated,'' the teacher said. ''One day she brought me a
present, a blouse. It was a very lovely gesture, because here is a child who
doesn't have much money. That made me very happy. It made the whole rotten year
worthwhile.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table on teachers' attitudes table on quality of
education

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. BODY OPENS A 3-MONTH PARLEY TUESDAY

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 18


The General Assembly, a conclave of all l57 United Nations members, opens its
annual meeting here Tuesday with an agenda thick with well-worn items.

The delegates are expected to pass resolutions that denounce Israel and South
Africa, demand that the Soviet Union withdraw its troops from Afghanistan and
that Vietnam leave Cambodia. Cambodia's Assembly seat is also likely to be again
awarded to the forces of Pol Pot, enhanced this year by a new president, Prince
Norodom Sihanouk. All of these resolutions are likely to be approved by large
margins.

Two relatively new subjects that could embarrass the United States and Britain
may also be deliberated.

Independence for Puerto Rico

One is a Cuban effort to win a declaration demanding ''selfdetermination and
independence'' for Puerto Rico. The other is an attempt by Latin American
nations, led by Argentina, to pass a resolution calling on London to negotiate
the future of the Falkland Islands with Buenos Aires.

How much difference any of these resolutions would make is a question often
asked here. Smaller countries contend that such measures help mold world opinion
and maintain pressure on nations labeled as wrongdoers. But in a year when even
the resolutions of the Security Council are widely ignored, the value of the
annual meeting here has been questioned. Assembly edicts are only
recommendations; Council commands are supposed to be orders.

Diplomats from all regions say that the foreign ministers who come to New York
will devote some of their remarks, in formal speeches and corridor talk, to the
world body's own internal crisis. Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar set
the tone in his annual review when he said the United Nations had been blocked
from accomplishing its principal task: keeping the peace.

Shultz to Meet Gromyko

A major function of the Assembly is to provide an occasion for foreign ministers
to meet privately, and this year will be no exception. On Sept. 28 Secretary of
State George P. Shultz is due to see Andrei A. Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign
Minister, for the first time. At least 60 other foreign ministers are also
expected, and they too will retire to private discussions of problems among
their countries.

For the United States, the Shultz-Gromyko session could well be the most
critical feature of the three-month Assembly meeting. But the United States
delegate, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, is likely to face her stiffest task over the
Cuban attempt to portray Puerto Rico as a colony seeking independence.
Washington has argued that Puerto Rico, a commonwealth, is part of the United
States and that the Assembly has no business interfering in an internal matter.

Backed by the Soviet bloc and some third world nations for whom colonialism is a
rallying cry, Havana seems particularly determined in its bid to win an Assembly
declaration. Diplomats here say strong lobbying by the United States could turn
an American defeat into a Cuban embarrassment. These envoys think there is some
chance Washington might even seek to keep the issue off the agenda. Failing
that, the United States will try to prevent Havana from gaining more than 60
votes, a goal that seems achievable.

The British face a less serious problem. The Latin Americans are not planning to
demand the return of the Falkland Islands to Argentina but merely to call for
negotiations over the islands' future. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, in the
aftermath of last spring's successful conflict, has ruled but any talks. But
most United Nations members believe the fate of the Falklands must be settled by
diplomacy.

Asian, African and Latin nations also hope to begin global negotiations aimed at
transferring resources from rich to poor countries. After hesitating three
years, the United States has accepted a formula to start the talks. But
countries rich in oil have amended it in a way that could bypass any
arrangements for the price and supply of oil.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THREATS PRECEDED AN EDITOR'S DEATH

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Sept. 18


The police say they are investigating the possibility that the unsolved slaying
of a Vietnamese newspaper editor here last month was in retaliation for one or
more of the editor's articles.

The editor, Nguyen Dam Thong, 48 years old, was shot to death outside his home
Aug. 24. Shortly before the slaying, friends and relatives said, Mr. Thong
received numerous threats about his articles. His wife said she had been unable
to revive her husband's biweekly newspaper because the threats, now directed
toward her, had continued.

''We don't know anything for sure and we don't have any specific suspects,'' a
Houston homicide detective, J.@W. Ellis, said. ''But he sure made a lot of
enemies with that paper and there doesn't seem to be many other possible
motives.''

The killing has raised considerable concern among leaders of the approximately
40,000 Vietnamese who live here because Mr. Thong was the third Vietnamese
editor to have been slain or shot at in this country in slightly over a year.
The community leaders said the attacks were part of a growing incidence of
violence among Vietnamese refugees that was going largely unchecked because the
police were unfamiliar with their language and culture.

Paper Largest of Three

''You Americans, you take your free press, free thought for granted,'' said
Pauline Van Tho, head of a Vietnamese resettlement program here. ''When we first
came here, we did too. But now, we start to wonder.''

Mr. Thong, a 30-year career journalist fled with his family from Saigon, now
known as Ho Chi Minh City, and came to this country in 1975. He started the
newspaper, Tu Do, which means freedom, in August 1981 and rapidly turned it into
the largest of the three Vietnameselanguage newspapers in Houston. Readers
described it as a generalinterest newspaper that tended to be a bit sensational.

''There was a lot of controversial stuff in there,'' Mrs. Van Tho said. ''Maybe
too much.'' The articles dealt with a wide range of topics affecting the
Vietnamese here, including Ku Klux Klan activities against Vietnamese fishermen
off the Texas coast. But the articles that seemed to cause the greatest notice
were Mr. Thong's campaign against local money-raising groups that he deemed
insincere in their support of anti-Communist leaders in Vietnam and against
refugee resettlement programs that he said were fraudulent.

Angry Calls Turned to Threats

In his last issue, for example, Mr. Thong published a front-page article on an
anti-Communist Vietnamese group here that said it was headed by a military hero
in Vietnam. In the article, Mr. Thong said that the man was not associated with
the group. On another occasion, Mr. Thong said that a businessman, asserting
that he was supported by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, had duped refugees
here into paying him as much as $20,000 to reunite them with their families
abroad, a task the businessman was not able to fulfill.

Mr. Thong's wife, Hoa, said that as late as three days before his death her
husband received an anonymous call from someone threatening to kill him if he
continued his newspaper. She said that another call was made the day after he
died and that the threats had continued since then.

''I wanted to keep the paper going,'' Mrs. Thong said. ''But with these threats,
how can I? I feel guilty I cannot follow the spirit of his work, but I just
can't now.''

The killing here occurred 13 months after Lam Trong Duong, editor of a community
newsletter in San Francisco, was shot to death on a busy street there. And last
January in Los Angeles, Bong Huu Bach, the publisher of a small newspaper, was
shot at but not hit as he left a restaurant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of a transmission error, an article in last Sunday's paper incorrectly
identified a Vietnamese newspaper editor who was slain in Houston. He was Nguyen
Dam Phong.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUPERPOWERS KEEP U.N. ON A TIGHT LEASH

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y.


More than 60 foreign ministers and a handful of government chiefs are expected
in New York, starting this week, for the opening of the General Assembly, an
annual jamboree of speeches, resolutions and, sometimes, serious diplomatic
business conducted in corridors and hotel suites. This 37th session comes at a
nadir in United Nations history, when many delegates question whether the
organization has become as sterile as the League of Nations in the 1930's.

The organization's writ now rarely runs beyond the iron railing on First Avenue
or the East River shoreline. A long roster of nations have defied its orders or
refused to bring their conflicts to its halls - Argentina, Israel, Chad, Libya,
Iran, Iraq, Vietnam, the Soviet Union and more. The prevailing tone of despair
was sounded recently by the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar. ''This
year, time after time,'' he said, ''we have seen the organization set aside or
rebuffed in situations in which it should, and could, have played an important
role. I cannot disguise my deep anxiety at present trends.''

Perhaps the most ignominious moment came in June when Israeli armor rolled
through 7,000 blue-helmeted, lightly armed United Nations peacekeepers, who were
stationed in southern Lebanon to separate Israelis and Palestine Liberation
Organization guerrillas. Later in Beirut, Israel rejected United Nations
observers. Last week, as Israeli forces occupied Moslem west Beirut, a unanimous
Security Council demanded an Israeli pullback. But the Israeli delegate, Yehuda
Z. Blum, stalked out before the vote, literally turning his back on the Council.
Mr. Perez de Cuellar had considered proposing a ''serious deterrent'' for
brushing peacekeepers aside. But the Secretary General, offering proposals for
improvements, deleted the reference. An overt display of muscle would be likely
to incur the wrath of the five great powers with permanent Security Council
seats, the Soviet Union, United States, France, Britain and China.

The critical fact, most diplomats agree, is that the United Nations is a
collection of states unwilling to cede sovereign power to a collective
organization. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was not brought to the Council
because everybody knew that Moscow would veto any Council command. The United
States joined in resolutions ordering Israel to observe cease-fires in Lebanon
and to accept United Nations observers. But when these edicts were defied,
Washington was unwilling to join other Council members in prohibiting arms sales
to Israel.
Sounding the Alarm Early

Now, Mr. Perez de Cuellar has raised the issue of impotence and nearly every
foreign minister will feel compelled to address it. His proposals are likely to
win praise even if they cannot grapple with the inherent contradiction between
national interest and collective action. He wants a diplomatic early warning
system to spot disputes before they turn into wars. He pledged that his own
office would develop a system for picking out trouble spots, bringing them to
the Council before the bullets fly. He proposed that the Council move promptly
into disputes, dispatching mediators or initiating negotiations.

Few diplomats would quarrel with this in the abstract. But particular cases are
something else. Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, for instance, welcomed Iraq's
invasion of an Iran dominated by revolutionary fundamentalists. Syria and Libya,
friends of Teheran, could only rejoice at Iran's successful resistance. When one
side wants the war halted, the other wishes it well. Similarly, Argentina and
Britain alternately sought and evaded Council action in their battle for the
Falklands.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar also proposed that members should use their influence to
win compliance for Council orders. But this looks better on paper than in fact.
In Lebanon, many diplomats question whether Washington had much influence over
Israel or Moscow over Syria and the P.L.O. Above all, the Secretary General
wants Security Council peacekeeping orders backed by guarantees of collective
action, embargoing arms or trade against countries that ignore its commands.
Here, too, he runs up against sovereign nations willing to punish their enemies'
clients but not their own. Finally, he urged the Council's foreign ministers to
hold a special meeting on the crisis in the United Nations. Britain and the
United States have begun private talks on holding such a seminar.

Third world foreign ministers will offer remedies of their own.  Some will argue
that they should be given permament Council member seats with veto rights. That
would give a few Asians, Africans or Latin Americans influence, but it is not
clear how it would assure greater respect for Council edicts. Anyway, the
present five will not share their veto power. Outside the United Nations,
well-meaning groups have long argued that the veto itself is the greatest
obstacle to world peace. Within the organization, it is regarded as a practical
reflection of power.

Many diplomats doubt that the United Nations can be effective as long as the two
superpowers challenge each other around the world.  Mr. Perez de Cuellar said
the United Nations ''presupposes, at a minimum, a working relationship among the
permanent members.'' Officials recall that the Middle East war of 1973 was ended
by the combined efforts of the Soviet Union and the United States in the
Security Council; they shared a common interest.

The Secretary General's reforms may provide some relief. But for a more
effective United Nations, the critical conditions appear to be some thaw in
Soviet-American relations and a readiness by the other 155 sovereign states to
use the place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of United Nations troops in south Lebanon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDITOR'S CHOICE

BYLINE: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.50.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 97 words

DATELINE: AUNT JULIA AND THE SCRIPTWRITER, by Mario Vargas Llosa.


four previously published reviews, articles and essays. FAMILY INSTALLMENTS, by
Edward Rivera. (William Morrow, $14.50.) A family chronicle about growing up
Hispanic in both Puerto Rico and New York's El Barrio. GOD'S GRACE, by Bernard
Malamud. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.50.) A dark, biblical fable about man's
fall. THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) A large
novel about Americans in the Vietnam War. THOMAS E. DEWEY AND HIS TIMES, by
Richard Norton Smith. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A political biography of the
G.O.P. Presidential nominee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: NEW ROCHELLE

BYLINE: By GEORGE W. GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 8; Page 9, Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1513 words


ASK City Manager C. Samuel Kissinger about the character of New R ochelle and he
will say it is a community that cherishes the values a nd ambiance of the
American small town.

''Here there is clearly a priority on maintaining the residential life style,''
he said. ''This is what makes New Rochelle.'' Then he proudly cited the economic
development that is reviving a oncedecaying downtown business district.

New Rochelle was established on the southernmost tip of what is now Westchester
County nearly 300 years ago by Huguenots and named after a community in their
native France. It has a housing stock made up mostly of single-family homes
built in a variety of styles, from stately Norman-Tudor to more modest American
wood-shingled. Most of the homes sit on clean, tree-shaded streets, exemplifying
middleclass suburbia before the advent of the development tract.

The town's homey charm is captured in the works of Norman Rockwell, the
illustrator, who lived here early in his life. Among the city's current
celebrities are E.L. Doctorow, the author of ''Ragtime''; Robert Merrill, the
opera singer, and Ruby Dee and Ossie Davis, the actors.

''Some of us never realized those Rockwell bird cages and kitchen tables we
thought came from Iowa were all right here,'' said Thea Eichler, who with her
husband, an accountant, moved here from Manhattan in 1964. The Eichlers have
since raised a family of five children in a baronial three-story house with 10
rooms situated on more than a third of an acre. The parcel is in a section
called Paine Heights, once part of a farm owned by Thomas Paine, the leading
pamphleteer of the Revolutionary War.

According to Fran Eisner, principal broker in the real-estate concern of
Oshlag-Eisner, a house similar to the Eichlers' might range in price between
$165,000 and $190,000 and its annual taxes would range between $3,500 to $4,500.

IN the city's less affluent southern end, large, older houses cost a round
$70,000. Rentals range from $450 to $600 for a one-bedroom a partment, but
finding one is difficult. According to Mr. Kissinger, t he vacancy rate is less
than 0.5 percent.

For rentals, ''people are going into second-floor taxpayers or the older
multiple dwelling walkups over stores in the southern end of the city,'' Mrs.
Eisner said.

''There are no apartments in the residential areas,'' she added.''The shortage
is one of our problems.'' The city is close enough to New York to make commuting
relatively easy. Traveling by auto on the New England Thruway, which slices
diagonally accross its lower half, New Rochelle is 17 miles northeast of
Manhattan. By Conrail's New Haven division, Grand Central Terminal is about 32
minutes away.

With a 1980 population of 70,794, the town is large enough to support two radio
stations, a cable-television station and its own daily newspaper, The Standard
Star, with a circulation of about 14,000.

A pervasive spirit of voluntarism knits the city together. There are 40
religious institutions and 500 community organizations, among them such groups
as the New Rochelle Art Association, the Boys Club, Communications Club, the
Huguenot-Thomas Paine Historical Society, the Rotary Club and the North Italy
Society.

Students, educators and parents all speak highly of the quality of their
schools. Average classroom size for both elementary and secondary school is one
teacher for every 24 students. There are six elementary schools, two junior
highs and one high school, as well as several parochial schools. The city also
is home to two institutions of higher learning, the College of New Rochelle and
Iona College.

New Rochelle Hospital Medical Center, a 470-bed voluntary facility, has more
than 225 physicians, surgeons and dentists affiliated with it and its services
extend to the surrounding communities of Larchmont, the Pelhams, Mamaroneck,
Eastchester and Scarsdale.

The city also has abundant public amenities: nine miles of Long Island Sound
shoreline, sandy beaches, a dozen marinas and nearly 400 acres of parkland.

In the 1980 census, there were 79.9 percent whites, 18 percent blacks and 3.1
percent others, a category that includes Hispanics and Asians.

During the 1950's and 1960's, there was public controversy over school
desegregation that led to the nation's first urban conflict over the busing
issue. That dispute was resolved amicably, however, and now there is little
evidence of racial problems.

Jaquetta Cole, who heads the New Rochelle Task Force for a Better Community,
cites one situation as an example of the current state of intergroup relations.

''When we tried to get 100 units of federally subsidized housing for the poor,
mostly blacks, who live along Lincoln Avenue, we went to the Mayor and the
Development Council for help,'' she said.  ''We're getting our housing units and
we credit Mayor Leonard Paduano for the support we needed.''

Melvin Sirner, chief rabbi at Beth-El Synagogue in New Rochelle's affluent north
end, said: ''We have a truly pluralistic community with Catholics, Jews, blacks
and Hispanics all living and working alongside each other in a tradition of good
feelings.''

Ossie Davis, who moved to New Rochelle in 1963, recalled: ''New Rochelle had
some minor civil disorder over the Vietnam War and the death of Martin Luther
King. But we never had the violence or the sense of rot you felt elsewhere.''

During the 60's and 70's, however, there were fears of economic rot, prompted by
shrinking commerce in the downtown area and the depletion of the city's tax
base. Much of New Rochelle's 19th century building stock was in critical need of
renovation. Two major stores - Arnold Constable and W.T. Grant's - had closed
and other commercial leaseholders were about to follow, leaving vacant buildings
with boarded windows and graffiti-scarred facades.

In 1974, the New Rochelle Development Council, a 65-member consortium of
prominent business leaders from the city's financial, industrial and retail
sectors, was formed. Lewis Fechter, executive director of the council, said it
had helped bring 15 companies to New Rochelle that utilized a half-million
square feet of space for offices and light industry and employed more than 1,000
workers.

''We help companies with every facet of establishing themselves here,'' he said,
''from site selection through the placement of loans.''
THE council also has helped in the renovation of 60,000 square feet o f
commercial space in the three-story Constable building downtown a nd 120,000
additional square feet in what was formerly a B loomingdale's store. And there
are plans for two new downtown h otels.

Under a $20 million renovation program, the city provided the downtown area with
broader sidewalks, trees, plantings and facade improvements, restoring 90
Victorian and Art Deco buildings.

The city also has completed a $6.3 million library and a $1 million plaza. A
total of $2.3 million has been spent on a semi-mall and street drainage project,
and construction was finished last March on a $3.5 million multipurpose
community center, replacing what formerly was the Southside Boys' Club.

Rental costs for commercial properties in New Rochelle's prime business
districts, Mr. Fechter estimated, range between $19.50 and $22 per square foot.

By far the most promising venture ahead for the city is a proposal by Xanadu
Properties Associates of Honolulu to erect 3,000 luxury condominium units on
Davids Island, an unused 80-acre parcel in the Sound just off the mainland.
Feasibility studies have not yet been completed, and one of the still-unresolved
questions is how to link the island with the mainland.
School Board: Elected vs. Appointed

On Nov. 2, New Rochelle voters will decide either to continue having the Mayor
appoint an unsalaried nine-member Board of Education, or require that it be
elected.

Mayor Leonard C. Paduano promised voters the referendum during his 1979 election
campaign. ''I have no position on the election issue,'' he said, ''but I believe
that voters should have the opportunity to decide.'' The proposal is also
advocated by City Councilman Francis Judge, who said, ''I fought for this
because there is concern about the school board and we have not had a referendum
in 30 years.''

But critics, including Tilden Lemelle, a former board member, say the election
of the board could hurt minority-group representation (traditionally protected
by the Mayor's system of balanced selection) and inject partisan politics into
its affairs at the expense of educational concerns.

The board oversees a budget of $46 million a year and a system with 1,000
employees and 8,166 pupils in nine schools.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos and map of New Rochelle

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARCO IS THE FIRST U.S. OIL CONCERN TO WIN OFFSHORE CHINA CONTRACT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 19


The Atlantic Richfield Company today became the first American oil concern to
win China's permission to start drilling for oil offshore.

A contract signed today, awarded in partnership with the Santa Fe International
Corporation, covers a 3,500-square-mile block in the South China Sea just south
of Hainan Island.

Qin Wencai, president of China's National Offshore Oil Corporation, signed the
accord in the Great Hall of the People with Robert O. Anderson, Arco's chairman,
and Paul Ravesies, president of Arco's international oil and gas subsidiary.

Arco holds an 80 percent interest in the concession and Santa Fe, a drilling and
construction concern, holds 20 percent. This means that Arco will put up
four-fifths of the costs in return for four-fifths of the foreign profits while
Santa Fe will have the remaining onefifth. Both companies are based in Los
Angeles.

China is anxious to develop its offshore oil potential not only to earn foreign
currency but also because its onshore oil production has stagnated, falling from
a high of nearly 2.12 million barrels a day in 1979 to barely 2 million last
year.

The onshore production, carried out by Government companies, has nevertheless
permitted some export sales, including some to the United States, because oil
demand in the developing Chinese economy has been relatively low. Now, as the
economy grows more sophisticated, demand is growing.

Today's contract signing concluded nearly four years of often difficult
negotiations between Arco and the Chinese Government and gives the oil company a
substantial lead over other major American concerns in a race to drill along
what Mr. Ravesies, at a news conference here, called ''probably the longest
unexplored virgin coastline in the world.''

10 Billion to 20 Billion Tons

The Chinese Government says there are 10 billion to 20 billion tons of oil
potential offshore; some Western estimates have run closer to 4 billion.

Extensive seismic surveys by Arco and Santa Fe have located what Mr. Ravesies
called more than 20 promising ''geological structures'' under the waters south
of Hainan Island.

Mr. Ravesies said that ''the earliest production would be five years hence; that
would be the fastest we could do it.'' He called the contract ''a very
complicated agreement,'' but declined to give any details, explaining that
''we've been precluded by the Chinese from going into the specifics.''

A Western commerce specialist here said that the Arco contract was more
favorable than the model drafted by China for 33 other Western oil companies
that submitted sealed drilling bids a month ago. The model's terms have not been
published either, but reports said that 50 percent of the oil produced would go
initially to pay back exploration and operating costs. The Government would get
another 12.5 percent as a royalty and 5 percent as tax.

The remaining 32.5 percent would be split into ''share oil,'' for the Government
to allocate, and ''profit oil'' that would be divided between the Government and
the drilling company. Of the profit oil, the National Offshore Oil Corporation
would normally get 51 percent and the foreign company, 49 percent.

$20 Million Already Spent

Mr. Ravesies confirmed that Arco and Santa Fe, which have already spent $20
million in seismic surveys and other costs, would assume full financial risk of
the exploration. ''If we're wrong, we simply lose,'' he said. ''It's a roll of
the dice, like anything else.''

Arco hopes to have exploratory drilling under way by early next April, using a
drill vessel, the Glomar Java Sea, now operating off the California coast. How
soon the company starts pumping oil will depend on its exploration progress.

Arco, in signing the contract today, may have gained as much as a year over its
competitors, whose bids for drilling blocks in the southern Yellow Sea and the
South China Sea are still being studied by the Chinese.

Of the 33 companies that submitted bids, eight made individual proposals and the
rest formed 13 group bids. Sixteen of the companies are American, another five
are British and the remainder are Japanese, Canadian, Australian, French,
Italian, Spanish and Brazilian.

The block awarded Arco and Santa Fe lies just east of the Gulf of Tonkin, where
China and Vietnam have conflicting territorial claims.  Mr. Ravesies discounted
the possibility of Vietnamese interference with the drilling. ''The Chinese have
told us these are Chinese waters,'' he said. ''We have no fear of that
whatsoever.''

Conditions Seem Reasonable

The drilling conditions off Hainan Island seem reasonable, except for seasonal
monsoons. Mr. Ravesies said that the water depth ranged from very shallow near
the coast to almost 600 feet at the southern end of the block. He estimated that
the wells themselves could range in depth from 8,000 to 22,000 feet.

Arco's operational headquarters will be in Zhanjiang, a small city on the
Leizhou peninsula of southernmost Guangdong Province. A supply base, from which
helicopters will ferry oil workers to the drilling rigs, will be set up in
Sanya, on Hainan's southern coast.

The Government is insisting that foreign oil companies, as part of their
commitment, train local workers and pass along technological expertise, as well
as buy Chinese equipment and products whenever possible.

'Certain Amount of Training'

''We have agreed with the Chinese to do a certain amount of training and
transfer of technology,'' Mr. Ravesies said. Most workers would be trained
locally, he added, but ''what we can't do here we will do in the United
States.''

Arco's contract will run from 25 to 35 years. The exploration period will
constitute half of the production period and the Chinese will eventually take
over the operation.

The negotiations between Arco and the National Offshore Oil Corporation bogged
down last summer, reportedly as a result of Arco's concern that the Ministry of
Petroleum would not cosign the contract. Some foreign oil companies have feared
that the oil corporation, which was formed only last February, lacked sufficient
weight to protect long-term contracts in any Chinese bureaucratic rivalry.

In response to a question about the delay in the negotiations, Mr.  Ravesies
would say only that ''that has been resolved.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PALME WINS MAJOR VICTORY IN SWEDEN

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Sept. 19


The Social Democratic Party of Olof Palme won a decisive victory tonight in the
Swedish general election and promised to press ahead with policies that could
lead to worker control of the nation's industries in a few years.

After six years of government by shifting coalitions of non-Socialist parties,
during which Sweden's economic problems rapidly worsened, the Socialists swept
back into power on promises of more jobs. Their proposal for employer-financed
wage-earner funds, which would buy shares in corporations, appeared to have had
little impact on the outcome, although polls showed the idea to be unpopular.

For Mr. Palme, who served as Prime Minister from 1969 to 1976, the victory
represented a striking personal success. Perhaps the most left-wing of Western
European Socialist leaders, he has always been a contentious figure, and when
his party lost power in 1976 after holding it for 44 years, many thought his
career was at an end.

The Social Democrats, who took 46 percent of the vote, will have more seats in
the new Parliament than the three non-Socialist parties combined. That will free
them from their traditional dependence on the tacit support of the Communists.

Setbacks for Two Parties

Both of the Government parties, the Liberals and the Center Party, suffered
sharp setbacks, although Prime Minister Thorbjorn Falldin's centrists did better
than the polls predicted.

Swedish television reported on the basis of nearly complete returns that the
Social Democrats would have 166 seats, a gain of 12, and the Communists 20, as
in the last Parliament. It said the non-Socialist bloc would have 163 seats - 86
for the Conservatives, a gain of 13; 56 for the Center Party, a loss of 8, and
21 for the Liberals, a loss of 17. Several small parties failed to gain any
seats.

The result was in keeping with reverses suffered by governing parties of all
ideological persuasions in Western Europe in the last few years. Both Norway and
Denmark recently moved to the right, France has moved to the left and last week
the left-center coalition of Chancellor Helmut Schmidt in West Germany
collapsed.

But opinion in Sweden also appeared to be polarizing, with the Social Democrats,
the dominant party of the left, and the Conservatives, the most important party
of the right, both gaining ground. The Socialists attacked the Government's
modest policy of retrenchment and of trimming welfare payments, arguing for
increased spending; the Conservatives said much greater austerity was required.

Concept Is Untried

The Social Democrats' wage-earner funds have never been tried in any country.
The concept was developed to broaden the ownership of industry, which remains
concentrated in the hands of a few capitalists despite almost half a century of
left-wing governments.  It also seeks to increase investment in industry and to
ease wage bargaining.

Under the plan put forward during the campaign by Mr. Palme, the funds would be
financed by payroll and excess-profits taxes. But many details remain to be
resolved, including the rules for investment and even the precise nature of the
regional boards that would administer them. The details, Mr. Palme said, are
open to negotiation.

Swedish industry campaigned furiously against the funds. Lars Namath, the
director general of the Federation of Swedish Industries, said ''they would
completely revolutionize our economic system and severely worsen the conditions
in which industry functions here.''

Others have charged that Mr. Palme planned to create an Eastern European-style
republic by the end of the decade. Prof. Assar Lindbeck, the Social Democrats'
leading economist, resigned a month ago in protest and said the funds would mean
''the collectivization of society'' in a few years.

Basic Framework by 1985

At a news conference late tonight Mr. Palme said he would ask leaders of
business, trade unions and other parties to sit down soon to discuss the
creation of the funds. Asked how soon he hoped to pass the requisite
legislation, he replied, ''It will take the time it has to take,'' but he added
that he hoped to have the basic framework in place in time for the next general
election in 1985.

The 55-year-old Prime Minister-elect said his party won mainly because ''the
Swedish people wanted a change, and they had confidence in us on matters such as
employment and social security.''

In the immediate future the Social Democrats are pledged to create 30,000 new
jobs through a huge Government investment program, to be financed by an increase
of 2 percent in the national sales tax, which already stands at 22 percent, the
highest in Europe.

Ulf Adelsohn, the new leader of the Conservatives, promised to continue to fight
for lower, not higher, taxes, and predicted that Mr. Palme would find it
impossible to put his program into effect without what he called ''massive,
crippling loans'' from abroad. Mr.  Adelsohn also said that any future
non-Socialist government would dismantle wage-earner funds if the Socialists
instituted them.

The advent of a second Palme Cabinet undoubtedly means that Sweden will play a
larger role in world affairs. In his previous term he was Europe's fiercest
critic of American policy in Vietnam, and even in opposition he played a major
role in commissions studying North-South relations and disarmament. He also
tried unsuccessfully to mediate the war between Iran and Iraq.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Olof Palme

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR PALME, SOME THORNS ON THE ROSES

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Sept. 20


Olof Palme sat in his spartan office in Sweden's Parliament Building this
evening, surrounded by the trophies of triumph -vases of red roses, the symbol
of his Social Democratic Party, victor in Sunday's general election.

But the 55-year-old Prime Minister-elect, who has already led the party for 13
years, expressed more caution than elation as he contemplated the task of
restoring to health an economy, once the envy of Europe, that is now hobbled by
foreign debt, low investment, an adverse balance of payment and even
unemployment, which until a few years ago was unthinkable in this, the
birthplace of the modern welfare state.

''The answers are not by any means clear,'' he said in an interview, ''but it is
obvious to us that there is no possibility of improving the situation until we
can get Swedish business back into action.''

Mr. Palme's short-term gamble is a major program of Government investment in
projects he hopes will create jobs throughout the economy without sucking
imports into the country and setting off a new orgy of consumer-led inflation.
He plans to spend $100 million and hopes to attract private investment of $350
million, creating 30,000 new jobs in the process. Sales taxes would be raised to
finance the plan.

Drawbacks Are Conceded

His critics argue that it is time to cut back, not spend more, and he readily
conceded that his proposal has drawbacks. One obvious question is whether
private capital will follow where the Government leads, given the low level of
company profits in recent years.

But Mr. Palme, who will begin his second administration on Oct. 8, said he was
convinced that his own remedies bore little resemblance to those tried, so far
without conspicious success, by President Francois Mitterrand of France.
Sweden's non-Socialist parties have taunted Mr. Palme throughout the campaign
about the supposed failings of his fellow Socialists, but the Swedish leader
argued that the two countries faced different problems.

''Mitterrand,'' he said ''came to power after a long period of bourgeois
government, and he was forced to respond to his constituents' pent-up desire for
consumer goods. So he stimulated demand and ran into trouble. Things are
different here - we have had almost 15 years of Socialism, and we have no great
gaps between the working class and others. We have a far better chance to
stimulate savings and investment, which is what Western economies need.''

Mr. Palme won, politicians and commentators here agree, for two reasons: because
he promised to halt the rise in unemployment and to maintain welfare benefits,
and was believed because of his party's traditions; and because the
non-Socialists who have ruled for the last six years were seen by many voters as
inept and quarrelsome.

Key Issue Is Employment

From Mr. Palme's viewpoint, the key issue was fear of unemployment, which
currently stands at only 3.5 percent but which, he said, is ''moving very
quickly toward 4 or 5 - a tiny rate in many countries but one that Swedes won't
stand for.'' His greatest electoral strength, he said, came in Norrbotten, the
Swedish region with the highest unemployment, where the Social Democrats pulled
almost twothirds of the votes.

A committed Socialist and internationalist, Mr. Palme has upset the United
States in the past as a critic of American policy in Vietnam and as a fervent
advocate of disarmament and of much greater Western assistance to the third
world. Here at home, he has upset people in the past not so much by his policies
but by a certain hectoring, Calvinist streak in his personality that many people
take as condescension.

During the campaign this summer, however, he aroused controversy mainly through
a plan for ''wage-earner funds'' - an innovation, typical of the Swedish Social
Democrats, that appears to have been tried nowhere else. It would involve the
use of revenues from payroll and excess-profit taxes to buy shares in Swedish
industry on behalf of the workers. The plan amounts to indirect, partial
nationalization of industry, and it has been bitterly denounced by Swedish
corporations.

Stocks Narrowly Held

Sweden is something of a paradox; it has had a Socialist government for most of
the last half-century, yet it has far fewer nationalized industries than Italy
or France or Britain, which have often had right-wing governments. In addition,
stocks are narrowly held; a little over 1 percent of the households control 75
percent of all shares, and 90 percent of Swedish families have no shareholding
at all.

Mr. Palme wants to change all that and to buoy the economy at the same time.
''It's a basic problem in advanced industrialized societies,'' he said. ''How do
you generate capital? You can nationalize outright and put tax money in, but
that has always struck me as a conservative, old-fashioned method. You can
increase profits, which is fine, but not if they all go to a few people and into
bank accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein.

''This is a reasonable way of tackling the problem, which will help to increase
productive saving and to redistribute wealth. By the 1990's, I imagine the funds
owning 10 to 15 percent of industry, which does not seem excessive to me.''

Key Questions Unresolved

Mr. Palme said that two key questions - who controls the funds and, what are the
investment rules? - had yet to be settled. But he predicted that the fund
administrators would not be trade union leaders ''because they are more and more
uncomfortable with the idea of representing both ownership and labor.'' Some
form of democratic election would have to be devised, he said.

''On investment policy,'' Mr. Palme added, ''it is crucial that we find rules to
see to it that we don't pour money into albatrosses.  That's why I say to
corporations, 'Help us to see that the money goes to good companies and not bad
ones. You know the difference.' ''

So far big business and its allies seem unwilling to cooperate. So successfully
have they propagated the idea that the Social Democrats are ready to turn Sweden
into a state on the Eastern European model that a visitor was greeted today by
three friends with variants on the comment, ''Welcome to Poland.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Model of Washington's Vietnam Memorial Statue Is Unveiled

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 2; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Frederick Hart, the sculptor, with a model of the statue he designed
for inclusion in the Vietnam memorial that is being built on the Mall near the
Lincoln Memorial. Yesterday's showing of the model, which depicts three American
soldiers, two white and one black, was accompanied by the announcement of a
national salute to Vietnam veterans, to be held in November. The salute will
feature reunions, a parade and a candlelight vigil. Associated Press

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Great Society Lives

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


Blacks ''would be appreciably better off today,'' President Reagan recently told
a meeting of the National Black Republican Council, ''if the Great Society had
never been inaugurated.'' His idea was to justify Reaganomics in the eyes of
massively disaffected black voters. They are not likely to be so easily fooled.

The economic expansion following World War II, Mr. Reagan declared, was a
bonanza for all workers and would eventually have closed the economic gap
between blacks and whites. The argument ignores a major fact of life in the
1950's and 60's: racial discrimination. Because of it, the gap between black and
white achievement remained substantial, and it is by no means certain that
economic forces alone would have diminished it.

Indeed, by the 1960's resentments erupting over America's treatment of blacks
had begun to express themselves in violent confrontations in the South and urban
riots in the North. Racial discrimination had become an embarrassment to the
United States abroad. The civil rights movement enjoyed wide support. The Great
Society was an important expression of Washington's commitment to equality.

The complex of programs might well be faulted for unreasonably increasing
expectations. President Johnson, forever playing the political angles, promised
more than he or anyone could have delivered, especially as the Vietnam War began
to compete for resources. Some programs were mismanaged, and leadership
sometimes fell to charlatans. Community action programs sometimes became bound
up in local politics.

But it is hard to make a case against Head Start, Medicaid, Legal Services,
neighborhood health centers and job training, which survived and whose benefits
remain evident. These programs also added 15,000 workers to the Federal payroll
and gave many poor people, black and white, their first management experience.
In the 1960's, more than twice as many blacks moved into managerial and
white-collar jobs as in the two previous decades combined.

To be sure, the Great Society could not eliminate the gap between black and
white workers. And the nation's current economic problems have caused perilous
levels of unemployment among blacks, wiping out some of the advances of the
1960's. But the Great Society was a necessary, imaginative and productive
response to a deeply rooted social conflict. Its legacy is real.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

S.A.T. SCORES RISE FOR FIRST TIME IN 2 DECADES

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


Both the verbal and mathematics scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test rose this
year for the first time in 19 years. It marked an upturn in what has become a
leading barometer for measuring the condition of the nation's schools.

''The long-term decline in S.A.T. scores has been halted by the 1982 seniors,''
said George H. Hanford, president of the College Entrance Examination Board,
which sponsors the testing program.

''This year's rise, however slight, combined with last year's holding steady, is
a welcome sign for educators, parents and students that serious efforts by the
nation's schools and their students to improve the quality of education are
taking effect,'' Mr. Hanford said in a statement issued in connection with the
announcement of the 1982 results.

Too Early to Call a Trend

He said it was too early to tell whether the higher scores were the start of a
trend or merely a temporary interruption in the decline.  No conclusive
explanation has been offered for the past declines in the scores by the 980,000
high school seniors who annually take the test, and the cause of the improvement
this year is also apparently unknown.

In the last two years, however, a growing number of the nation's 20,000 high
schools have begun coaching pupils on the Scholastic Aptitude Test. This came
about after research showed that scores could be improved by such coaching,
although the College Board denies it makes a difference.

Shift to Required Courses

It is also possible that a move by many schools to reinstitute required courses
in English, science, mathematics and foreign languages may be having an impact
on pupils' test performance.

The average score for the seniors who graduated from high school in June was 426
on the verbal part of the test and 467 on the mathematics section, as against
average scores last year of 424 on the verbal part and 466 on the mathematics
part, according to the College Board, which has its headquarters in New York
City. Scores range from a minimum of 200 to a maximum of 800 for each of the two
sections.

A breakdown of the 1982 figures by states shows the average verbal and
mathematical scores were 429 and 467 in New York; 416 and 453 in New Jersey, and
432 and 464 in Connecticut.

In 1963, the year before the string of declining scores began, the national
averages were 478 for the verbal score and 502 for the mathematics score.

Key College Admissions Tool

The aptitude test is widely used by colleges in making admission decisions.
Pupils usually take the examination in the fall of their senior year and the
scores are submitted at their request to the colleges to which they apply.

As the scores on the aptitude test continued to decline in the 1970's, more and
more educators, legislators and parents cited the test results as evidence that
a loosening of high school requirements in the 1960's had led to a deterioration
of educational standards.

This view was reinforced by the expansion by colleges and universities of
remedial courses for students with inadequate preparation in reading, writing
and mathematics.

Despite this concern, the schools were unable to identify and correct the
causes. A 1977 College Board study mentioned possible explanations as diverse as
the unrest over the Vietnam War, the increase in one-parent families and the
proliferation of elective subjects replacing required courses in high schools.

An article two years ago in the Phi Delta Kappan, a respected educational
journal, attributed the score decline to the effect on the young of fallout from
the above-ground nuclear tests of the 1950's and early 1960's.

More Pupils Applying to College

A phenomenon that some authorities link to the lower scores is the expansion of
higher education in the last two decades to include students who in past years
did not apply to college. As these students sought admission to selective
colleges they had to take the aptitude test.

Some experts dispute this because the score decline continued long after the
number of high school seniors taking the aptitude test leveled off at just under
a million. Roger Farr of Indiana University, who has conducted extensive
research on the teaching and testing of reading skills, offers another
interpretation.

''A lot of the decline was probably due to the pain of expanding to include a
lot of kids previously excluded from the test,'' he said in a telephone
interview yesterday from Bloomington, Ind. ''It took time for that change to be
absorbed and the scores are starting to go up as those students become more like
the middle-class kids who used to be the only ones taking the S.A.T.''

A survey by the College Board of the seniors taking the test this year showed
that they took more science and math courses than did previous groups of seniors
and that foreign language enrollment was the highest since 1977. It is not
known, though, whether the twothirds of the nation's three million high school
seniors who did not take the aptitude test also increased their enrollment in
such courses.

Each section of the test has multiple-choice answers. The verbal part deals with
understanding English through the use of questions about passages and word
definitions. The mathematics part includes concepts and problems on geometry,
algebra and other areas.

Designed by Princeton Company

The test is designed, administered and scored for the College Board, a
membership group of the nation's schools, by the Educational Testing Service of
Princeton, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK, CHAMPAGNE IN HAND, PLANS HIS FUTURE

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 21


Why would a royal exile with a taste for Western luxury choose to live in two
austere Communist societies like China and North Korea?

Prince Norodom Sihanouk ticked off the answers. ''First, geographically I must
be in China and North Korea because they are in Asia,'' he explained.

''I must confess,'' he went on, ''that since the coup in Phnom Penh in March
1970, during the five years that I led the struggle against Lon Nol, I was
supported very strongly by North Korea and China, so there is a sentimentality
in me. I like good food. I like champagne.  But for sentimental reasons, I feel
more comfortable here.''

Also, he said, he returns periodically to visit ''my comrades inside Cambodia''
as head of the anti-Vietnamese resistance coalition that he formed last summer
with former Prime Minister Son Sann and the guerrilla leader Khieu Samphan. He
would not live next door in Thailand, he said, because on his last visit ''the
Thai press insulted me very much.''

'I Became a Proletarian'

The Prince hesitated. ''Fourth,'' he said, ''I am ashamed to tell you this. Lon
Nol confiscated all my wealth and I became a proletarian. Here I have no food
problems, no accommodation problems, because the Chinese and North Koreans give
me all my accommodations, food and personnel - cooks and butlers. It would not
be correct to take this North Korean and Chinese money to live in France.

''Since I am very poor,'' he said, ''I have empty pockets, but I can live as a
head of state and a Prince because I am a guest.'' Prince Sihanouk and his wife,
Princess Monique, usually divide their time between villas in Peking and
Pyongyang.  The Prince is to appear before the United Nations General Assembly
this month to try to block the Vietnamese-backed Phnom Penh regime of Heng
Samrin from claiming the seat of Cambodia. The seat is formally held by the
previous Cambodian regime of Pol Pot and is now his guerrilla group's main proof
of diplomatic legitimacy.

Hopes to Talk With Reagan

Prince Sihanouk said he also hoped to go to Washington to plead for American
support. If President Reagan is busy, he said, he would gladly settle for Vice
President Bush or Secretary of State George P. Shultz. He said he had sounded
out such a visit with the United States Ambassador in Peking, Arthur W. Hummel
Jr., who indicated that he would be welcome if he did not bring along any
representatives of the Pol Pot group.

''But I won't play the role of beggar,'' the Prince said during a
two-and-a-half-hour conversation in his spacious Peking villa, ''because it is
very embarrassing. It is up to your Government.''

Prince Sihanouk, who will turn 60 years old next month, said he was wiser and
more resourceful than a dozen years ago, when he was abruptly deposed by Gen.
Lon Nol while he was visiting Europe.  Cambodia, previously insulated from the
war in Indochina, plunged into civil strife that eventually led to a genocidal
slaughter by the fanatically leftist Pol Pot guerrillas.

'I Saw Very Bad Things'

He returned from exile in 1975 to become a virtual prisoner for nearly four
years, monitoring foreign radio broadcasts through earphones to learn what was
happening in his own country. ''The Khmer Rouge did not dismiss me as head of
state because they needed me,'' he said, ''but I saw very bad things. I did not
see the killing, but I saw the forced labor of my people.''

Now the Prince has entered an uneasy alliance with the ousted Pol Pot regime,
which he blames for having murdered 5 of his children and 14 grandchildren. The
Pol Pot guerrillas are the lesser evil, he explained emotionally over Chinese
champagne and imported French wafers.

''I've agreed to be in the coalition because we cannot allow the Vietnamese to
Vietnamize our country,'' he said, ''to swallow up our country or make our
country another South Vietnam.''

The Prince said he was persuaded to make such an accommodation not only by his
Chinese hosts but also by other Southeast Asian nations worried about Vietnam's
expansionism. Prince Sihanouk is officially committed to a protracted struggle
with the 200,000 or so Vietnamese troops in Cambodia.

Negotiations Are a Goal

Unofficially, the Prince said he saw himself as a historic compromise who could
return Cambodia to neutrality after the adversaries exhaust each other. ''I
think at best we could get one day the agreement of the Vietnamese to go to the
conference table,'' he said, ''to have a frank discussion and bring to the
so-called Kampuchean problem a fair solution, including a respect by Vietnam for
the independence of Cambodia.

The Vietnamese and Russians will never accept a pro-Chinese Kampuchea,'' he went
on. ''So, as to give satisfaction to both sides, I can imagine only this
solution: a complete neutralization of Cambodia and Rouge and pro-Russian and
pro-Vietnamese elements.''

In Prince Sihanouk's vision of the future, national elections policed by an
armed United Nations peacekeeping force would let Cambodians determine their own
destiny and effectively keep out the unpopular Pol Pot guerrillas.

In the meantime, Prince Sihanouk said he wanted the United States to help his
resistance coalition, if not militarily, then certainly by diplomacy and, if
possible, financially.

He said China's leader, Deng Xiaoping, who has armed the Pol Pot guerrillas,
promised in July to provide weapons at low prices for Prince Sihanouk's own
guerrillas if he could get the United States to foot the bill.

Prince Sihanouk asserted that ''without exaggerating,'' 5,000 guerrillas in
Cambodia would follow him. Son Sann, he says, has 9,000 troops and the Pol Pot
group about 40,000. The Prince said he could recruit another 20,000 to 40,000
volunteers from the refugee camps if he had weapons and food for them.

'My Best Friend'

For now, Prince Sihanouk said, he must get his airline tickets from the Chinese
and his spending money from ''my best friend,'' Kim Il Sung, the North Korean
leader.

When he visited the Thai-Cambodian border area in July, he said, ''I spent more
than $40,000, because Kim Il Sung gave me not his currency but your currency.''
The Prince said he distributed the money to his troops, to refugees and to
monks. He said he expected Mr. Kim to provide $40,000 when he goes back into
Cambodia next month.

The Prince's attention is focused on keeping the United Nations from declaring
Cambodia's seat vacant, which he says is Vietnam's objective. If this happens,
he said, ''next year there is a good chance for them to get this seat for the
puppets in Phnom Penh.''

Prince Sihanouk said the Chinese had assured him that the Pol Pot guerrillas
wanted to make their regime more democratic, but he did not know whether this
was just a tactic.

''If you are really democratic,'' he said, ''you do not need to be called
democratic. ''I would like to name my country only Cambodia and not Democratic
Kampuchea. But since Democratic Kampuchea is still recognized by the United
Nations, we cannot change the name.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk at United Nations

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


INTELLIGENCE AGENCY UPHELD IN ITS REFUSAL TO RELEASE DATA

WASHINGTON, Sept. 21 (AP) - A Federal appeals court ruled today that Harrison E.
Salisbury, a retired associate editor and correspondent of The New York Times,
was not entitled to National Security Agency documents that mention his name
because their release would harm national security.

The three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia ruled unanimously that the agency was correct in withholding the
documents and a lower court judge had properly upheld the decision. The panel
also held that Mr. Salisbury was not entitled to $10,000 in damages as
compensation for what he said were violations of his constitutional rights and
his right of privacy under common law.

Meanwhile, another Federal appeals court panel here ruled that it could not
prohibit future intelligence operations such as Operation Chaos, a program in
which the Central Intelligence Agency gathered intelligence to determine whether
foreign governments or political groups supported domestic critics of the
Vietnam War. The program, begun in 1967 under President Johnson and ended after
the war, included extensive domestic spying.

Twenty-one individuals and five organizations who asserted that their rights had
been violated by the program had filed suit seeking Government documents and an
injunction to prohibit similar programs in the future.

A three-judge panel held unanimously that a lower court judge had properly
restricted release of many requested documents on the ground of national
security and had been right in refusing to grant an injunction prohibiting
similar conduct in the future.

In the Salisbury decision, the court noted that the journalist had said he had
sent numerous communications ''from locations of great intelligence interest''
including Hanoi, the capital of Vietnam.

(Mr. Salisbury, reached tonight in Los Angeles, said he would wait until he had
read the decision before deciding whether to file an appeal.)

Mr. Salisbury said he had learned from requests made under the Freedom of
Information Act that the C.I.A. and F.B.I. had maintained records on him that
were supplied by the National Security Agency, whose mission is communications
security and foreign intelligence information.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PROMINENT U.S. JEWS SUPPORT ISRAEL, BUT SOME CRITICIZE BEGIN AND SHARON

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2027 words


Israel's invasion of Lebanon and the presence of its troops in the area where
hundreds of Palestinians were killed by Christian forces over the weekend have
aroused a broad range of responses from American Jews in the cultural,
political, intellectual and theological worlds. The responses also include some
thoughts about the role the United States should play in the Lebanese situation.

While an accurate gauge of opinion would be difficult in the absence of
research, an indication of the breadth of views was indicated in responses
solicited from some American Jews who are not organizational leaders but are
writers, political figures, philosophers and others who have previously
manifested a concern with Israel and its fate.

All said their support for Israel remained firm. But their opinions varied. Some
strongly condemned Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Defense Minister Ariel
Sharon while others denied Israeli responsibility for the bloodshed in the
camps. Some declined to pass judgment until more information was available. No
one in any way indicated that he had turned against the state of Israel as a
result of the situation.

The respondents, in telephone interviews, answered questions that included
whether the killing of the Palestinians had altered their attitudes either
toward Israel or toward its leadership and what action they thought the United
States should take in the Lebanese situation. Some of those whose opinions were
sought declined to answer because they distrusted the information they had
received on the massacre. Those who disagreed with Israeli policy in Lebanon
carefully couched their expressions in terms that could not be construed as
condemnatory. Following are excerpts from the interviews:

Barbara Tuchman
Historian and author I am not at all certain of the facts. In this situation,
eyewitness facts are often distorted and I, sitting in Connecticut, am not
inclined to believe all I read. From two months ago, I have believed that
Israel's determination to wipe out the Palestine Liberation Organization to some
extent would encounter difficulties. The complications of the Arab world are not
such as the Israelis can control, particularly those in Lebanon.

I felt at that time that the American pretense that the next step was going to
be to establish a coherent, united and peaceful Lebanon was impossible. What
bothers me is the justification that the Israelis could control the Christian
group was not realistic because of the past history of conflict among the
several Lebanese groups that goes back a hundred years.

The policy of Begin and Sharon for the elimination of the P.L.O.  threat - a
real one - had a justifiable aim. What concerns me is the survival and future of
Israel and of Jews in the Diaspora -myself, among them. I do not think that the
way the situation has developed is in the long-term interest of Israelis and
ourselves.

Elie Wiesel
Author and death camp survivor Since the end of World War II, this has been the
worst and darkest Rosh ha-Shanah for me. It is not that I accuse or indict
anyone, and surely not the people of Israel, but I felt sadness, incommensurate
sadness, almost disarmed. In a strange way, I felt responsible.  Perhaps if we
had told the story more convincingly, if we had prevented the trivialization and
cheapening of what was and remains a unique catastrophe, things would not have
happened this way.

I believe now that ''a gesture'' is needed on our part. Perhaps we ought to
proclaim a day of fasting, surely of taking stock.

Jacob K. Javits
Former United States Senator, New York

I deplore the horror and understand the desire to find out who did it and
whether Israel had even a passive role. But it doesn't stand in the way of what
needs to be done. It shows the absolute urgency of getting all foreign forces
out of Lebanon, of settling the situation in the West Bank and Gaza. It has not
changed my attitudes on Israel and on the double-dealing of the P.L.O. The
United States is taking a strong stand in this area. My view is that we must get
Jordan and Saudi Arabia committed to an involvement in bringing about peace.

Irving Howe
Author and literary critic This has not changed my attitude toward Israel but it
has certainly confirmed and strengthened my opposition to the Begin and Sharon
Government. I feel that it must take a share of the responsibility for allowing
the Phalange to enter the camp. Everyone knows of the blood feuds in Lebanon.
Even if it's hard to believe that Israeli officers would knowingly send them in,
knowingly or not, they have to take the responsibility. I think it's a moral
disgrace and I hope that the people of Israel change their government.

Martin Peretz
Editor in chief, New Republic I think President Reagan's speech was quite
appropriate. I have confused feelings. I resent the alacrity with which some
people have rushed to arrange the facts so that it seems the Israelis did the
murdering, not the Christians. At the same time, I am disgusted with the refusal
of Begin and Sharon to asccept culpability for this event because it is the
result of their obsession and fanaticism with stamping out every last vestige of
the P.L.O. Israel had already won a colossal victory. Only zealots and fanatics,
like Begin and Sharon, would have been obsessed with ferreting out the
remainder.

I find it disquieting that they are so without horror at the event. In this,
Israeli public opinion offers a welcome contrast to the Government and also to
the reaction of the Arab world when Arabs are more directly involved in
atrocities and murders.

Joseph Papp
Founder and producer, New York Shakespeare Festival

This has not fundamentally changed my attitude toward Israel. I do feel that
there should be a peacekeeping group to come into the situation. Otherwise,
Israel has to be responsible for every killing there, and I don't feel that
Israel is responsible for it. Israel is in a terrible position there; as long as
it remains in Lebanon it has to, in an indirect sense, bear responsibility. I'm
upset but Israel has to make its own determination. Even though I am a Jew, I
can talk to my own Government and I believe that the United States should be
involved in the peacemaking.

Morris B. Abram
Past President, American Jewish Committee

The Beirut atrocity will be denounced by righteous people in Israel and
everywhere, as was our own country's involvement in the My Lai massacre.

Fortunately, Israel is a parliamentary democracy and under such a system, when
Cabinet ministers make a colossal blunder, even by miscalculation or negligence,
they may resign. Then an inquiry can bring the responsible ones to justice and
thus the state disassociated from its failed servants.

Robert M. Morgenthau
Manhattan District Attorney Every civilized person, Jew or Christian, is shocked
at what happened in the camps. But for lynch mobs to get out and say it's
Begin's responsibility is premature, to say the least. There's no evidence to
say that the Israeli Army was the cause of this. After all, the President-elect
of Lebanon and 26 of his key people had been killed by other Lebanese a few days
before. To try to say that Israel is responsible for the violence is wrong. We
have to wait for further information. I don't think anyone can fairly say that
this sort of retaliation happened because the Israelis went into Beirut.

Mark Helprin
Writer It appears from the evidence of the moment that there was at least
passive Israeli complicity in the recent killing of civilians, and this is
unforgiveable. The present Israeli Government would do best to depart as
gracefully as it can, if only for the good of Israel.

On the other hand, the indignant condemnations from Europe, the Arabs and the
Soviet bloc come from those with far more blood on their hands than Israel ever
had or probably ever will have. Bear in mind the Syrian atrocities in Hama, the
Soviet atrocities in Afghanistan and the indelible record of the Germans, and
then contrast what these nations are saying with what they said, and how
vigorously, after Lod Airport, Maalot, the coastal road, et cetera, et cetera.

As usual, I find myself caught in the middle. Though I maintain that Israel
should end its association with the Phalange, drastically reduce its aims in
Lebanon and embark upon the kind of course advocated by Shimon Peres and
President Reagan, I still see the central issue in the area as the implacable
Arab hostility toward the Jewish state. People tend to forget why Israel is
thrashing. They should remember.

Lawrence Hoffman
Professor of Liturgy, Hebrew Union College

I have too little information to make an informed judgement. The press and the
media have been reporting different information, some of which I don't believe
is true. It has become a media event. It is like Vietnam when people tuned in to
see the latest horror.

I'm sure the United States is involved in bringing about a peace settlement and
the pact will have to be worked out by those directly involved. I think it is
dangerous for intellectuals sitting in armchairs to make real-life decisions
with regard to a war somewhere off in the distance.

Rabbi Arnold Wolf
KAM Isaiah Israel Congregation, Chicago and former Jewish chaplain at Yale

I'm crushed and terrified by the massacre and I think all of us have bloody
hands. It is a time for repentence perhaps even before political solutions are
possible. It's Babi Yar all over again and this time we're not innocent. We Jews
are not innocent. I'm so upset. Israel and the Begin Government - and I hope
it's just the Begin Governnment -they are collaborators with terrorists. The
United States should certainly safeguard the families of the Palestinians and
should try to get all the foreign troops out of Lebanon, including Israel's
troops.

Rabbi Balfour Brickner
Stephen Wise Free Synagogue While the full extent of Israeli involvement in the
massacre in Lebanon still remains unclear, I mourn and decry any Israeli
complicity. One might hope that Israel did not know and was not involved, but
from all reports that seems to be only a hope.

What happened is the inevitable bitter fruit of Begin and Sharon's expansionist
policies, which go far beyond achieving physical security for Israel's northern
border. I believe Begin ought to resign and take Sharon with him. They are
inimicable to the interests of Jewish unity both in Israel and elsewhere in the
Diaspora. Their leadership has changed the spirit of Israel from state-building
to empire-building. Their presence is now counterproductive. One might hope that
out of this shattering experience there might emerge a sobered Israeli
self-evaluation.

I believe there is a lot of merit in the overall Reagan plan for the Mideast.
Lebanon has become for Israel what Vietnam was for the United States. Anything
the United States can do to save the face of Israel to enable it to get out of
Lebanon is very much desired.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of demonstrators in Paris

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


THE THIRD WORLD WAR. The Untold Story. By Gen. Sir John Hackett. 372 pages.
Illustrated with Maps. Macmil- lan. $15.75.

ONE can sneer: is it really necessary to fight World War III once again, by
reading Sir John Hackett's ''The Third World War: The Untold Story''? Wasn't it
enough to have fought it once, by reading the general's earlier book, ''The
Third World War: August 1985''?  After all, fighting World War III can be
extremely draining.

One can scoff: as fiction, ''The Third World War'' is wooden. As fact, it is
purely speculative. The general is the first to admit that nothing will actually
turn out as he has predicted. Already, his calculations have been thrown askew
by Israel's recent campaign in Lebanon. It is now not very likely that next
year, in response to Israel's ''desperate'' but ''ultimately impotent'' attack
on Syria and southern Lebanon, the United States and the Soviet Union will join
hands to force Israel to negotiate a settlement of the Palestinian problem.

And one can carp: why is it that all the mutinies and defections of World War
III happen on the Soviet side? Granted, these incidents are intended to reflect
the inherent contradictions of the Soviet system, as General Hackett sees them.
But are there really no malcontents on the Allied side? And granted, General
Hackett makes elaborately clear just why the Soviet Union starts the World War
III: ''Time was running out for the old guard.'' They had until about the
mid-1980's and probably no longer to extract full benefit in their own way from
the Soviet Union's military strength and its recently developed capability for
projecting that strength at a distance, and to consolidate the world position
this created.

But one wonders if this old guard would be so desperate that it would fling its
country toward the catastophic defeat that the General foresees. And if the old
guard really were so desperate, wouldn't it be likely in the final losing hour
to drag the world into a nuclear conflagration instead of mounting a single-bomb
attack on Birmingham, England?

One gets the sense that there is a lot of wishful thinking involved in the
general's scenario. Nor is this sense diminished by the happy solutions (from
the West's point of view) that he predicts for the long-standing problems of
Ireland, the Palestinians, Jerusalem, Vietnam, the Caribbean and both Central
and South America. Indeed, the only gloomy note in the book - aside from the
hundreds of thousands of casualties sustained in the war - is the persistence of
Apartheid in South Africa.

All the same, there are a fair number of reasons to attend to ''The Third World
War: The Untold Story.'' For one thing, it elaborates and updates the general's
earlier book, which caught the imaginations of an enormous number of readers.
For another thing, because General Hackett consulted with the same group of
military, foreign-policy and geopolitical experts that contributed to the
earlier book, this sequel represents a very high order of strategic thinking.
Indeed, it may itself possibly constitute an incident in the competition between
the West and the Soviet Union - in the sense that the book can be regarded as a
signal to the Soviets, or even a warning, of the way some Western military
leaders are thinking.

For still another thing, General Hackett is not nearly so interested in
predicting the outcome of the next world war as he is in illustrating two very
basic messages. One of these is a variation of the old Roman saying, ''Si vis
pacem, para bellum'' (''If you want peace prepare for war'') - to wit, ''If you
want nuclear peace prepare for nonnuclear war: but be ready to pay the price.''

The other message is that the greatest advantage of fighting a conventional war
with the Russians would be the consequent disintegration of the Soviet empire
owing to the rigidity of the Communist system and to an ultimate lack of loyalty
among both the Soviet-bloc nations, especially Poland, and the nationalities
within the Soviet Union proper. It is a good deal more entertaining to have
these messages illustrated by the drama that the general has imagined than it
would be simply to read them chalked up on a blackboard.

And finally, ''The Third World War'' is just highly exhilarating as an exercise
in fantasy. It's almost dizzying to contemplate a world in which the Soviet
empire is no longer a threatening presence. Just imagine worrying about the
competition of the Poles and the Ukrainians for territory, or how to go about
constructing some sort of superpower in Europe to be balanced against the United
States and China. Imagine pondering whether East and West Germany ought really
to be reunited. Imagine that Central America's troubles could be solved by the
ascendancy of a moderately left regime in Venezuela.  All this may sound
oversimple. But why shouldn't there be a daydream in which solutions to
international relations seem possible?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sir John Hackett

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 23, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER DETENTE, THE GOAL IS TO PREVAIL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


From President Truman through President Johnson, the watchword on policy toward
the Soviet Union was ''containment.'' From President Nixon through President
Carter, it was ''detente.'' With President Reagan, it is emerging in the phrase
''to prevail.''

''We believe the free world can prevail,'' Thomas C. Reed, a special assistant
to the President, said in a speech. ''Prevailing with pride is the primary
objective.''

Mr. Reed, who said that he spoke for the President, asserted that the concept of
prevailing was novel in Washington, that ''not since John Kennedy left the world
stage have we dared to dream such dreams.'' He contended that if a democratic
nation's vital interests were at stake, ''there's nothing wrong with winning.''

As Administration officials explain the theory of prevailing, it means pushing
Russian influence back inside the borders of the Soviet Union with the combined
pressure of a military buildup along with diplomatic, economic and propaganda
measures. The officials assert that such pressures, in the long run, will avert
armed conflict.

Prevailing does not mean overthrowing the government in Moscow, a senior
Administration official says, nor is it rooted in dogmatic anti-Communist
ideology. Rather, it is founded on a pragmatic calculation that, as some
Administration officials put it, ''Russian imperialism'' must end.

More Than Rhetoric

The concept involves more than a change of rhetoric, the officials insist. They
contend that containment worked when the United States had military superiority.
But with the Soviet Union projecting power worldwide, they say, that doctrine
has become irrelevant. Detente, they add, was unsuccessful.

In the end, containment, detente, and prevailing all strive to dissuade the
Soviet Union from endangering the United States. But, as enunciated by Reagan
officials, the concepts seem to differ in nuance. Containment meant living with
the Soviet Union as it was.  Detente sought, by treating the Russians as equals
in power, to relieve their paranoia. Prevailing, however, has a clear tone of
seeking American superiority.

In Washington, watchwords often become focal points for setting policy. The
theme of prevailing runs through the Pentagon's Defense Guidance, a five-year
strategic plan, and through a strategic review ordered by the President's
national security adviser, William P.  Clark. The concept of prevailing has
cropped up in speeches by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger. And
Secretary of State George P. Shultz is reported to be amenable; he recently
invited foreign policy specialists in for a brainstorming session on dealing
with the Russians.

But watchwords also draw fire. It is the objective of superiority that has
aroused some Administration critics. They warn that the Reagan policy threatens
vital Soviet interests and therefore raises the danger of hostilities.

Speech at Eureka College

Unlike most Presidents who eagerly proclaim a philosopy of power, Mr. Reagan has
not publicly articulated specific thoughts on the concept of prevailing. But in
a speech at Eureka College in Illinois last spring, he said that a primary
objective was ''a Soviet leadership devoted to improving its peoples' lives
rather than expanding its armed conquests.''

Senior officials say the President believes he has thus expressed the essence of
his concept and that the public is not yet ready politically for a stronger
focus. Moreover, the aides add, the President has been occupied with immediate
domestic and foreign issues and wants to avoid to appear too belligerent toward
the Soviet Union. But, they suggest, Mr. Reagan may later proclaim a ''Reagan
Doctrine.''

The Russians have recognized the change generated in the concept of prevailing,
according to Administration officials who say they have seen the evidence in
intelligence analyses. But Moscow seems split on what it means.

Some Russian leaders think Mr. Reagan will serve only one term and that they
need only wait. Others believe that he is serious and they must stand up to him.
A third group, officials here say, asserts that a confrontation with Mr. Reagan
would be dangerous and that the Soviet Union must reach an accommodation with
him. Whatever the case, the Russians may well adjust to prevailing as they did
to containment and detente.

Domestic opposition to the concept has not coalesced, possibly because Mr.
Reagan has not yet presented a clear target. But Paul C.  Warnke, a prominent
member of the Democratic party's defense establishment, asserted recently that
Reaganites are ''searching for excuses to pursue a policy of all out
confrontation, which is the policy they prefer.''

'That Ultimate Weapon'

In an interview published by Common Cause, the lobbying group, Mr.  Warnke said
the Reagan Administration was seeking nuclear superiority: ''They're after that
ultimate weapon that enables us to dictate the terms of a Soviet surrender.''

To prevail, according to an Administration official, means to reverse the
geographic expansion of Soviet political influence and military power. It means
to loosen Russian controls over Eastern Europe, Cuba, Vietnam and North Korea.
Its ultimate ambition, he adds in an echo of Mr. Reagan's Eureka speech, is to
turn Russian attention away from expansion.

Mr. Clark also echoed that theme in his only public speech, saying that ''with
an active yet prudent national security policy, we might one day convince the
leadership of the Soviet Union to turn their attention inward.''

The concept of prevailing is said to underlie the President's call to ''rearm
America'' with increased military spending and his reluctant approach to arms
control. It is the basis for impeding the Siberian pipeline and reducing Soviet
access to American technology.  It seeks to force the Russians to spend huge
sums on new radar to detect Stealth bombers, thus subtracting from funds for
aggressive weapons. As Mr. Clark said: ''We must force our principal adversary,
the Soviet Union, to bear the brunt of its economic shortcomings.''

The concept of prevailing, officials say, is also at the heart of Mr. Reagan's
policy on Poland, his demand that Russian troops withdraw from Afghanistan, his
approach to China, and his initiative in the Middle East.

It also means exploiting Soviet economic weaknesses that Administration
officials believe will intensify toward the end of this decade just as America
regains military and economic strength.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 23, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEBRASKA'S TROUBLED FARM ECONOMY SETS MOOD IN BATTLE FOR GOVERNORSHIP;
The 1982 Election: Nebraska First of 10 articles appearing periodically on key
state races.

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2385 words

DATELINE: LINCOLN, Neb., Sept. 18


On autumn Saturdays, when the University of Nebraska plays football at home, the
giant stadium here turns into the state's third-largest city, a roisterous,
howling congregation of 76,000 fans, most clad in bright Cornhusker red. For
anyone seeking public office in Nebraska, the opportunities are obvious.

At the municipal auditorium in downtown Lincoln, for example, the Democrats this
afternoon were hosts at a pregame beer-and-hotdog lunch for Bob Kerrey. Mr.
Kerrey, a 39-year-old Vietnam war hero and, later, a war protester, is their
candidate in a hotly contested struggle for the governorship that is making
Nebraska one of the more interesting battlegrounds in the 1982 election.

Three blocks away, at the Governor's mansion, Charles Thone, the Republican
incumbent, is wearing a red blazer and pumping the hands of guests invited to a
fund-raising reception, complete with an open bar and a pianist well rehearsed
in the University of Nebraska fight song.

''Nebraska football is probably the one thing that everyone in the state is
proud of,'' says Lowell Johnson, the coordinator for Mr.  Thone's re-election
committee. In an obvious play on Cornhusker mania, Mr. Johnson helped put
together a television campaign advertisement that features Jeff Kinney, a
popular running back on Nebraska's 1971 national championship team.

Filmed against a backdrop of the Nebraska stadium, Mr. Kinney recalls his own
gridiron experience to offer some political advice in behalf of Governor Thone:
''When things got tight, you always went with the players that were reliable.''

Hard Times on the Prairies

But even Mr. Thone's loyalists concede that the Governor is going to need more
than a winning football season to be re-elected this November. The talk on the
prairies this year is mostly of hard times: of high interest rates, low farm
prices and an agricultural economy that most people describe bleakly as the
worst since the 1930's.

It is agriculture that sets the rhythm in Nebraska, from the flat, dry wheat
country in the west to the green rolling cornfields of the east. Even the
prosperity of Nebraska's urban areas, consisting of the capital at Lincoln and
the state's largest city, Omaha, atop the Missouri River bluffs, is largely
dependent on agriculture.

''When agriculture is in trouble, every store in Lincoln feels it,'' says Dale
L. Young, the executive vice president of the First National Bank here. This
year, he says, retail sales have been especially poor.

With corn at $2 a bushel and grain sorghum down 50 cents from a year ago, most
farmers say they are earning less than it costs them to produce the crops. Lower
feed costs have done little to rehabilitate the state's cattle and feedlot
business; sluggish demand for beef has kept market prices low.

''It's bad all right, and I'm hearing a lot of folks who say maybe it is time
for a change,'' says Merle O. Olson, a farmer from Ceresco, Neb., who says he is
a third-generation Republican and was a loyal supporter of Charley Thone in
1978. ''Folks are saying, maybe we ought to give the other guys a chance.''

'Going Broke and Don't Know It'

Even the weather has worked against Nebraska farmers this year. It has been an
unusually cool and wet summer, and some crops are stunted and immature. An early
frost could spell disaster.

''I fear that a lot of farmers in the state are going broke and don't even know
it,'' Mr. Olson says.  That a broad level of frustration exists among Nebraska
farmers is perhaps best underscored by what may become the fall election's most
widely debated issue, a referendum to amend the Nebraska Constitution so that
only family-run corporations could buy and sell farmland in the state.

Supporters say the proposal, called the Family Farm Preservation Act, would help
insure the survival of the traditional family farm by barring foreigners and
large corporations from accumulating blocks of land in the state.

Opponents, who have pledged to raise $500,000 to fight the proposed amendment,
describe the act as an assault on the free enterprise system.

The referendum was forced by the Farmers Union of Nebraska, the smallest of the
state's four major co-op groups, after its members raised 56,000 signatures on
petitions earlier this year. ''Farmers are angry,'' says Neil Oxton, who is the
head of Farmers Union.  ''They want to do something.''

Both Governor Thone and Mr. Kerrey signed the petition that placed the
referendum on the ballot.

Battle on Land Sales

Farmers had tried since 1970 to get such a measure through the state's
unicameral Legislature. Although eight other Middle Western states have laws
limiting out-of-state companies from buying agricultural land, a similar
proposal has failed regularly in Nebraska, amid warnings from the State Attorney
General that such a move was probably unconstitutional.

''Therefore, the logical solution was to amend the Constitution,'' Mr. Oxton
says, explaining that the campaign had been fueled by disclosures that the
Prudential Life Insurance Company of Newark, N.J., had purchased more than
33,000 acres of land in the state.

''Wherever this sort of thing happens, the style of life changes,'' says Mr.
Olson, who farms land passed down from his grandfather. ''A lot of outside labor
has been brought in, and people lock their doors at night. Here, if someone dies
or gets injured, it's not uncommon for neighbors to get together and harvest a
fellow's land.  I'm not so sure a corporation would do that.''

In a sense, the issue of family farms is as much emotional as it is economic, an
attempt to preserve a fading way of life. Since 1931, the number of farms in the
state has fallen to 64,000 from 131,000.  Backers of the voter-iniiiated
referendum argue that only 5.2 percent of Nebraska farms account for 49 percent
of the state's sales of agricultural goods.

Meanwhile, land prices in some areas have gone up more than 400 percent, to
$1,200 an acre, in the past decade, making it more difficult for small farmers
to expand their operations.

This means that farm assets have also grown, increasing farmers' paper wealth
many times over. ''That's good if you want to sell your farm and can find a
buyer,'' Mr. Olson says, ''but if you don't, all it means is that I'll be a rich
man when they bury me.''

Anger Over Water Diversion Plan

Nebraska farmers have also united against a proposal by South Dakota, which
borders the state on the north, to sell water from the Missouri River to a
private company that wants to use it in a coal slurry pipeline. The pipeline
would move crushed Wyoming coal to a terminal in Arkansas.

State officials have filed a lawsuit to block South Dakota's plan to divert
Missouri River water that now flows into Nebraska, a move that has broad popular
support in the state.

In some ways, Nebraska is faring better than some other states in the Middle
West. While bankruptcies are up, an estimated 50 percent of the state's farmers
are debt-free. Unemployment in the state is about 5.5 percent, the sixth lowest
rate in the nation.

The central question, however, is whether the farmers' dissatisfaction will
translate into a vote against Mr. Thone, not only because he is the most visible
incumbent in these hard times but also because he is a conservative Republican
who has been closely identified with President Reagan.

Nebraska is one of the few states in the nation where there are more Republicans
than Democrats. In the 1980 election, 50 percent of the state's 856,000 voters
registered as Republican, as opposed to 44 percent who called themselves
Democrats.

Nevertheless, Nebraska is represented in the United States Senate by two
Democrats, one of whom, Edward Zorinsky, appears to be running well ahead of his
Republican challenger, Jim Keck, in his bid for reelection.

Reagan's Popularity Still High

At least two polls taken in the state suggest that Mr. Thone's association with
the President is not likely to be a liability.  Despite the effects of his
economic policies, Mr. Reagan's popularity and standing among Nebraskans remain
high. In 1980, he carried the state with 71.6 percent of the vote, second only
to Utah in terms of victory margins.

''Mr. Reagan could come here on a rainy day and tell people there are no clouds
up in the sky,'' Mr. Oxton says. ''And you know, people will look up and say,
'Well, it has brightened up a bit.' ''

For his part, Mr. Thone has said that as Governor there is, regrettably, little
he can do to better the lot of the farmer.  Commodity prices are set by Federal
policy and an international market, far removed from the politics of Lincoln.
And no Nebraska Governor can do anything about interest rates.

''When it comes to those things closest to the skin of agriculture, it just
doesn't make all that much difference who is the Governor of Nebraska,'' The
Lincoln Journal said in an editorial earlier this month. ''Farm policy is set in
Washington, not Lincoln.''

But Nebraskans are looking to Lincoln for relief. And most listeners at the
recent state fair were unimpressed when Governor Thone and Mr. Kerrey debated
the state of Nebraska's agricultural economy.

''They told us interest rates are high and farm prices are low,'' a woman from
Plattsmouth told an Omaha reporter. ''Any dumb-yum can say that.''

Race Could Be Decided on Style

In that sense, the governorship race could turn as much on differences in style
between the two candidates as on matters of substance.

Mr. Thone, 58 years old, is a four-term Congressman and was the first Governor
to endorse Mr. Reagan publicly in 1980. In campaign rallies, he is fond of
telling voters, ''Charley Thone is what Nebraska is all about.'' As Mr. Thone
explained in an interview, he is ''an honest, handworking fellow who came off
the farm and thinks of himself as more of a workhorse than a showhorse.''

His Democratic opponent, Bob Kerrey, is a city boy bred in Lincoln who has never
before run for an elective office. His more polished style has been compared to
that of the Kennedys, which is not necessarily an asset among Nebraska voters.

Mr. Kerrey made his money in the restaurant business, his hero's reputation in
the Vietnam war. As a Navy officer and leader of a commando team, he was awarded
the Medal of Honor for leading an assault on an enemy position in the Bay of Nha
Trang in 1969. A grenade exploded at Mr. Kerrey's feet; his right leg was
amputated at the knee.

Like a lot of young veterans, however, Mr. Kerrey subsequently became active in
the antiwar movement, traveling the country and speaking out against American
policy in Vietnam.

Mr. Kerrey's antiwar activity makes him an unusual political commodity in
Nebraska. Some people also remember when, as a member of the city's Human Rights
Commission, he led an unsuccessful effort to enforce an equal rights ordinance
for homosexuals in Lincoln. How much that might harm Mr. Kerrey's election
prospects remains unclear, but his opponent is trying to portray him not only as
an ultraliberal but also as a novice who knows little about agriculture.

A recent editorial in The North Platte Telegraph was entitled ''Strangely, a
Nebraskan'' and described Mr. Kerrey as political kin to Gov. Edmund G. Brown
Jr. of California,

This week Mr. Kerrey began a counterattack on the Governor, noting that Mr.
Thone was proud of recalling he had spent the first third of his life living on
a farm. ''It's a good thing he didn't spend the last third of his life there,''
Mr. Kerrey says. ''If he ran a farm like he runs this government, he'd be
broke.''
NEBRASKA GLANCE

Nebraska

GEOGRAPHY

Nebraska lies just north of the geographical center of the United States. The
eastern two-thirds of the state, the 15th largest in the Union, falls within the
Great Plains. The north-central Sand Hills region is dotted with sand dunes and
natural lakes. The Missouri River and its tribu-

taries drain the state.

POPULATION

With 1.57 million residents, Nebraska is the 35th most populous state. Omaha has
a population of 311,681, according to the 1980 census, and Lincoln, the capital,
has 171,932 residents. Some 62 percent of all Nebraskans live in cities. Some
western counties average fewer than two

persons for each square mile.

HISTORY

From about 10,000 B.C. to the early 1700's, Nebraska was populated by Indians.
The first white explorers were French and Spanish fur trappers. The area came
under United States jurisdiction in 1803 with the Louisiana Purchase. On March
1, 1867, Nebraska became the 37th state. From that time until the late 1870's,
Nebraska was a battleground between the Plains Indians and the Army. The Union
Pacific began its transcontinental

railroad at Omaha in 1865.

ECONOMY

Farming and ranching are the two main enterprises. Nebraska grows rye, corn,
wheat and more varieties of grass than any other state. It is the nation's
largest meat-packing center and the world's secondlargest cattle

market.

POLITICS

The Republican Party has dominated Nebraska politics. By 1980, there had been 23
Republican Governors, as against nine Democrats.  Both the state's United States
Senators are Democrats. In the House, two Representatives are Republicans and
one is a Democrat. In 10 of the last 11 Presidential elections, Nebraska has
voted for the Republican.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of cheerleader photo of Charles Thone photo of Bob
Kerrey

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STATE LEGISLATOR IS SENATE CHOICE

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words


Florence M. Sullivan, a little-known State Assemblywoman from Brooklyn, won the
Republican nomination for the United States Senate last night, and Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, as expected, easily won the Democratic nomination.

With more than 90 percent of the votes counted, Mrs. Sullivan was 11 percentage
points ahead of her rivals. She had 41 percent of the vote, leading Whitney
North Seymour Jr., a former United States Attorney, who had 30 percent and
Muriel Siebert, a former State Bank Superintendent, who had 29 percent.

On the Democratic side, Mr. Moynihan led with 84 percent of the vote. Melvin
Klenetsky, a former leader of the U.S. Labor Party, had 16 percent.

Mr. Moynihan, who is seeking a second term, declared victory at the Sheraton
Centre, Seventh Avenue and 53d Street, 10 minutes after the polls closed at 9
P.M. Though only a scattering of returns were in, he called his victory ''the
largest margin of victory in the history of the statewide primary.''

Mrs. Sullivan becomes the first woman to run as a Republican nominee for the
Senate from New York State. As the most conservative of the three Republican
candidates, Mrs. Sullivan, who campaigned as a ''Reagan Republican,'' offered
the most clear-cut challange to Mr.  Moynihan on ideology and issues.

With a crowd of more than two hundred people shouting, ''go with the flow,'' in
the Skyline Suite at the New York Sheraton, Seventh Avenue and 56th Street, Mrs.
Sullivan began her campaign for the November general election by calling on Mr.
Moynihan to debate her.

Mrs. Sullivan, who was wearing a white orchid on her beige suit, was joined on
the podium by State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, who is seeking re-election but
was not challenged in the primary.

In her speech, Mrs. Sullivan said: ''Our victory is for all mainstream
Americans, parents like myself who want to enjoy a safe and prosperous New York.
The people of New York are fed up with Professor Moynihan and with his pursuit
of elitism and intellectual endeavors.''

During the primary campaign, Mrs. Sullivan readily conceded that she would be an
''underdog'' against Mr. Moynihan because of his standing as one of the state's
most popular elected officials.

Mr. Moynihan, who began the day in Washington with a key vote that helped block
a school prayer measure, hailed his victory over the ''radical right.''

''We have beaten back the radical right,'' he said. ''We beat them on the floor
of the Senate today, and we beat them in the ballot box tonight.''

3 Lines for Mrs. Sullivan

Mrs. Sullivan, 52 years old, was already assured of appearing on the ballot in
the general election in November because she is the candidate of the
Conservative and Right to Life Parties. She has served two terms in the
Assembly, representing the Bay Ridge section, and is a former assistant district
attorney in Brooklyn. She is a widow who returned to college in her 30's and
taught in a Roman Catholic high school.

Mrs. Sullivan had far less money to spend than either of her opponents, about
$30,000 in all. She was aided in the final days of the campaign by a mailing to
more than 500,000 likely Republicans across the state. The mailing, which was
financed by the state's Conservative Party, attacked Mr. Seymour as a ''Lindsay
Republican'' and Mrs. Siebert as a ''flaming liberal.''

Aides to Mr. Seymour complained that the mailing had misstated his position on
several issues. Last night, he told a crowd of supporters gathered in the
Madison Room at the Roosevelt Hotel, 45 East 45th Street, that Mrs. Sullivan's
campaign had been ''very unsportsmanlike.'' He said he ''resented'' the
interference of the Conservative Party in the race, but noted that he had agreed
to support the winner of the primary.

'Enjoyed' the Primary

Miss Siebert thanked her supporters at her campaign headquarters at 25 West 43rd
Street and said she had ''enjoyed'' the primary.  From the first, Mrs. Sullivan
sought to distinguish herself from her rivals as being the most conservative.
But despite statewide campaigning and mailings, and the television campaigns
mounted by her two opponents, all three Republicans remained largely unknown
throughout the campaign. Polls taken during the final days showed more than half
of all Republicans still undecided.

In the end, Mrs. Sullivan carried all counties in the New York metropolitan area
except Manhattan, where Mr. Seymour placed first with 38 percent, followed by
Miss Siebert.

The candidates had to organize their campaigns hastily when former United States
Representative Bruce F. Caputo, the expected Republican nominee, withdrew from
the race after acknowledging that accounts of his military service during the
Vietnam War had been fabrications. In fact, he never saw military service.

After Mr. Caputo's withdrawal last March, the National Conservative Political
Action Committee, which had targeted Mr. Moynihan for defeat, announced that it
had placed its planned $750,000 campaign ''in limbo.'' A spokesman explained
that it was ''doubtful'' a campaign against Mr. Moynihan would be successful.

Miss Siebert gave her campaign $250,000, but on the whole the candidates had
difficulty raising enough money to get their names and positions across to the
voters. The candidates also agreed on many of the issues, including the need for
some form of death penalty, economic development and new programs to fight
crime.

Mr. Moynihan raised $2.6 million in campaign funds over the last five years,
and, except for an unsuccessful bid to challenge his opponent's nominating
petitions, all but ignored Mr. Klenetsky in the campaign.

Mrs. Sullivan's aides had said that, of the three Republicans, she had the best
chance of defeating Mr. Moynihan in the general election because a primary
victory would have given her three lines on the ballot. The aides said her
Republican opponents would have had no chance of beating Mr. Moynihan in a
three-way race.

Mr. Seymour, 59, a longtime member of the city's political, social and legal
establishments, spent most of the summer camping out in state parks and touring
upstate county fairs. He raised $109,000, including $28,000 he lent to his
campaign, and was able to put together only a small television campaign in the
last few days of the race.

His campaign stressed his law-enforcement background and his experience in and
out of government. His aides complained that Mrs.  Sullivan's last-minute
mailing misstated his positions on the death penalty and other issues.

Miss Siebert, 54, the first woman to hold a seat on the New York Stock Exchange
and the first woman to found her own stock exchange firm, spent $210,000 on
television spots. Her campaign, which raised $338,000 over all, emphasized her
background in finance and conservative economic views.

Mr. Klenetsky, 37, won 4 percent of the vote in last year's Democratic primary
for Mayor as a candidate of the defunct United States Labor Party, which
sponsored Lyndon LaRouche for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1980.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Assemblywoman Florence M. Sullivan (Page B7)
photo of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan (Page B7)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. OFFICIAL ASSAILS KILLINGS IN LEBANON, NOT IN AFGHANISTAN

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 289 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 23


Imre Hollai of Hungary, the new President of the General Assembly, today
discounted the Sovietinflicted deaths in Afghanistan but deplored the massacre
in Beirut.

''The killings in Aghanistan are largely exaggerated compared to what is
happening in Lebanon,'' Mr. Hollai said at a news conference. ''The two
situations are not comparable, not the same. It's shocking, the attempt to
exterminate the Palestinian people, innocent people.''

Since the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan nearly three years ago, its
troops are believed to have been responsible for the deaths of thousands of
civilians. The Christian militiamen admitted by Israeli forces to Palestinian
refugee camps in Beirut are thought to have killed several hundred men, women
and children.

Mr. Hollai's view, consistent with that of other delegates from the Soviet bloc,
was not surprising. But it was unusual for the President of the General Assembly
to voice such a position publicly. The President is supposed to work in a
fashion that does not reflect any nation's policy.

In his opening speech on Tuesday, Mr. Hollai expressed concern over ''mass
violations'' of human rights.  Asked at the news conference for examples, he
cited South Africa and Chile, ignoring abuses in Eastern Europe and the third
world.  The new President declined to say whether he would preside on Sept. 30
when Prince Norodom Sihanouk addresses the General Assembly.  The Prince heads a
coalition that holds the United Nations seat for Cambodia. The Soviet bloc backs
the rival Phnom Penh Government installed by Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Hints at Terms On Missing Americans

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 23


Vietnam will permit searches for 2,500 United States servicemen missing during
the war in Indochina if Washington improves ties with Hanoi, four relatives of
missing Americans said today. Washington has no diplomatic ties with Hanoi.

The four relatives, returning to Laos after a week in Vietnam, indicated that
Vietnam was using the emotional issue of United States servicemen missing in
action as a bargaining chip with Washington.

Ann Griffiths, widow of an Air Force officer shot down during the Vietnam War,
said the group held ''beneficial'' talks with officials in Hanoi and viewed the
crash site of a B-52 bomber in which her husband died. But Mrs. Griffiths said
the group was told that further searching by civilians and others ''depends on
change in U.S.  Government policy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Jerusalem And Saigon

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


Israel's muscle-flexing Defense Minister, Ariel Sharon, has declaimed in the
Knesset, apparently in warning to the United States: ''This is Jerusalem, not
Saigon. It would be well for you to remember this.'' But it's Mr. Sharon and his
supposed leader, Prime Minister Menachem Begin, who most need to remember that.
Washington has not, after all, sent 500,000 American troops to Israel, nor
overwhelmed that country's society and economy. Neither the Reagan nor any
predecessor Administration has carpet-bombed an enemy capital to placate a
petulant Israeli government.

Despite dark insinuations from Jerusalem, Washington has not tried to
destabilize the Begin-Sharon Government, and certainly has instigated or
supported no coups. Even the Reagan peace proposals, far from being a dastardly
undercutting of Israel's rights and prospects, represent what has been basic
American policy for decades - and sometimes Israel's.

On the other hand, the United States has been generous in its aid to Israel,
even if no more so than deserved. But in return for the one-quarter of its total
foreign aid that goes annually to Israel, and for the weapons that have -
together with Israeli resolution and ingenuity - made Israel the strongest
nation in the Middle East, Washington has no right to expect and has not
demanded the subservience of a client state.

Washington does have a right to expect, however, that in return for its long and
generous support Israel will deal with it fairly and squarely, and that Israel's
own actions will reflect not only a decent respect for American policies and
interests but also for the opinions of mankind.

But that is not what the United States has been receiving from the Begin-Sharon
Government in recent months, as the following record shows:

The Israeli invasion of Lebanon was timed, purposely or not, to embarrass Mr.
Reagan during his European tour; and the stated reason for it - to bring peace
to Israel's northern border - was flimsy.  That border had been quiet for a
year, owing to a cease-fire negotiated by Philip Habib, under Mr. Reagan's
auspices.

The originally announced invasion objective - a 25-mile zone north of the border
- was discarded by Israel as soon as its forces penetrated 25 miles into
Lebanon. Cluster bombs were used, in defiance of American restrictions.

After the Israelis invested Beirut, and Mr. Habib began trying to arrange the
evacuation of Palestinian guerrillas, Israeli forces - in the opinion of most
observers - repeatedly broke the cease-fires Mr.  Habib devised. Whatever the
Israeli purpose, these tactics tended to undermine Arab respect for Mr. Reagan
and the United States, hence to undercut not only American standing in the
Middle East but also Washington's prospects as a peacemaker.

The subsequent Reagan peace proposals were spurned in the most vitriolic and
abusive fashion by Mr. Sharon and Mr. Begin, who said it would be ''treason''
for any Israeli to support them. Nothing could have made clearer the
Begin-Sharon Government's intention to hang onto the West Bank, in contravention
of U.N. resolutions, American policy and most of the world's interpretation of
the Camp David agreements that Mr. Begin signed.

A strong case can be made that, following the assassination of Bashir Gemayel,
the Israelis entered West Beirut - again sabotaging an agreement devised by
Philip Habib - to undermine the credibility of the Reagan proposals. In West
Beirut, they signally failed their self-appointed mission of maintaining law and
order in another country; and even Ariel Sharon admits that Israeli forces
introduced vengeful Christian Phalangists into unprotected Palestinian camps.

That amounts at least to a complicity of incompetence and/or blindness to danger
that Mr. Sharon would pay for with his office in most countries. But not only is
he defiant; he and the Prime Minister will not even tolerate an independent
investigation of what happened in West Beirut. Such stonewalling shows contempt,
not just for world opinion but for all those American Jewish leaders who have
been pleading with Washington to ''wait for all the facts'' before condemning
Israel for the Beirut massacre.

So Ariel Sharon is right that Jerusalem is not Saigon; but it isn't Washington
that needs to be reminded of that - it's Jerusalem.  For if the United States
has no right to expect of Israel the subservience of a client state, it has
every right to expect that the Government of Israel will not conduct itself like
the militaristic, dictatorial and untrustworthy Governments that ruled in South
Vietnam for so many years, to such bitter effect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Deirdre Carmody and Clyde Haberman

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


Part of the Solution

B it by bit, variations of the old-time soup kitchens are cropping up all over
the city.  One has been operating for several months in the University Heights
section of the Bronx, out of a storefront at 270 West Fordham Road. It is called
POTS, a carefully chosen acronym that stands for Part of the Solution. Without
benefit of government money, it serves about 100 meals a day to people coming in
off the streets - a surprising number of whom turn out to be Vietnam War
veterans.

POTS was started by the Rev. Edward Murphy, a veteran of the Catholic antiwar
movement, who not only oversees the soup kitchen but also runs - and lives in -
a North Bronx house for teen-agers without families. ''We picked this area
because plenty of others tend to the 'established' poor places like the Bowery
and the South Bronx,'' Father Murphy said.

A fund-raising event was held for the group in Greenwich Village the other
night, although the term ''fund-raising'' lends too great a monied air to a
gathering where $15 was considered a fine contribution. There was the obligatory
wine and cheese and some singing and speechifying. Mostly, there was talk about
people out there going hungry and how the time was past for turning one's head.

''It's a little thing that we are doing - it really is,'' Father Murphy told the
60 guests. ''But it is based in community, so it is without end. We realize we
are not doing very much. But we are there.'' Deirdre Carmody Clyde Haberman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEFTIST REBELS IN EL SALVADOR SAID TO EXPAND AREA OF WAR

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1887 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Sept. 25


Salvadoran rebels are taking their guerrilla war into previously quiet parts of
the country, according to American and Salvadoran military analysts.

These analysts also say that the guerrillas are increasingly being supplied by
helicopter and light aircraft from Nicaragua.  Although United States and
Salvadoran officials insist that the war against an estimated 4,000 armed
insurgents is going well - interpreting the fanning out of the guerrillas as a
sign that they are under pressure in their traditional strongholds - Western
analysts voice doubts about the leadership of key portions of the Salvadoran
military.

One knowledgeable analyst said that, of the 14 military commanders leading the
fight against the insurgency, about half of them ''are aggressive and understand
the true nature of the war.''

'A Garrison Mentality'

''The others may as well stay home,'' said the official. ''They have a garrison
mentality. The only time they put troops in the field is in large numbers. They
have not adapted to night operations, small patrols, ambushes. They don't
believe a five-man reconnaissance patrol can have more success than a 50-man
reconnaissance patrol.  They're just not doing it.''

American and Salvadoran officials say that there appears to have been an
increase in airborne movement of supplies to the rebels from Nicaragua, with
black-painted helicopters and fixed-wing planes landing on ''little dirt strips
and sections of road,'' in the eastern portions of the country.

In August, the officials said, there were 18 sightings of these aircraft, which
land at dusk or during the night. The planes are believed to carry radios,
Soviet-made demolition equipment, medical supplies and replacement parts for
weapons from Cuba.

Intelligence reports indicate that the pilots are Nicaraguans and possibly other
foreigners.

Shift in Supply Routes

Military officials say that one of the reasons for the increase in flights out
of Nicaragua was that overland arms supply shipments from Nicaragua through
Honduras have been intercepted with more frequency by the Hondurans, and that
water supply routes used by Nicaraguan ships have lately been interdicted by the
Salvadoran Navy.

A new supply route, say American and Salvadoran officials, takes weapons from
Nicaragua to Belize, to Guatemala and then El Salvador.  ''Belize is like a
funnel,'' said one military source.

To American and Salvadoran officials, who concede that the rebels' ability or
will to fight remains undiminished, the war has nonetheless taken an favorable
turn, although this view is disputed by other Salvadorans.

Officials say that the elections last March, when 70 percent of the Salvadoran
electorate defied threats from guerrilla forces and voted, was a repudiation for
the insurgency. Western officials say that there is some evidence that the
guerrilla leadership itself was startled at the vote and withdrew to devise a
new strategy, including possibly starting talks with the Government.

U.S. Aid and Advice

Beyond this, United States military assistance, totaling $125 million in the
last 20 months, coupled with the services of about 50 military advisers, has had
an impact on a portion of the 30,000 Government troops fighting the rebels,
Western officials say.

The United States advisers conduct training courses for recruits and junior
officers and, according to American officials, are engaged in such tasks as
showing Salvadorans how to secure bridge sites and dams that are potentially
vulnerable to guerrilla attack.

More than 1,500 Salvadorans have been flown to the United States so far,
including a 960-man battalion that attended a 14-week course at Fort Bragg,
N.C., and 470 officer cadets who have gone to school at Fort Benning, Ga. Plans
are underway for another Salvadoran battalion to go to the United States for a
full-fledged training program. Two other battalions have been trained in El
Salvador by United States advisors.

A crucial problem, according to American and Salvadoran officials, is that
although the United States military has influence at the military high command
headquarters in San Salvador, and also has ''impact'' at the lower command
levels, where Americans are conducting basic training courses, the Americans
have virtually no muscle in dealing with the colonels who run military districts
and brigades in the field. It is these officers that devise their own strategies
for dealing with guerrillas.

'The Warlords'

United States military officials privately call these commanders ''the
warlords.'' One source said, ''They're appointed by the Ministry of Defense and
they're quasi-autonomous. What they do is their own business. There's no solid
command line like the U.S. On a day-to-day basis they run things pretty much as
they see fit.''

What makes the situation especially delicate for the United States, is that any
United States role with these officers would ''raise the rules of engagement and
raise the risks of Americans getting in the way,'' especially if United States
advisers were ordered to work in regional capitals instead of returning to San
Salvador, as they do each night, according to one official.

Of the 14 regions - or ''departments'' - in this country, military officials
said that commanders in such eastern and central areas as Cabanas, Usulutan, San
Miguel and La Union are most effective. The officials singled out for criticism
are those largely in the north and in the west, in such regions as San Vicente,
Santa Ana, Chalatenango and Ahuachapan.

Various guerrilla successes - such as destroying bridges, power stations and
electric pylons in an effort to shatter the economy - have taken place ''not
surprisingly, where the commanders are reluctant to get out and saturate the
countryside with small units,'' said one military source.

No Shortage of Weapons

Apparently the rebels themselves -who may have an unarmed cadre of at least
15,000 peasants behind them, and possibly far more - have no shortage of
weapons. They use mostly American-made M-16's, Soviet and East German demolition
equipment, United States 81-millimeter mortars and Soviet and Chinese
rocket-propelled grenades. Guerrilla units have also appeared with M-60 and
30-millimeter machine-guns, which provide enough fire power to hold off
helicopters flying air support for the Government troops.

The Salvadoran Army, which appears to retain the advantage in weaponry, has 20
UH-1H helicopters, six A-37 aircraft, four O-2 observation planes, plus
90-millimeter recoilless rifles, M-79 grenade launchers and the basic M-16 rifle
for infantrymen.

Precisely how the war is evolving, at this point, remains difficult to assess.
In recent weeks, Western intelligence reports have indicated that the guerrillas
have begun dispersing into areas of the west that have been relatively quiet
-Santa Ana, Sonsonate, Ahuachapan. To American and Salvadoran officials, the
dispersal of guerrilla forces is a sign that ''other areas have become more
difficult and it's become harder for the guerrillas to function.''

Other sources say, however, that the rebel move is an attempt to spread the
Salvadoran Army thinner and may result in more acts of disruption - such as
bombing bridges and power stations - in a further effort to wreck the economy.
Some military sources expect acts of terrorism in San Salvador itself - a city
where restaurants and discotheques are crowded at night - in order to weaken the
Government and undermine morale.

Estimates of Casualties

The army itself has estimated that, in the last year, more than 1,000 soldiers
have died and 2,500 have been wounded. Guerrilla casualties are not known,
although officials say that in recent ''successful'' operations against the
rebels in Usulutan and San Vicente there were ''250 confirmed guerrillas'' dead,
and about 20 wounded.Gen. Jose Guillermo Garcia, the Defense Minister, has
estimated that the guerrillas have lost 1,000 men since the March 28 elections.

What makes the military situation unclear, however, is not only questions as to
the tactics and effectiveness of the Salvadoran Army, despite its advantages in
weaponry, but the indiscipline of many troops. The army takes few prisoners and,
although numbers vary considerably, military operations inevitably include
details of numerous civilian deaths. Last month, for example, in a major sweep
in the central province of San Vicente, the army claimed a major triumph against
guerrilla forces, because of the assistance of United States-trained units,
called ''immediate reaction'' battalions.

Complicating the army's role in Salvador is the fact that its leadership, under
General Garcia is the pivotal force behind land redistribution and seems
committed to certain basic social changes.  Moderate Salvadorans say that it is
simplistic to assume that the army is a symbol of repressive force and the
rebels have widespread support in the countryside.

''This is not Vietnam,'' said General Garcia, in a speech to the American
Chamber of Commerce here on Friday. ''This is another kind of enemy. You need
the support of people, popular support. Thank God, here in Salvador, we have
support.'' United States diplomats and Salvadoran officials say that the
election in March, by and large, affirms General Garcia's view.

'Absolutely No Comparison'

Among American military officials who have worked in Vietnam, comparisons
between the two situations stir intense objections.  ''There is absolutely no
comparison,'' said one United States military aide. ''These guys are aggressive,
they're tough, they don't back off - in fact that's one of their problems. There
are more people here that want to get in the army than the army can hold. In
Vietnam they wanted to get out. They're very, very aggressive here.''

American and Salvadoran officials concede that a crucial security problem
remains unresolved: How to deal with the National Guard and the Treasury Police,
which are technically under General Garcia's command. United States officials
and human-rights advocates have blamed these forces for many civilian deaths and
atrocities, and some American diplomats have urged that the guard and the
Treasury Police be abolished as independent units and either merged with the
army or turned into separate civilian forces.

But the proposals have run into considerable difficulty. The director of the
National Guard, Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova, is one of only three Salvadoran
generals, and refuses to relinquish his considerable power.

And the head of the Treasury Police is known to have in his possession
information on the private lives of military and civilian officials, as well as
tax returns. Officials here deem it unlikely that the Treasury Police will be
abolished.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map indicating areas penetrated by rebels

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
4 Americans See No Sign Of Missing G.I.'s in Laos

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 158 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 25


Four Americans looking for traces of missing United States servicemen in Laos
searched today through a cave used to hold prisoners of war during the Vietnam
War.  No sign of missing Americans was found.

One of the four Americans said the Laotian authorities, believing there is a
remote chance some Americans missing for a decade may still be alive, would
order searches of rural sites where United States aircraft crashed.

The four Americans, all with relatives missing in southeast Asia and all members
of the National League of Families, are searching for clues to the fate of some
2,500 Americans listed as missing in action.

Ann Griffiths of Annandale, Va., executive director of the Washington-based
organization, said the group was told that two American prisoners died in 1968
in the northern Laotian cave explored today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAROL BURNETT PLAYS IT STRAIGHT

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1915 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Stephen Farber is a freelance writer based in Los Angeles.

BY STEPHEN FARBER
LOS ANGELES The license plate on Carol Burnett's Rolls-Royce reads ''11 YRS,''
in reference to her long reign as the queen of one of the most successful comedy
series in the history of television. But the fans who know her only as the TV
comedienne who created a huge gallery of vivid loonies in some 2,000 movie
parodies and satiric sketches have not seen all the faces of Carol Burnett. She
has appeared on stage (in ''Once Upon a Mattress'' early in her career, and more
recently in a revival of ''Same Time Next Year'') and in films (''Pete 'n
Tillie,'' ''A Wedding,'' ''The Four Seasons,'' and ''Annie'') as well as on
television. She has excelled in drama as well as in comedy, most notably in
''Friendly Fire,'' in which her portrayal of a Midwestern woman obsessed with
learning the truth about her son's death in Vietnam earned her an Emmy
nomination.

In addition, her musical variety specials have won almost as much acclaim as her
comedy shows; she warbled duets with Julie Andrews at Carnegie Hall, Beverly
Sills at the Met, Dolly Parton at Opryland, and two weeks ago she was paired
with such diverse figures as Placido Domingo and Sammy Davis Jr., in the
''Texaco Star Theater's Salute to the American Musical.''

On a recent visit to Los Angeles from her home in Maui, Miss Burnett agreed that
one of her greatest satisfactions is that she has escaped the curse of type
casting and pigeonholing. ''In America,'' she said, ''people like to put you in
a niche and categorize you - as a nightclub singer, or a stage actor, or a
sit-com performer. I think that's a big mistake. I want to keep doing it all.''

Miss Burnett's next outing marks a distinct change of pace from her outlandish
comedy roles in musical medleys: she stars in ''Life of the Party: The Story of
Beatrice,'' a grimly serious TV movie to be shown Wednesday evening at 9 on CBS.
In this alternately harrowing and uplifting story, Miss Burnett plays Beatrice
O'Reilly, a former alcoholic who founded the first Los Angeles recovery house
for female alcoholics. The two-hour drama, which co-stars Lloyd Bridges, has
been directed by Lamont Johnson; the executive producers are Ken Welch and
Mitzie Welch, who were two of the writers on Miss Burnett's TV series for a
number of years.

''Life of the Party'' developed after Mrs. Welch took Miss Burnett to meet
Beatrice O'Reilly at Friendly House in Los Angeles. ''Bea is quite a
character,'' Miss Burnett says. ''She's in her 70's, but up until very recently,
she was riding a motorcycle every day. Her story is quite remarkable. She was a
trailblazer. Thirty years ago it was very unusual to see a woman at an AA
meeting. They were all closet drinkers and wouldn't dare venture forth to say,
'I am an alcoholic.'

''Bea had been in drunk tanks and seen a lot of other women alcoholics, and she
promised herself that if she stayed straight, she would do something to help
other women. Eventually she started this recovery program without any help from
the government or the state. She gave the women a home and helped them to find
jobs. And she's become very successful.''

The subject touched a personal chord for Miss Burnett, whose parents were
alcoholics. ''When I met Bea,'' she recalled, ''I adored her immediately. She
reminded me of my mother, who died of alcoholism at the age of 46. Both had the
same Texas background. And they both had the same personality plus; my mom could
charm a bottle and get it to talk to her. After we had already started working
on the show, I went to a fund-raising affair that Bea held, and out of the blue,
I asked her when her birthday was. It turned out to be the same day as my
mother's. When I heard that, I got goose bumps.''

In playing the role, Miss Burnett was able to draw on painful memories
stretching all the way back to childhood. ''In an alcoholic,'' she said, ''I've
observed there's often a spontaneous change of personality from one second to
the next. They can go from laughter to immediate tears, from saying the most
vicious thing to being Miss Congeniality. It's a Jekyll-and-Hyde syndrome. I
don't hate my mother or my father now. I've learned that alcoholism is a
disease. I hated them at times when I was a kid. I thought it was my fault when
they got drunk. I felt it was because they didn't love me. It's common for kids
to feel that way. I wish they had had Alanon in those days, which is for the
families and children of alcoholics.''

Because of her personal involvement in the subject, Miss Burnett clearly hopes
that ''Life of the Party'' will reach a larger audience and have a greater
impact than a routine TV show. ''I don't like message movies,'' she said,
''unless they are also entertaining. But I hope this film will show people that
alcoholism is nothing to be ashamed of, that there are a lot of people who have
been in the pits and managed to overcome it.

''I'd also like the film to encourage women to be more open about the problem.
Of course that's happening already. More and more women are coming out of the
closet. I don't know that our show is a breakthrough. I just think Bea is a
fabulous lady. If she had been out to save the whales instead of alcoholics, I
still might have wanted to do it because I liked her so much.''

Ironically, the role that Miss Burnett played before Beatrice was another
alcoholic - the soused, sluttish Miss Hannigan, the meanspirited head of the
orphanage in the movie version of ''Annie.'' Given her serious concerns about
the subject of alcoholism, some people might argue that a comic drunk like Miss
Hannigan trivializes the problem. ''I don't think so,'' Miss Burnett replied.
''When I was doing the TV show, I played comic drunks - like Eunice - in several
of the sketches, but every one of them came out a loser. Eunice is quite
pitiful, for example, and so is Hannigan. All alcoholics are losers - that's a
common denominator.''

The movie of ''Annie'' proved to be Miss Burnett's most difficult professional
experience. As she explains, ''I've never done anything that broad without an
audience to tell me if I was going too far.  There was no feedback. When you're
doing comedy without an audience, you have to trust the director and the editor.
I'd rather trust the audience, because the audience is never wrong.''

''Annie,'' one of the most expensive movies ever made, received poor reviews
from many critics and turned out to be far less profitable than the studio had
hoped. While Miss Burnett herself garnered enthusiastic notices, she admits to
feeling disappointed by the tepid response to the film. ''I'm sorry about all
the work that everybody put into it,'' she said. ''Any time a film fails, it's a
funny story to everybody but the people concerned. I guess the minute they
bought the stage play for that much money, they were asking for trouble. I kind
of knew going in that unless it was 'Gone With the Wind,' people were going to
knock it.

''I did it because my whole life growing up was movie musicals.  Those were my
favorite films. And they just don't do them anymore. If I'd been around in the
40's, I probably would have been playing the Virginia O'Brien and Betty Garrett
roles - the best friend of June Allyson. So I'm kind of happy that I got to be
in one big musical of my own.''

Of all the different kinds of roles that she has played, Miss Burnett finds
comedy on stage the most satisfying. ''But I don't want to do Broadway,'' she
said, ''and get stuck in a hit for a year and a half. I'd rather do three or
four weeks on stage, or tape it for television.''

Her transition to serious roles had not really been part of her original game
plan. ''I didn't ask for my first dramatic roles,'' she said. ''Both 'Pete 'n
Tillie' and 'Friendly Fire' were sent to me, and I had to look at the envelope
twice to make sure my name was really on it. I thought it had to be a joke.''

While she seems to enjoy the challenge of those serious roles, she downplays her
achievements and believes that she is still endeavoring to find her footing as a
dramatic actress. ''I have to learn to take more chances with the straight
work,'' she insisted. ''I tend to fear that if I get very big - and sometimes a
dramatic role will call for that - people might start laughing. They've seen me
get very big comedically, and that's what they expect of me.

''In a dramatic role it's much easier for me to underplay. A woman who's very
shy and introverted would be a piece of cake for me. The schoolteacher in 'Time
of the Cuckoo,' for example, is a part I would feel comfortable doing. But in
something that requires more bravado, like 'Mommie Dearest,' people would think
I was doing a sketch. I admired Faye Dunaway for going all the way with that. I
would have been afraid to.

''I was definitely too restrained in 'Pete 'n Tillie.' I think my best work has
been for Robert Altman, who directed me in 'A Wedding' and 'Health.' He turns a
key in everybody's back and opens them up.  He freed me in front of a film
camera, made me more brave, which has helped me in other things. But I still
have to work at being bolder.''

In the last couple of years Miss Burnett has received almost as much attention
for her off-screen roles as for her on-camera performances. First she talked
publicly about her oldest daughter's drug problem. Then she made page one
headlines in her successful libel suit against The National Enquirer. Looking
back at those two experiences, she still feels surprised by her own
outspokenness.  ''I've always been the least likely person ever to make waves,''
she said, smiling. ''When I was at Hollywood High, I was so desperate not to be
noticed that people would come over to where I was sitting and ask, 'Is this
chair taken?' So it's kind of strange that I've had all this notoriety lately.
But it only happens if it's something I really care about. I have to get infused
with what I consider the righteousness of something, which is what happened in
both of those recent cases. Now I'm backing off. I'm getting all these scripts
about caped crusaders, and that's not really me.''

After that intense period in the limelight, Miss Burnett is happy to retreat to
her home in Maui, Hawaii, where she now lives most of the year with her husband,
the producer Joe Hamilton, and their three teen-age daughters. Her work has
brought her to California several times this year, but she has no more definite
commitments and intends to take the rest of the year off.

''This fall I am not going to work,'' she said. ''I won't do anything unless
Laurence Olivier or Katharine Hepburn calls. Of course I said that once before.
Someone wanted us to rent out our beach house in California. And I said, 'I will
not rent the beach house unless it's to Laurence Olivier.' I'll be darned if he
didn't call. It was fun to be his landlady for six months.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Carol Burnett (page C23) photo of Ben Johnson
and Tom Selleck (page C13) photo of British soldiers (page C13) photo of Carol
Burnett

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AMERICAN LEFT STILL SEARCHES FOR A CLEAR POLITICAL DIRECTION

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 3338 words


IS there a future for left-wing politics in this country? The old leftist
parties of the first half of the century seem moribund, and the 1960's, for all
their tumult, did not give birth to new ones. Among leftists now there is a
growing debate about what to do. It is a debate confused by the decline of the
liberal wings of the two major parties to which leftists in the past have looked
for support.

All this comes at a time when six people, including members of the radical left
splinter group, the Weather Underground, are awaiting trial in Rockland County
on murder charges stemming from an October 1981 robbery of a Brink's truck in
which two policemen and a guard were killed. Last week, in the second week of
pretrial proceedings, the continuing political theater was reminiscent of trials
of other left wing activists in the 1960's. Four of the defendants declared
themselves ''prisoners of war'' and refused to participate in their defense. One
defense lawyer said the trial was illegal, another argued for the defendants'
right to wear tee shirts bearing political slogans and the judge barred several
attorneys from leaving the courtroom as their clients shouted ''Long live
Palestine.''

Few students of politics would argue that there is any but a factitious
connection between the holdup and killings and the tradition of the left in this
country, but many worry about the popular impression the publicity surrounding
the trial will leave.

D.J.R.Bruckner, an editor of The New York Times Book Review, interviewed six
people - writers, activists, teachers - four of them most often identified as
leftist thinkers and two as conservative.  They are Eugene Genovese, professor
of history at the University of Rochester; Elinor Langer, author of ''Notes For
Next Time: A Memoir of the 60's'' which appeared in Working Papers in 1973 and
who is a columnist for Mother Jones, a member of the editorial board of The
Nation and a fellow at the Bunting Institute of Radcliffe College; Nathan
Glazer, professor of education and sociology at Harvard and co-editor of The
Public Interest who this year is teaching in France; Sheldon S. Wolin, professor
of political theory at Princeton University and editor of the journal
''democracy''; Heather Booth, president of the Midwest Academy, a center for
training leaders of citizens groups and organizations centered on community
issues, director of the State and Local Leadership Project, past director of the
Citizens/Labor Energy Coalition; and Theodore J. Lowi, who is John L. Senior
Professor of American Institutions at Cornell University.
Excerpts from the interviews follow.

Question. What message does the Brink's robbery give people about the left-wing
movement of the 1960's?

Answer. There was a frustration within the youth movement which drove a very
small number of people into almost nihilistic violence.  And some of those
people have resurfaced. This is nothing new in the world and we're talking about
a very few people. I don't see any point in trying to understand the political
phenomena of the 60's from that angle.

Q. All right, how do you assess the 1960's movement?

A. I was critical of it at the time and I am not surprised by what happened to
it. But it was a mass movement, the first since the 30's; it brought together
the civil rights movement and the antiwar movement, and that is an achievement.
I have different feelings about the counter-cultural aspect of that movement.
American workers and the middle class were disenchanted with the Vietnam war,
but many of them hated the peace movement for the attack on traditional values
that was mixed up with it. However, one should not underestimate the numbers who
went through the civil rights and student movement and the women's movement, who
I think will be heard from again.

Leadership is another matter. I'm old-left enough to think that any movement
that will be more than temporary has to come from the traditional working class.

Q. Why does the left seem to have such trouble articulating a program?

A. First, you run into the bad reputation of socialist countries.  Their
political system is unattractive to Americans, for understandable reasons.
Beyond that, I don't think the movement in the United States ever recovered from
the split over the Russian Revolution - between the Communist left and the
Social Democratic left. One of the major obstacles to any united left-wing
effort is its inability to develop a coherent foreign policy, and at the root of
that is the intractability of the conflict between the Communist countries and
the capitalist countries. So, the left has difficulty getting a hearing for
anything that suggests a radical restructuring of the economy and the class
structure of this country. But then, New Deal-type solutions may not have much
to offer anymore. The problems are such that it's not clear they can be solved
in other than a conservative way, within the present economic structure. So, the
left's dilemma is genuine.

But I think that if we can avoid war, given the problems the country faces,
there will be opportunities. I do see the rebuilding of a left-liberal
coalition, but only after some hard struggles within the left and center, as
well as between the left and center and the right.

Q. What brought the 1960's movement to an end?

A. It was a combination of internal and external factors. One thing which should
not be overlooked is the role played by the Government.  Certain activities have
been documented through the Freedom of Information Act, such as the Jean Seberg
case and the infiltration of the underground press.

Another factor was the violence rising to a crescendo around Kent State and the
killing of the students there. It frightened people away. The eventual change in
policy on Vietnam also had an effect.  Then, too, the internal chaos and
confusion of the movement were very great.

Q. Many say it was the movement that was violent.

A. I don't think it was particularly violent. The Weather people and all their
consequences notwithstanding, there was still less mass violence in America in
the 60's than in any country where there has been a real revolutionary movement.
There is another issue: Official violence was real and underestimated. I saw
plainclothesmen infiltrating Columbia University the night of the bust and I
know that the violence there was not caused by demonstrators. What the police
did to the Black Panthers has also been documented.

Q. It seems the most viable part of the 1960's movement is the women's movement.
Why?

A. Well, it didn't threaten physical disruption so in that sense it was easier
to take, I suppose. But over a longer period of time it raised fundamental
questions about the position of women and the organization of the family that
are in fact extremely disruptive and are in part responsible for the rise of the
New Right.

On the national scene it has appeared largely as a succession of individual
crusades, which like all single-issue politics leads to peculiar alliances and
has taken the women's movement far from its origins in the New Left.

Q. Are the people you knew in the movement in the 1960's still political people?

A. Yes, in the sense of continuing concern for social issues but not in the
sense of remaining very active. For the last decade or so there has been a great
sense of uncertainty about what to do.  Basically, the 60's movement was a
protest movement. It didn't attract people who like the daily work of politics.

The former radicals I know who are active politically, however, are working in
quite a variety of situations including city governments, education and legal
services and there are also a lot of people in those fields who are working in
an intellectual framework derived from the 60's, although they may not think of
it that way.

To me, the underlying question is: Why does it matter whether we have an active
left or not? And the only answer I have is that it has traditionally been a kind
of conscience. That's a corny thing to say, but it has more often than not
called attention to what's wrong in American society and aligned itself against
what's wrong.

A related question is what is the left to be the left of? I think the left has
always liked to think of itself as having independent origins but the fortunes
of the left have always risen and fallen according to other forces, particularly
the forces of liberalism.

Q. Is there a particularly tough foreign policy issue for the left?

A. The left has never solved the problem of how to criticize America internally
and support the defense of it externally at the same time. In order to be taken
seriously politically, the left has to agree the United States is worth
defending; this does not necessarily come naturally.

In my view this is the area where the greatest and most painful maturation has
to occur if the left is ever to carry any weight. To defend regimes which one
after the other are exposed as being in many respects more terrible than the
United States, seems to the majority of Americans not just incomprehensible but
indeed ''sinister.'' Without this kind of reformulation all the left's specific
criticisms - whether of defense budgets, particular issues in particular
countries or whatever - will always be regarded as suspect.

Q. Where is the American left going?

A. I don't think it has any ruling or dominant ideas. If one thinks of the
economy, for example, the left is very much opposed to the measures taken to
increase investment and stimulate economic activity. But I wonder what its
alternatives are. The most powerful arguments I have seen on the left - Bob
Kuttner or Robert Reich - are that other capitalist societies, such as Germany
and Japan, do things better. But is that an argument for the left?

In foreign policy, I don't see a strong left-right issue either.  Does the left,
which is in no sense friendly to Russia, think that Russia's military strength
is of no significance for democratic values? There has been a collapse of the
idea that socialism will provide a better life. Russia does not suggest a better
life, nor Cuba, nor China. If one says that France and Sweden are better models
than Reagan provides, that's a fair argument, but the differences among Western
democracies are minor.

Q. There was a time when the left had political organization. What happened to
it?

A. The socialist parties broke up as a result of the attractiveness of the left
wing of the Democratic Party. The Communists broke up because of the inability
to present Soviet Russia as a model. The left Democrats don't have a program.

But opportunities for the left can be revived by economic disaster in which any
alternative would look better. I suppose the alternative would be expanded
domestic social programs and cuts in arms expenditures. But even the left has to
worry about military strength. Some of them worry about Cuban-style regimes
taking over from revolutionary movements.

The problem of the left, then, is to articulate a viable alternative that looks
reasonable, attractive and fulfills its values. This is an intellectual problem
and it is a problem of history, in which a lot of alternatives have been
spoiled.

Q. Why should anyone worry about what happens to the left?

A. The left is still the main bearer of the ideas of equality, freedom and
common action. Unfortunately most leftists are so concerned with formulating the
crisis of our time in essentially economic terms of production, jobs,
consumption and efficiency that they ignore the political nature of economic
choices and unwittingly promote the demise of democracy.

What defines the left is a political task. Democratic institutions are being
undercut at virtually every level of our society. The power of business
corporations has corrupted political parties and representative institutions;
the creation of a 'national security state' has placed individual liberties in
the greatest peacetime danger in our history; ordinary people are being deprived
of influence over their own lives in the name of what is a nakedly
class-oriented conception of the economy that strips them of both dignity and
power, from education to workplace safety.

The left needs to rally around the task of recreating a democratic society in
which economic power and arrangements are subordinated to democratic ends of
equality, liberty and participation.

Q. But what are leftists doing now?

A. They are doing a great many things. There is, for example, a lively leftist
culture developing in a number of journals and among younger academics and
intellectuals. One important change is the emergence of a historical
sensibility, an interest in reappropriating populist and democratic traditions.

The old left shared the liberal and neoconservative faith in the 'progressive'
destruction of older ways of life. Among some elements in the new left, however,
there is a conviction that life can be lived intensely without launching space
shuttles.

Q. Does that mean the old leftists were wrong in their approach?

A. They were separated from the American traditions that are radical,
democratic, participatory and egalitarian.

Q. How does what you describe as growing leftist thinking get translated into
political action?

A. In recent years there has been a remarkable flourishing of grassroots
politics. Its concerns range from health care, to utility rates, to nuclear
power. Most of it is democratic and anticorporate.  It is very different from
the old left focus on centralized planning.

The second hopeful development is the widespread opposition to interventionism
abroad and to the nuclear arms race. Foreign policy, weaponry and war have
always been viewed as a preserve insulated from public discussion, and, above
all, from democratic participation.

The antinuclear movement is an attempt to breach that barrier. But until the
antinuclear movement becomes truly radical and connects the danger of war to the
structure of economic and political power, it runs the risk of becoming simply a
means of easing upper middle-class guilt.

Finally, there is in this country a slowly growing discontent among workers and
a realization that new forms of political action and alliances are needed.

Q. Won't those segments just fly apart?

A. That has been the congenital problem of the left. The way to avoid it is to
eschew an ideal of a huge mass movement and to build, instead, ever-widening
methods of cooperation. The left cannot play politics on terms set by mass media
and mass organization. A more decentralized and local politics, scattered and
diffuse, is the first best hope.

Q. Is there reason to be optimistic about the left now?

A. We're in a volatile time. What I have hope in is the ability of organized
people to fight for what is right over time. In the 70's important new
organizations developed which worked on consumer and energy issues. These
community organizations are springing up all over the country, winning changes,
from improvement in community services to insuring greater fairness in the
investment policies of banks.

There are new alliances among trade unions, senior citizens groups and other
issue organizations that have been training grounds for new leadership ready to
enter the electoral arena. That strategy parallels the experience of the new
right after 1964, when it built an array of single- and multiple-issue
organizations and then went into electoral politics.

Q. How does that scenario differ from the 1960's?

A. The 60's was a time of relative prosperity. The hard won changes were
incredibly important. In prosperity more needs could be met more easily without
challenging who profits and who pays. In the 80's, we're in economic decline and
so the demands are not for access to jobs but for jobs, not just for a seat at
the lunch counter but for the money to eat. In a time of decline one group is
pitted against the other, unless we unite to counter the organized corporate
greed.

Q. How can these movements become involved in electoral politics?

A. These groups are becoming an electoral force. They have developed capable and
articulate leadership. They have clear issues and programs. They are now
recruiting and running their own candidates. What is particularly important is
the developing alliances between these issue organizations, movement
organizations and trade unions.

In the short run, the problem is to develop a winning response to the failure of
Reaganomics. In the longer run, my hope is these organizatons will unite so they
can pose not only an effective opposition, but a winning progressive
alternative.

Q. What has happened to the American left?

A. I assume that you intentionally evoke European notions of the left with its
revolutionary theory about social change. In the United States in the 30's the
depression made socialism plausible, but it was stunted in its growth by its
lack of ability to attract truly exploited people like the blacks, and because
Stalinism made a pact with Nazism. But, what is more important, the United
States is a federal system: Most government and most social injustice came from
the state capitals and not from Washington, and socialism never had a central
state to attack.

Now, the interesting thing about what was called the left in the 60's is that,
except for a few old leftists, it was composed of student activists and their
faculty fellow travelers and so on. Most of their outspoken leaders were in a
long American tradition which I would call rebellious. They were mainly trying
to be extreme reformists. They used radical action to gain attention, but their
demands and hopes were for the present society to live by its own ideals,
whereas the revolutionary tradition would hope to cashier the current regime.
And the 60's movement succeeded to a large extent. Universities reorganized
themselves; there is more public access to agencies; there have been civil
rights advances; there is more pacifism. Success is one reason for the decline
of the movement.

Q. Doesn't that suggest that there might be a growth of left-wing politics
beyond the campuses?

A. There's a greater interest in Marxist writers now and they may be gaining
plausibility, because one very important thing that's happened since the 30's is
what I call the Europeanization of America: In the last 20 years we've developed
an immense national presence and we now know it isn't going to go away despite
Reagan's efforts. That has changed the conditions which explained why in the
past we didn't have a strong left.

Leftist thinking in the European sense may in fact strengthen in the United
States. It may start on the campuses, not because teachers are brainwashing
students, but because students who were always assigned Marx to read may find
that kind of writing more plausible today. There is a stronger foundation for it
now. I don't think it's only in the universities, but that is where things are
considered, where things are kept and not forgotten, that is where it starts to
emerge. Its potential is everywhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of people interviewed, rally

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS AND TRENDS IN SUMMARY;
A Hopeful Blip At Last in the S.A.T. Scores

BYLINE: By Wayne Biddle and Marge Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 306 words


There was a time when cars were big and houses were cheap and kids did great on
their Scholastic Aptitude Tests. Lots of things deteriorated in the 1960's,
however, including S.A.T. scores. But last week the College Entrance Examination
Board, which sponsors the testing program, announced that performance was up
slightly last fall for the first time since 1963.

Inability to explain the long-term decline has bugged educators for years. In
1977, the College Board tried to pin it on Vietnam traumas, one-parent families
and lax high school curriculums. ''A lot of the decline was probably due to the
pain of expanding to include kids previously excluded from the test,'' said
Roger Farr of Indiana University, who studies teaching and testing. ''The scores
are starting to go up as those students become more like the middle-class kids
who used to be the only ones taking the S.A.T.''

In recent years, many high schools (and commercial services) have offered
coaching classes to prepare students for the tests. The College Board denies
that coaching helps, but the results show otherwise. Perhaps more relevant is
that schools have revived required English, science and math courses after
allowing electives to replace them. A College Board survey of seniors taking
this year's tests showed they studied more science and math than their
predecessors. Foreign language enrollment was the highest since 1977. ''This
year's rise, however slight, combined with last year's holding steady, is a
welcome sign for educators, parents and students that serious efforts by the
nation's schools and their students to improve the quality of education are
taking effect,'' said George H. Hanford, president of the College Board.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT RESISTANCE 80's STYLE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 122, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


David Harris contends, ''Today's draft resistance has sprung up without a
pre-existing political network, without an infrastructure of experienced
organizers and without the framework of a political agenda larger than itself.''
In fact, thousands nationwide, working through hundreds of grass-roots groups
and a number of national organizations, have been actively organizing against
draft registration since it was reinstated in 1980. Far from being
inexperienced, many of us are veterans of various social-change movements, of
the ongoing struggle against United States intervention in Central America and
of the movement for nuclear disarmament. Not incidentally, many of us worked
against the draft and United States intervention in Vietnam during the 1960's.

Perhaps Mr. Harris's ignorance of the state of the movement is a result of his
being too long absent from political activism. He and others like him have
skills and experience that would be valuable to today's draft resistance work.
We would welcome them back.  DARBY PENNEY Albany Peace and Energy Council Albany

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDITOR'S CHOICE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 176 words


A BARTHES READER, edited by Susan Sontag. (Hill & Wang, $20.) A selection of the
late French philosopher's work. A BLOODSMOOR ROMANCE, by Joyce Carol Oates.
(E.P. Dutton, $16.95.) A novel about the fanciful adventures of five sisters
from Bloodsmoor, Pa., circa 1870. DANCING GIRLS, by Margaret Atwood. (Simon &
Schuster, $14.50.) A collection of stories by the Canadian poet. FAMILY
INSTALLMENTS, by Edward Rivera. (William Morrow, $14.50.) A family chronicle
about growing up Hispanic in both Puerto Rico and New York's El Barrio.  GOD'S
GRACE, by Bernard Malamud. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.50.) A fable, with
talking animals, about man's fall. MONSIGNOR QUIXOTE, by Graham Greene. (Simon &
Schuster, $12.95.) A playful novel by the master storyteller. SELECTED POEMS, by
Galway Kinnell. (Houghton Mifflin Co., $12.50.) Selections from all phases of
the poet's career. THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books,
$15.95.) A large novel about Americans in the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 996 words


FICTION
1 1 4 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.95.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power.

2 8 5 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle. (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.

3 2 4 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the
saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the
Cave Bear.''

4 3 8 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

5 4 17 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, $15.95.) A
sequel to the author's ''Kane & Abel,'' in which two children of those
antagonists marry one another.

6 9 5 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in the
lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.

7 6 10 THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders.  (Putnam's, $13.95.) A
psychiatrist finds that an aberrant 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of
Florida's Gold Coast, where she lives.

8 7 28 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.

9 5 20 THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $14.50.) A Russian
terrorist collides with his own romantic past, during a mission to Britain on
the eve of World War I.

10 1 CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) A clandestine
trans-Atlantic romance survives the stresses and strains of World War II.

11 3 19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Arbor House, $14.95.) A loving
couple set out to bring down a Mafia operation that ''respectable'' bankers have
taken over.

12 10 7 TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (Stein & Day, $14.95.) Terrorist
stalks terrorist at the behest of Britain's antiterrorism chief.

13 1 THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) The war in
Vietnam as it was seen and felt by a diverse group of soldiers.

14 12 16 EDEN BURNING, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $15.95.) Romance and
political upheaval on a Caribbean island.

15 11 13 CINNAMON SKIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Harper & Row, $13.95.) Travis
McGee investigates a suspicious accident that befalls a friend's family at sea.

NONFICTION
1 1 36 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.

2 3 23 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.

3 2 9 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $22.50.) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.

4 4 33 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S.  Kushner. (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.

5 5 4 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.50.) The scandal at
Columbia Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.

6 6 9 EDIE, by Jean Stein, edited with George Plimpton.  (Knopf, $16.95.) Edie
Sedgwick, minor celebrity of the 60's, remembered by friends and acquaintances.

7 10 11 PRINCESS, by Robert Lacey. (Times Books, $16.95.) The life of the
Princess of Wales in words and pictures.

8 8 26 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, by Barbara Woodhouse.  (Summit, $12.50.)
Advice on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.

9 13 47 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Humor
in cartoons and verse.

10 7 42 A FEW MINUTES WITH ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney.  (Atheneum,
$12.95.) Reflections on contemporary life by the journalist and television
commentator.

11 11 11 HOW TO MAKE LOVE TO A WOMAN, by Michael Morgenstern.  (Clarkson N.
Potter, $10.95.) A lawyer tells men ''what women want.''

12 9 15 RICHARD SIMMONS' NEVER-SAY-DIET COOKBOOK. (Warner, $15.95.) More than
100 recipes by the Hollywood television personality and exercise guru.

13 1 THE G SPOT, by Alice Kahn Ladas, Beverly Whipple and John D. Perry. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, $11.95.) Recent discoveries about human sexuality.

14 1 MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Atheneum, $19.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

15 15 18 THE UMPIRE STRIKES BACK, by Ron Luciano with David Fisher. (Bantam,
$12.95.) Memories of the oddball baseball umpire.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the United States.

FOOTNOTES

Besides the two new titles on the hard-cover fiction list, there are three new
runners-up: V.C. Andrews's ''My Sweet Audrina,'' a tale of dark family
influences on a sweet young innocent; Steve Shagan's ''The Circle,'' an
international-intrigue thriller; and Harold Robbins's ''Spellbinder,'' about a
pop-religious leader. Our two-time-winner watcher points out that six authors
have two books each among the four best-seller lists: William Kotzwinkle,
Stephen King, Robert Ludlum and Lawrence Sanders, with books on both the
hard-cover fiction and mass-market paperback lists; Leo Buscaglia, with titles
on both paperback lists; and John Irving, with two titles on the mass list.
Although ''Weight Watchers 365-Day Menu Cookbook,'' after a 27-week apearance,
drops off the nonfiction list, a new runner-up to the list is ''Weight Watchers
Food Plan Diet Cookbook.'' Another self-help duo appears this week on the trade
paperback list as ''30 Days to a Beautiful Bottom'' joins ''Thin Thighs in 30
Days.'' ''Bottom'' was a rush job put together for Bantam Books, after the
success of ''Thighs,'' by book-packagers Jeff and Dan Weiss of Cloverdale Press.
They report that they are looking high and low for further objects for
improvement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A SURGE OF IMMIGRANTS ALTERS NEW YORK'S FACE;
A New Melting Pot: The City in the 80's First article of a series appearing
periodically

BYLINE: By DENA KLEIMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1669 words


More so today than at any time since the early part of this century, when
boatloads of Irish, Italians and Eastern Europeans spilled onto the city's
shores, New York is a city of immigrants. Beginning 17 years ago with a
loosening in the Federal immigration law, the latest surge of foreigners from
virtually every nation has reached dimensions not seen since the last great wave
of immigration ended in the 1920's as the heyday of Ellis Island came to a
close, Federal immigration records show. More than a million immigrants now live
in New York City. According to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, there
are more than 650,000 legal immigrants here, and the city estimates that there
are 750,000 illegal aliens as well.

The heaviest influxes are from Central and South America, the Caribbean, Italy,
the Soviet Union, India, China and Korea, a complex mix that includes wealthy
newcomers whose high visibility around the city often obscures the traditional
immigrant force - those who come here with only a dream and a willingness to
struggle.

This new surge is altering the city's ethnic texture, revitalizing many of its
neighborhoods and reaffirming something about the city that many may have
thought long lost - that despite the fiscal crisis, crime statistics and other
drawbacks, the rags-to-riches promise of New York that attracted generations of
immigrants is still very much alive.

''The word has leaked out,'' said Frank Vardy, who analyzes immigration for the
city's Planning Commission. ''You can make a living in this city, and you might
even make it big.''

All over New York, immigrants are making their mark. And nowhere is this
presence more apparent than in the new ethnic outposts that have sprouted in
recent years, taking over where Little Italy, Chinatown, the Lower East Side and
other immigrant nurturing grounds of the past left off.

Of these, perhaps none is more an epitome of the whole city's new ethnic
landscape than Elmhurst, Queens. It is the city's most ethnically diverse
neighborhood, a true melting pot where 20,000 immigrants from more than 110
countries live in the shadow of the elevated No. 7 Flushing subway line, and
where every day a trip to the cleaners, a stop at the post office or a wait for
the bus becomes an important step in that complicated osmosis involved in
becoming an American.

Elmhurst is the kind of place where the local grocer is Korean, the butcher
comes from Argentina and the baker is Colombian - where it is harder to find a
decent hamburger than Pakistani lemon pickle. There are blocks where the fashion
is saris, and others where it is mandarin collars, and still others with
garments that look plucked from the streets of Guatemala.

Ethnic surprises abound in this community of modest row houses and low-rise
apartment buildings that has been transformed over the past decade from an
Archie Bunker-style working class haven to an international metropolis in
miniature. Indian, Greek, Korean, Thai, Chinese, Argentine, Colombian, Italian,
Ecuadorean restaurants dot the commercial terrain. An Indian ashram sits across
from the local high school. The Dutch Reformed Church now conducts services in
Taiwanese.

Unlike many other sectors of the city where people have flocked in distinct
ethnic groups, Elmhurst is a place where Bengalis live alongside Ecuadoreans -
where lending a cup of sugar becomes as much an exercise in double translation
as in neighborliness.

Elmhurst has an Italian-style pizzeria operated by a newcomer from Greece who is
unable to talk to his customers because most are from India. The most faithful
patrons at the local doughnut shop are Chinese, although most have yet to master
the word for cruller.

It is a place, in fact, where the pale-skinned look out of place and unaccented
English sounds odd.

In Search of English

''I came to New York so that I could learn English,'' said Jumoke Rhodes, a
Nigerian whose native language is Yoruba and who complains that neither she nor
her two children can find anyone in Elmhurst to speak English with. ''Here is an
English-speaking country. What I got in my life is something else. I don't know
where I am. Spain?  China?''

In many ways, Elmhurst furnishes an overview of today's immigrant experience -
reflecting many of the contributions and burdens this foreign population has
brought to the city as a whole.

There are 34 different languages spoken by pupils in the local public school,
P.S. 89. Citywide, the Board of Education has hired 2,500 teachers at a yearly
cost of $27 million to work with youngsters unable to speak English.

Elmhurst General Hospital employs its own interpreters, and deals daily with
such situations as having an Indian man refuse an emergency gynecological
examination for his wife because the only doctors on call are men.

There are sweatshops in Elmhurst where workers are paid by the piece - and below
the minimum wage. There are places, too, where forged Social Security cards are
reported to go for $180.

''The city is changing, there's no question about that,'' said Charles B. Keely,
a senior associate at the Population Council, which studies international
population movement and trends. ''Not since the turn of the century have there
been so many foreigners here, and they are as diverse a group as ever.''

''It's amazing,'' said Detective Jerry Campbell of the 110th Precinct, which
includes Elmhurst. ''Anything God put on this earth, we've got at least two of
them here in this precinct.''

Attraction Is Not Apparent

No one quite knows why so many different foreigners flock to Elmhurst, which is
about an 18-minute subway ride from Times Square.  Housing is cheaper than it is
in Manhattan, but no more so than in many other neighborhoods. There is nothing
about the community's layout or services that would naturally attract the
foreign born.  Still, immigrants arrive every day - having been given the green
light by relatives and friends or by friends of friends -often oblivious to how
international a center it really is.

''Please, change, quarters,'' Lev Mines said in uncertain English the other day,
handing over a dollar bill to a woman in a coffee shop in Elmhurst.

''Not enough,'' Maria Fernanda replied with equal linguistic difficulty,
attempting to explain she only had dimes.

There the two of them were. He, who moved to this country two years ago from
Leningrad, and she, who arrived here two years ago from Colombia, reaching out
to one another in a foreign tongue, ultimately arriving at some understanding,
with neither of them quite aware how.

A Shared Deficiency

''No English, no English,'' Mr. Mines exclaimed, as if to apologize to the rest
of the customers in the shop. Unbeknown to him, the shop caters primarily to
Colombians, and few of the customers spoke English either.

Elmhurst - named years ago for its abundance of elm trees - sits in the heart of
Queens, adjoining such other increasings oolong.

Economic Contrasts

Few foreigners find life easy here in Elmhurst. It is a place where families are
often crowded five to a room and work as many as 14 hours a day, seven days a
week. Many in this community hold two or three jobs.

It is a place of extremes: A Yugoslavian handyman and his wife, who cleans
office buildings at night in Manhattan, saved up $90,000 to buy a new home, but
a young Colombian busboy who came to this country last year to seek his fortune
paces the floor at night, torn between subsisting here or swallowing his pride
and going home.

In Elmhurst lives Isabel Aguirre from Argentina, who operates the shish kebob
stand on Vanderbilt Avenue at 43d Street, across from Grand Central Station, and
Nu Trieu Pheu, who escaped by boat from Vietnam. It is home for 25-year-old
Cesar Sierra, an immigrant from Colombia now studying to become a doctor, and
28-year-old Cheng-I Chang, who hopes someday to open his own Chinese restaurant.
And it is now home for Yvonne Chang, a 3-year-old immigrant from Taiwan, who has
been here three months and is already listening to records about the life of
Curious George.

Sophie Chapman was on a float in a Hispanic Day parade when she met the man she
hopes to marry. Tina Wong decided to marry Jimmy, and did, after bumping into
him on a street corner in Brooklyn after not having seen him for years since
their school days in Hong Kong.

An Immigrant Romance

As for Sarita Ocampo, romance was a bit more involved.  Mrs. Ocampo, who now
works in Elmhurst, first came to the United States from Colombia as a maid. She
had never been a maid before, and disliked the job from the start. She
continued, however, because - given her inability to speak the language - there
was nothing else for her to do.

One day Mrs. Ocampo went looking for an apartment and consulted a real estate
agent. This particular agent had more than simply real estate to offer. He asked
whether Mrs. Ocampo was interested in making some extra money. She said she was.
He opened his wallet, and took out a photograph of his brother.

He said his brother, who had no legal way to remain in this country, would pay
her $800 if she would agree to marry him. Mrs.  Ocampo recalls that she was
intrigued by the photograph. She agreed to the deal, and a week later was
married. That, she says, was 10 years ago. They are still married. They are
still in love. He has never paid her the $800.

These days, the Ocampos, who have recently bought a home on Long Island, are
both in the real estate business. They are looking for a maid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Dutch Reformed Church in Queens map of New York
City (page B4) Photos of immigrant population (page B4)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Kin of Missing G.I.'s Ending Mission in Laos

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 26


Relatives of missing American servicemen held a ''very friendly'' two-hour
meeting with Laotian officials today on stepped-up efforts to produce a final
accounting of some 2,500 missing Americans in Indochina.

The meeting in the Laotian capital of Vientiane ended a two-week visit to Laos
and Vietnam by a four-member delegation from a private Washington-based group
searching for information on American soldiers missing in action. The group is
to arrive here Monday.

Ann Griffiths, executive director of the National League of Families, said her
group asked the Laotians to increase search efforts. ''The talks were very
friendly, open and very sincere,'' Mrs. Griffiths said, adding that no
commitments were given by the Laotians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW AND MIDEAST;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 27


In the hue and cry over the massacre in Beirut's Palestinian camps, few voices
have sounded as shrill and furious as Moscow's.

In statements by Soviet leaders and in the press, the killings have been likened
to the Holocaust, unborn generations of Israelis have been damned to suffer the
scars of the heinous crime and Washington has been held to account as an
accomplice.

To Western diplomats, however, the polemics have only underscored Moscow's
apparent helplessness before the rout of its Arab clients and in the diplomatic
aftermath and even against the impudent Israeli side trip through the Soviet
Embassy compound in West Beirut.

After years of funneling arms to Syria and the Palestine Liberation Organization
and of maneuvering for the role in a Middle East settlement that Moscow
considers its birthright as a superpower, Leonid I. Brezhnev seemed capable of
little more than reminders to Arab leaders of past Soviet support and of
telegrams to Yasir Arafat cautioning against American motives.

To some Western diplomats, the sight of Russians sidelined in the Middle East
conjured up images of an aged leadership incapacitated by a stagnant economy at
home, locked into bankrupt policies and extravagantly expensive ventures abroad,
relegated to venting impotent rage and poking through the rubble of Beirut for
political advantage.

Gromyko-Shultz Meeting

Moscow is more likely to stress its restrained behavior and to argue that the
bitter hostilities proved anew the need to seek an ''international solution'' to
the Arab-Israeli conflict, with Moscow in a leading role alongside the United
States.

Such conflicting perceptions are certain to hang over Foreign Minister Andrei A.
Gromyko's talks Tuesday with Secretary of State George P. Shultz, wherever
Lebanon is relegated in the formal agenda. There is little likelihood that
either side will accept the other's views, especially in view of the prevalent
contention among Western analysts that the Kremlin's lack of leverage in Lebanon
reflects a broader problem in Soviet foreign policy.

Indeed, a scan of the world from the vantage of the Kremlin battlements may seem
unsettling. To the east, Japan continues to demand the return of the Kurile
Islands and China pursues its opening to the West. Vietnam is costing millions
to sustain and Cambodia remains unpacified.

In Afghanistan, 100,000 crack Soviet troops seem checked by bands of anarchic
mountain men. Moscow's former allies in Iraq are feuding with potential allies
in Iran, and in the Middle East even Syrians seem to put more stock in
Washington's leverage than in their sworn Soviet friends.

Problems in Africa

The African allies gained through the 1970's - Ethiopia, Mozambique, Angola -
seem to have evolved into unproductive drains on Soviet resources. And in the
United States, a conservative Administration has seemingly failed to follow the
course toward accommodation with Moscow plotted at the outset by Soviet experts
such as Georgi A. Arbatov.

Perhaps the brightest spot on the Soviet horizon is Western Europe and its
wrangles with Washington, a perception underlined by Mr.  Brezhnev in his speech
in Baku on Sunday, when he noted that detente seemed to have struck ''deeper
roots'' in Europe than elsewhere. But the view is somewhat marred by the
economic chaos and continuing resistance in Poland, by the nagging independence
of the Eurocommunists and by the apparent awareness that in the end the Western
alliance will probably survive internal arguments.

Western analysts who postulate such a bleak Soviet position trace its
development from the self-assurance of the Moscow of 1970's, when Russia pushed
to military parity with the West, when the Soviet economy grew at a steady rate
of 4 percent, when the United States seemed shackled by the upheavals of Vietnam
and Watergate, detente carried the promise of Western technology and respect,
and Marxist ideology appeared to hold an irresistible allure for developing
nations.

The Western Response

But an alarmed West began its own nuclear modernization programs in the late
1970's; the Soviet economy slowed by half; Marxist converts in the third world
turned into costly dependencies; Western sanctions and the lessons of a bankrupt
Poland dimmed the allure of detente, and the attractions of Soviet-style
Communism waned as a model of development among third world nations.

The military intervention in Afghanistan in the last days of the 1970's seemed
an appropriate conclusion to the decade, pointing as it did to the need for
force to prop up a Marxist regime and touching off as it did an unprecedented
outcry against the Soviet Union among its ''natural allies in the third world.''

Western analysts who see a Soviet foreign policy in retreat usually note the
added problems of an incipient power struggle in the Kremlin, a process presumed
to at least hinder development of new policies or the jettisoning of discredited
presumptions.

But the Kremlin has a way of confounding Western analyses, and there is a
parallel school of thought in Moscow not yet prepared to accept as fact the
erosion of Soviet foreign policy.

Another View of Mideast Stand

Soviet impotence in the Middle East, people of this school contend, can also be
viewed as calculated restraint, a pragmatic recognition of the dangers of
plunging into a losing fray and as a demonstration of the continued belief
-shared by some Western diplomats here as well - that a solution to the
Arab-Israeli feud must eventually include Moscow. Reports that the Soviet Union
has begun to replace arms lost by Syria suggest expectations of a continued
influence, and the Arabs' call for Security Council guarantees for any future
peace may be encouraging for the Russians.

Elsewhere, the Soviet view likewise may be less bleak than commonly presumed.
The tentative exchanges of overtures with Peking do mark an advance over past
tensions, and Moscow's grip over Indochina, while costly and incomplete, does
not seem seriously challenged.

Trade with India is flourishing, and even in Afghanistan there is no hard
evidence that the Russians are balking at the diplomatic or military cost of a
long siege. There is every sign that the Russians were greatly relieved at being
spared the need to intervene in Poland by force, and press commentaries have
noted with satisfaction the limited popular response to Solidarity's calls for
demonstrations last month.

Some Success in Europe

In Europe, Soviet propagandists are vigorously pursuing their campaign to
mobilize public opinion against the deployment of new American medium-range
missiles, and the Siberia-to-E@urope pipeline is viewed as something of a
triumph for the Russians.

On the home front, analysts in Moscow share Washington's view of a nation
exhausted by shortages and repression or paralyzed by a power struggle, but
diplomats generally agree that Russians seem to have an uncanny capacity to
tighten their belts ever further, and dissatisfaction with shortages of consumer
goods or food have not been known to extend much beyond localized grumbling.

The Kremlin's perception of its standing in the world is difficult to glean
because of the secrecy surrounding Soviet leaders and because of the polemics of
propaganda. The one front on which most analysts are confident here is that for
all the talk of shifting to a ''Eurocentered'' policy or of writing off the
Reagan Administration as a negotiating partner, the Soviet leaders have not
wavered in the perception of the United States as their major challenge in world
politics.

Notwithstanding any improvement in relations with Western Europe or shifts in
influence elsewhere, the Russians seem constant in their assessment of
Washington as the key to any real changes in the balance of power, and that it
is with Washington that any real deals are to be struck.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Guerrillas in Cambodia Report Killing 30 Vietnamese Troops

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 97 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 27


Cambodian guerrillas said they attacked a checkpoint in western Cambodia last
week, killing 30 Vietnamese troops and wounding 50.

A communique from the Son Sann faction of the guerrilla coalition fighting the
Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government said the attack occurred last Monday
between the towns of Poipet and Sisophon in western Cambodia.

It said one guerrilla was killed in the attack.  A coalition of guerrilla groups
is fighting the Cambodian Army and an estimated 180,000 Vietnamese troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SAYS U.S. WILL KEEP ITS MARINE FORCE IN LEBANON TILL ISRAELIS AND SYRIANS
GO

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1363 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


President Reagan said tonight that the Marines would land in Beirut on Wednesday
and would remain until Israeli and Syrian forces were withdrawn from Lebanon.

In a televised news conference at the White House, Mr. Reagan said he was
''reasonably optimistic'' that both Is-
Transcript of news session, page A22.
rael and Syria would withdraw their troops ''as quickly as possible to their own
borders.''

''We've had declarations from both countries that they want to do that,'' Mr.
Reagan said. He said the withdrawal was ''going to come rapidly,'' but he
declined to say when.

Long Negotiations Were Expected

American officials have said that it may take a long time to negotiate a full
Syrian and Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon. But Mr.  Reagan dismissed a
reporter's suggestion that the United States could get involved in ''a long
entanglement,'' as in Vietnam.

The Marines will be joining a peacekeeping force of French and Italian troops
already in Beirut, and it was unclear what role, if any, the peace force would
have outside of the Lebanese capital as the Syrian and Israeli forces leave the
country.

''I believe that we are going to be successful in seeing the other foreign
forces leave Lebanon,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''And then, at such time as Lebanon
says that they have the situation well in hand, why, we will depart.''

Mr. Reagan said the Israelis had agreed to withdraw to a line south of Beirut
International Airport, thus clearing the way for the Marines. Israel's delay in
leaving the airport area has delayed the operation and irritated American
officials.

Official Gives Time of Landing

The President's comments came at his first news conference since the
introduction of American forces in Lebanon. The first such entry occurred in
August, when the Marines helped oversee the withdrawal of Palestinian forces
from West Beirut after Israeli troops had invaded Lebanon.

The new Marine contingent is due to land in Beirut at 11 A.M.  Wednesday (5
A.M., Eastern daylight time), an American official said after the news
conference.

The official said that the final decision on the withdrawal of the Marines would
be made in consultation with the Lebanese Government and that they could be
there ''for some time.'' He said American policy called for a two-phased Israeli
withdrawal: first from the vicinity of Beirut, then from the rest of Lebanon in
conjunction with the withdrawal of other foreign troops.

There are 7,000 Palestinian guerrillas and 30,000 Syrian troops in northern and
eastern Lebanon. About 50,000 Israeli troops are also in Lebanon.

Mr. Reagan's announcement about the Marines confirmed an agreement reached
earlier in the day in which the Israelis promised to withdraw from the southern
part of Beirut. Israel's failure to complete the withdrawal has held up the
landing of the first of the 1,200 marines for three days.

No irritation was expressed by Mr. Reagan tonight, however, and indeed the
President appeared to go out of his way to affirm American friendship and
support for Israel, and for Prime Minister Menachem Begin.

The President, for example, did not repeat any of his expressions of shock at
the killing of several hundred Palestinian men, women and children in refugee
camps in Beirut by Phalangist militiamen. And he appeared concerned about news
reports suggesting that he wanted to oust Mr. Begin.

Support for Israel Affirmed

Asked to describe the situation between Israel and the United States after the
massacre, Mr. Reagan said firmly: ''What I can tell you is one thing it isn't.
It isn't what some of you have said or written, that we are deliberately trying
to undermine or overthrow the Begin Government. We have never interfered in the
internal government of a country and we have no intention of doing so.

''The Israeli people are proving with their reaction to the massacre that there
is no change in the spirit of Israel, and they are our ally. We feel morally
obligated to the preservation of Israel and we are going to continue to be that
way.''

The President's news conference also marked his first opportunity to answer
questions about his Middle East peace proposal announced Sept. 1. In that plan,
Mr. Reagan called for autonomy for the Palestinians in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip in an undefined association with Jordan, but not in a separate,
independent Palestinian state. He also asked for a freeze in the construction of
Jewish settlements in the West Bank.

The Israeli Cabinet has rejected the plan, and Arab nations have continued to
seek a Palestinian state, with recognition of the Palestine Liberation
Organization as the legitimate representative of the Palestinians.

Not Discouraged by Reaction

Mr. Reagan said Israeli and Arab reaction to his plan, as well as recent
violence in the Middle East, had not discouraged him.  ''I am not less
optimistic,'' he said. ''I am also not deluding myself that it is going to be
easy.'' The President defined his proposal as a situation in which Israel would
have to participate in ''a kind of exchange of territory for security.''

He said he understood that both Israel and its Arab neighbors ''have voiced
things that they feel very strongly about.'' ''Having been a longtime union
negotiator,'' he added, ''I happen to think that some of that might be each side
staking out its position so as to be in a better position when it comes time to
negotiate.''

Without repeating the terms of his peace plan, Mr. Reagan said that any
permanent peace in the Middle East must involve a just and fair solution for the
Palestinians.

While declining to criticize Israel for its role in the massacre of Palestinian
civilians, Mr. Reagan also firmly rejected the suggestion that the United States
bore any responsibility.

The massacre occurred when Phalangist militiamen, who have been armed and
supported by Israel, raided two refugee camps in predominantly Moslem West
Beirut. Critics of Israel blame Mr. Begin and the Israeli Defense Minister,
Ariel Sharon, for allowing the Phalangists to go in.

Asked About Any U.S. Blame

A questioner asked Mr. Reagan about a recent comment by Jeane J.  Kirkpatrick,
the delegate to the United Nations, suggesting that the United States shared
some of the blame because it had guaranteed that Israeli and Phalangist forces
would not enter West Beirut. The Israelis and Phalangists entered after the
assassination of President-elect Bashir Gemayel of Lebanon two weeks ago.

Mr. Reagan said the United States could not be assigned responsibility. He said
American troops had completed their mission in insuring the departure of the
Palestinians from West Beirut.

''Then who could have foreseen the assassination of the Presidentelect that led
to the other violence and so forth?'' Mr.  Reagan said.  He explained that Mrs.
Kirkpatrick had voted against a resolution calling for an inquiry into the
massacre because the document contained ''such things as sanctions and such
things as voting Israel out of the U.N.''

He was referring to a resolution approved by 143 nations, with only the United
States and Israel opposed. In addition to calling for an investigation, it
requested that Israel admit Palestinians and recognize the P.L.O., and that arms
shipments to israel be stopped.

Mr. Reagan was also asked about a report that he had referred to Israel as the
''Goliath'' and not the ''David'' of the Middle East.  He said he had referred
to the fear of Arab nations that Israel ''may be expansionist, and they have the
military power,'' contrasting it with his own view of Israel as ''a tiny country
fighting for its life, surrounded by larger states and hostile states that want
to see it destroyed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

11 AMERASIAN CHILDREN DUE TO LEAVE VIETNAM FOR A LIFE IN U.S.

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


Eleven children of mixed American and Vietnamese background are scheduled to
leave Ho Chi Minh City on Thursday for the United States, State Department
officials said today.

The children, all United States citizens, the offspring of American soldiers
serving in Vietnam during the war, are the first substantial group of Amerasians
to leave Vietnam in years. Their scheduled departure, under the auspices of the
Pearl Buck Foundation and other groups, has stirred hopes among relief officials
that Vietnam will soon open the way for the release of other children of mixed
parentage.

Although figures vary, the number of Amerasian children in Vietnam may range
from 8,000 to 20,000. Many of the children of the Americans are abandoned and
objects of scorn in Vietnam because of their mixed parentage.

U.N. Arranged Their Exit

The 11 children, who will be accompanied by about a dozen relatives, are
scheduled to be met by a United States official at the Ho Chi Minh City airport,
processed quickly and then placed on a plane to Bangkok, Thailand, where they
will stay for several days before arriving in the United States. The United
States has no formal diplomatic ties with Vietnam, and the arrangements for the
children were made by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

State Department officials said that ''documentation exists'' for 80 to 85
Amerasian children who are United States citizens and whose relatives, mostly
fathers, are awaiting their arrival. In most of the cases the children's parents
were married in Vietnam and the fathers applied for United States citizenship
for their offspring. In several cases, a State Department official said, the
children may have been born in the United States and then been taken to Vietnam
by their Vietnamese mothers.

The expected departure of the group on Thursday is the first substantial group
of Amerasians to leave Vietnam legally since 1978, when 29 wives and children of
Americans were allowed to leave under the auspices of Senator Edward M. Kennedy,
Democrat of Massachussetts.

Besides the Pearl Buck Foundation, other groups who will accompany the children
to Bangkok, and then the United States, are Church World Services, American for
International Aid, Holt International Children's Services, American Council of
Voluntary Agencies in Foreign Service, the American Friends Service Committee
and Operation California.

'Desire for Normalized Relations'

''The significance of this, I believe, is that the Vietnamese are making yet
another sign of their desire for normalized relations with the United States,''
said Richard Walden, executive director of Operation California, a privately
supported group that has distributed aid to refugees Vietnam, Cambodia and
elsewhere.

But some State Department officials maintained that the Vietnamese Government,
despite public statements by Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, has failed to
respond to American requests to start processing the documents of many of the
children. There may be as many as 2,000 ''documented'' cases of Amerasian
children, or youngsters who have been able to prove that they have a parent in
the United States, officials said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILIES EAGER TO GREET ASIAN-BORN OFFSPRING

BYLINE: By DAVID BIRD

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 827 words


Ruth Everton of Sacramento, Calif., is among the Americans expecting to greet
some of the half-Vietnamese children arriving in this country next week, but the
children are not hers. They are her grandson and granddaughter, children of her
son, Dennis, a civilian aircraft mechanic who was killed in an airplane accident
in Vietnam in 1972.

Mrs. Everton's grandchildren, Nguyen Quoc Viet, an 11-year-old boy, and Nguyen
Thi Ngoc Loan, a 10-year-old girl, are among the 11 children of mixed American
and Vietnamese parentage who will leave Ho Chi Minh City on Thursday for the
United States. They are the first substantial group of such children to leave
Vietnam in years.

''We're really excited about seeing them,'' Mrs. Everton said by telephone from
her home. ''We've had a lot of pictures. They're really cute. They look more
like Vietnamese, but then my son had dark hair and dark eyes.''

Mrs. Everton said she had been able to send parcels and money to the children's
mother, Nguyen Thi Sau, ''but she's had to keep going on her own, always trying
to get here and finally they're letting her go. Now ours is all happiness.''

Mrs. Everton said the children's mother will come with the children. ''She'll be
staying with us for a while at least,'' Mrs.  Everton said. ''As soon as she
learns to speak a little English and learns our strange ways she'll probably be
off on her own.''

Another child due to come to this country is Trinh Quoc Nam, who is also known
as Michael James Reighard. He is the son of Robert G.  Reighard and his
Vietnamese wife, Dang, who live in the Dallas suburb of Garland. He will be 10
years old next month; his parents have not seen him since he was an infant.

''We had just two hours notice before we had to leave in February of 1973,'' Mr.
Reighard said. ''The boy was with my mother-in-law visiting relatives in another
town and he couldn't get back in time, so we had to leave without him. Since
then it's just been pictures and letters.''

Mr. Reighard said Michael writes to them in Vietnamese. ''I don't think he
speaks English,'' he said. ''My wife translates the letters to me.''

The Reighards have another son who is 8 and speaks no Vietnamese.  ''There will
be some adjustments between us and him,'' Mr. Reighard said of Michael.  Nancy
Yvonne Foster, who is 7 years old, is scheduled to come home to her father,
Wendell H. Foster, in Marietta, Ga.  ''She was not quite a month old,'' Mr.
Foster said of the last time he had seen his daughter before he had to leave
Vietnam. ''I would have brought her out then but they wouldn't let me.'

Mr. Foster declined to say more. ''This is a private matter,'' he said. ''I'd
rather not talk about it.'' The return of the children this week has given new
hope to others who are still waiting for children.  One of those is Richard
Petrocelli who lives in Manhattan and works in restaurants when he cannot find a
job acting.  ''My daughter is 12 1/2 now,'' Mr. Petrocelli said. ''I last saw
her when she was born, just before I left Ben Luc, where I was stationed.''

Mr. Petrocelli said the last letter he had from his daughter's mother was in
October 1979.  ''Since then, nothing,'' he said. ''But earlier this year my
mother saw a program on television about the Amerasian children and she was so
moved. We called the Pearl Buck Foundation, and they said they would do
everything they could.''

''My entire family stands behind me - my mother, my brother, my father,'' Mr.
Petrocelli said. ''They knew from day one about my daughter. I don't know what
my feelings will be when I see her. I'll have to experience it.''

Another person waiting with new hope is Gary Grady, a Coastguardsman for 22
years, now a Yeoman 1st Class stationed in Boston.

''It's my wife Lan's son, Le Minh Tuan,'' Mr. Grady said of the child he and his
wife hope will be allowed to come to the United States. ''It's her son by an
American Army man, a medic stationed in Saigon from December 1969 to December
1970. My wife never heard from him again. I met her in 1972 when I was in
Saigon.''

Mr. Grady said the boy was living with his grandparents about 25 miles south of
Ho Chi Minh City.  ''We had a telegram last Friday and the grandparents said he
was close to being interviewed for the trip here,'' Mr. Grady said.j The Gradys
have two other children, Yvette, 9, and Lena, 7.

''There are going to be a few hurdles we're going to have to cross - the boy
doesn't speak English - but I'm really confident that we can surmount any
difficulty that comes up,'' Mr. Grady said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC MATTERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5604 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's news conference last night in
Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:

OPENING STATEMENT

I have an opening remark or two, before I get to the questions.  Hardly a day
passes that I don't hear from hardworking Americans who, through no fault of
their own, face serious financial problems: a machinist whose plant has closed;
a working mother that's worried about the future of her job; the farmer and
small businessman caught in the financial crunch.

This recession, and the long years of Government mismanagement that led up to
it, have taken a heavy toll on the lives of too many of our people.

What hurts and angers me the most about this suffering is the fact that it
didn't have to be this way. We could, and should've, solved or prevented these
problems years ago, by the simple exercise of responsibility in Government.

When this Administration took office, we found America in the worst economic
mess since the days of Franklin Roosevelt. With support from the people, we
passed a long-term program to save the economy, promote recovery and create jobs
without re-igniting runaway inflation and higher interest rates.

And the overwhelming majority of Americans, especially those 99 million who are
working, are beginning to see some real hope.  Inflation has been cut more than
in half; interest rates are heading down and there are other signs that we're
heading toward a good recovery.

We still have a long way to go. But together we've pulled America back from the
brink of disaster. We're better off today than we were.

Urges Congress to Act

And the Congress can spur recovery by acting now to keep inflation and interest
rates coming down and to help us create some productive jobs. Before they leave
Washington for a campaign recess, I urge members of the Congress to devote their
energies to essential economic legislation.

We need spending bills that hold the line on the budget. Only 3 of 13 regular
appropriation bills have passed the House and Senate, with only two days left in
the fiscal year.

A constitutional amendment to balance the budget, supported by the people and
passed by the Senate, is bottled up by the liberal leadership in the House.

An export trading bill, that can create several hundred-thousand new jobs
without costing taxpayers a cent, is delayed in conference.  And a private
sector jobs-training bill, that can help more than a million unemployed
Americans per year, also awaits action this week.  To those who are sitting on
these bills while pretending all problems began Jan. 21, 1981, I must ask did
these modern-day Rip Van Winkles really sleep through the America of 1980? Don't
they remember the unprecedented misery of double-digit inflation, climbing
unemployment and record interest rates?

No, we haven't solved 20 years of problems in our first 20 months in office but
we have made a beginning where others failed to act. I just wish those who bear
such a heavy burden for overspending and taxing us into this recession could
resist playing politics with the problems they caused, and work with us to stay
on course to lasting recovery.

Now, Helen, it's your turn.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Massacres in Lebanon

Q. Mr. President, when the Palestinian fighters were forced to leave Beirut,
they said that they had America's word of honor that those they left behind
would not be harmed. Now comes U.N.  Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick who says
America must share in the blame for these massacres. My question to you is do
you agree with the judgment? And I'd like to follow up.

A. Helen, I think the manner in which Jeane said that - and she's talked to me
about it - was one about the responsibility of all of us back over a period of
time with regard to the separation of divisions in Lebanon, the whole matter of
the Middle East and not doing more to bring about the peace that we're trying so
hard now to get.

I don't think that specifically there could be assigned a responsibility on our
part for withdrawing our troops. They were sent in there with one understanding.
They were there to oversee and make sure that the P.L.O. left Lebanon. And that
mission was completed virtually without incident and they left. Then who could
have foreseen the assassination of the President-elect that led to the other
violence and so forth.

Q. Then why did you give orders to our representative at the U.N.  to vote
against an inquiry to find out how it happened and why?  A. As I understand it
there were things additional in that inquiry, things that we have never voted
for and will not hold still for, such things as sanctions and such things as
voting Israel out of the U.N.  Now I can't recall exactly now what it was that
caused our vote to be negative on that. But the Lebanese and the Israelis are
apparently going forward with such an inquiry.

Economy as Election Issue

Q. Mr. President, at least four months ago you were saying that a strong and
lasting recovery was not far away. Now you're saying that we're heading out of
the recession. Inflation and interest rates are dropping but business failures,
unemployment are continuing to rise and leading economic indicators seem to be
likely to drop. So what does this say for Republican chances in November, and
who should the voters believe, you or the Administration's economic figures?

A. Well, if they will honestly face up to the issue and cut through all the
demagoguery and rhetoric that they're going to hear, the things that have been
accomplished by this Administration were not accomplished before, and all of the
things that are still not resolved now had started long before we got here.
Unemployment for example has been on the rise for more than a decade and
particularly in about the last seven years it started really coming on an
average 7 percent over those seven years. In those seven years, under the
policies of the past, $66 billion was spent on job programs supposed to solve
that problem. And they didn't solve it. And certainly the rate of increase in
unemployment in the last six months of 1980 was just about as great as it's been
at any time since.

I remember campaigning myself on the very fact that what we were seeing in many
parts of the country where I was campaigning amounted to depression, not
recession. Now if the people will add up who's been in charge, who was running
the store, and this is the eighth time we've had one of these economic crises
since World War II - and for most of that time, almost entirely, the Congress
till now had been dominated by one party, and while there's been a Republican
President, they were handcuffed by a Legislature of the other persuasion. And I
think we have to look back and see what brought this on? What brought us to
almost a trillion-dollar debt, and then weigh it against the progress in 20
months that has brought the interest rates down -21 1/2, I was going to say to
13 1/2 but today the Bankers Trust lowered it to 13.

Election As Referendum

Q. In the upcoming November election, how much of that do you see as a
referendum on your Presidency and on your economic program? And if Republicans
don't do well in those elections, how might you modify the economic programs?

A. Well, first of all, you have to abide a little bit by tradition, that in that
first off-year election of any new Administration, normally there is a great
setback. Now our opponents are saying that they would hope to achieve 20
additional seats. Now, I think they're saying that because tradition has it that
normally they get about 35 or 36 and so they would like to be able to say, 'Oh,
look how much better we did than we thought we were going to do.' Well, all I
can tell you is we're going to do our best to see if we can't disappoint them.

John?

Plan for Exiting Lebanon

Q. Mr. President, do you have a plan for getting the United States out of
Lebanon if fighting should break out there? Or could the Marine presence there
lead to another long entanglement such as Vietnam?

A. No, I don't see anything of that kind taking place there at all. And the
Marines are going in there into a situation with a definite understanding as to
what we're supposed to do. I believe that we are going to be successful in
seeing the other foreign forces leave Lebanon and then as such time as Lebanon
says that they have the situation well in hand why, we'll depart.

Q. If fighting should break out again, would you pull the Marines out? A. You're
asking a hypothetical question, and I've found out that I never get in trouble
if I don't answer one of those.  Sam?
pick up 1st add

Blame for Recession

Q. Mr. President, in talking about the continuing recession tonight, you have
blamed mistakes of the past, and you blamed the Congress. Does any of the blame
belong to you?

A. Yes, because for many years I was a Democrat.  Q. But does any of the blame
for the past 18 months? The Democrats in Congress say they gave you your tax
program; they gave you almost all the budget cuts you want. You predicted that
the very psychological passage of these programs would cause the economy to
start up. But it hasn't.

A. I believe that all the indices that have been true in the other several
recessions are there and are evident for - four quarters we have seen a - a
growth in the gross national product. We have seen - for the first time in
several years - an increase in real earnings for the people, because of our
battle against inflation. As I've said, the interest rates coming down to where
they are.

I recall when we started that we were told by experts that inflation was built
into the economy and would take at least a decade to get control of it. The only
thing that has kept on progressing is the thing that, as I say, started and has
been going on over several years, which is the unemployment situation.

Now we know from history that is the last to recover. But I think we are in -
you could call it a curve or at the corner, going around the corner or curve by
every indice - the evidence that we are - that we are progressing and on our way
out of this. And the some 44 bluechip economists who get together and pool all
of their information and their knowledge as to what is going to happen have said
that they see a solid recovery in the year 1983. Gerry.

Policy on Busing

Q. I'd like to ask you a busing question, Mr. President. The Justice Department
has said it is considering asking the court to dismantle mandatory court-ordered
busing in St. Louis and several other cities across the nation. Were you
consulted in advance about this decision? And do you agree with it?

A. Well, this is no change in policy. It has been presented that way, Gerry,
there's no change in policy at all. What the Justice Department has said is that
in the - in those areas where there has been court-ordered busing, if the
community is seeking to have that changed in court, on a case-by-case basis,
depending on the circumstances, the Justice Department would join the community
in going into court on that case. But again, I say, on a case-to-case basis in
which there would be - the Justice Department would decide that the community's
case was well taken. Andrea.

Q. Just a follow-up: Considering that other Administrations have not taken this
course, why do you think it's necessary for your Administration to?

A. Well, because I suppose there has been so much court ordering and some of it
has seemed to be a violation of the rights of a community, and the rights of the
- of local school boards, and so forth, that it's time if communities officially
are ready to take this action. As a matter of fact, in a number of the cases
right now, the people that were supposed to benefit from the busing are the ones
who are bringing the cases. The black community is the one that is protesting.

Yes, Andrea.z

Israel As Goliath

Q. Mr. President, it has been reported that you believe that Israel is
sabotaging your peace initiative, and also that you now believe that Israel has
become the Goliath in the Middle East and that the other countries, the Arab
countries, are the David. Did you say that? Do you believe that?

A. I didn't say it exactly that way. In fact, I didn't say that I had said that
I thought they were the Goliath. I said that one of the things, as the
negotiations approach and we proceed with this peace-making business, that
Israel should understand, as we've come to understand from talking to other Arab
states, that where, from the very beginning, all of us including Israel, have
thought of it as a tiny country fighting for its life, surrounded by larger
states and hostile states that want to see it destroyed, that their military
power has become such that there are Arab states that now voice a fear that
they're expansionist, that they may be expansionist, and they have the military
power.

So all I was referring to was that. The first part of your statement there
though, about Israel and trying to undermine - no, I don't believe that. I think
that both sides have voiced things that they feel very strongly about. And
contrary to what I have suggested in my proposal, and having been a long-time
union negotiator, I happen to think that some of that might be each side staking
out its position so as to be in a better position when it comes time to
negotiate.

Perception of Unfairness

Q. Mr. President, you've described yourself, on more than one occasion, as very
upset with the perception of unfairness - the idea that your program has cut
unevenly against the poor. But there's one study which finds that most states
which cut social programs, after the sums were cut, are not replacing them at
the state level. You and others have talked of the need for even greater budget
cuts next year, and you've made it pretty plain that those aren't going to be
defense cuts. And there are stories all the time of people right on the margin,
people in the margin of poverty, denied a benefit here or an eligibility there,
while tax cuts make life more comfortable for the middle-class. And my question
is why should you not be held responsible in these cases?

A. Because in a number of instances those cases have nothing to do with our
budget cuts. There was even an entire documentary on the air and none of the
cases that were presented were the result of our budget cuts.

But also, let me point out that you're dealing with human beings on the
administering side also. My own experi=zence in California, in our own welfare
reforms, many times bureaucracy will take the ball and run with it, thinking
that they're going with the, what is supposed to be the new system. And they
will penalize people.

And I've talked as much about that as anyone else has, before I ever came here,
on my own radio broadcasts: cases of people that were thrown off of Social
Security disability and then when they could finally get a hearing it was
determined that they never should've been thrown off in the first place. These
are elements of human error, more typical I think of a bureaucracy in Government
than they are of private charities that aren't bound in by as much red tape.

Now, as to fairness, Aid for Dependent Children in the decade of the '70's,
their benefits were increased by one-third. In that same decade, because of the
inflation that was brought on by the irresponsible Government spending, those
people actually, with a one-third increase in benefits, had a one-third decrease
in their ability to buy food and the necessities of life - because of inflation.

Now, not only those people who are on Aid for Dependent Children find that they
have increased purchasing power because of the change in the inflation rate.
People at the poverty level have about $600 more in purchasing power; a median
family, median-income family in America, has about $1,500 more purchasing power
than they would have had if inflation had stayed at the level it was when we
started.

Now what is more fair, to embark on a lot of well-intentioned programs? I don't
fault the intention, but, for example, in the $66 billion that I mentioned, and
those job programs, those that were training programs, only 20 cents out of the
dollar went for training. Now we're asking for a billion-dollar training
program, particularly for young people, and 70 cents out of every dollar of that
is going to go to actual training of those young people.

I think that we're being more fair than someone who sits there, knowing
consciously that inflation is also a tax, knowing that without having to vote
for a tax increase the Government is getting a tax increase with every
percentage-point of inflation. And that's been going on for years. I think we're
being more fair.

Andrea, you said that you had a follow-up and I cut you off. Did you?

Goals of Peace Initiative

Q. That's very kind of you. I just wanted to ask you, since you said you didn't
think that Israel was trying to undermine your peace initiative, whether you are
less optimistic about its chances, since the massacre and the tragedy in Beirut?

A. No, I'm not less optimistic. I'm also not deluding myself that it's going to
be easy. Basically, what we have I think in this peace proposal is a situation
where, on one side territory is the goal and on the other side security. And
what has to be negotiated out is a kind of exchange of territory for security.

And I meant what I said when I proposed this plan, and that is this country will
never stand by and see any settlement that does not guarantee the security of
Israel.

Yes, Sarah.

P.U. 2d ADD REAGAN TEXT

Mission of the Marines

Q. Mr. President, you've told us that you're sending Marines to Lebanon for a
limited amount of time and yet you haven't told us what the limit is. Can you
give us a general idea of how long you expect them to stay there and tell us
precisely what you would like to see them accomplish before they withdraw?

A. I can't tell you what the time element would be. I can tell you what it is
that they should accomplish, and I hope sooner rather than later.

One, they're there along with our allies, the French and the Italians, to give a
kind of support and stability while the Lebanese Government seeks to reunite its
people which have been divided for several years now into several factions, each
one of them with its own army, and bring about a unified Lebanon with a Lebanese
army that will then be able to preserve order in its own country. And during
this time while that's taking place the withdrawal as quickly as possible to
their own borders of the Israelis and the Syrians.

Now there we've had declarations from both countries that they want to do that.
So I am reasonably optimistic about that. I have no way to judge about when the
Lebanese Government - the Lebanese Government will be the ones that tell us when
they feel that they're in charge and they can go home.

Q. Are you then saying that they will remain there until all foreign forces are
withdrawn.  A. Yes, because I think that's going to come rapidly. I think we're
going to see the withdrawal - our Marines will go in tomorrow morning, as I
said, because the Israelis have agreed to withdraw to that line south of the
airport.

Relations With Soviet

Q. Mr. President, taking into account the rhetoric on both sides over the
situations in Poland, Afghanistan, the arms reduction talks are going on here,
the Siberian natural gas pipeline and the renewed grain sale agreement, how do
you assess the United States-Soviet relationship now 20 months into your term in
office?

A. I think there's a pretty good understanding on their part as to where we
stand, and I can only say this: in 20 months - and I'm going to knock on wood -
the Soviet Union, which has been expanding over the years vastly in the
territory and the people coming under its control, they haven't expanded into an
extra square inch since we've been here. So maybe we do have an understanding of
each other.

Now today I just had a call from George Shultz. He has met for three hours with
Ambassador Gromyko, and he said it was a serious discussion and a wide-ranging
discussion and they're going to resume it on Monday, so we're not standing off
and ignoring each other.

Position on Tax Increase

Q. Mr. President, your aides are currently at work on a new budget that you'll
present to Congress next year. Knowing of your great distaste for taxes and tax
increases, can you assure the American people now that you will flatly rule out
any tax increases, revenue enhancers or specifically an increase in the gasoline
tax?

A. Unless there's a palace coup and I'm overtaken or overthrown, no, I don't see
the necessity for that. I see the necessity for more economies, more reductions
in Government spending, and I can't say anything about the 1984 budget because
in three days we come to the beginning of the fiscal 1983 year and we still
don't have a budget.  I haven't had a single appropriation bill to sign as yet
and they're all going to go home in a few days.

Waste in the Military

Q. Your budget director once said that he thought there was a kind of swamp of
$10-@ to-$20-@ to $30 billion worth of waste in the military budget. Those are
his words. Are you confident that you can ferret out that much waste in a
military budget or do you think you'll have to adjust Social Security or cut
further into social programs?

A. I don't know whether the - when that figure or what it was based on. But I
think that in these 20 months great progress has been made due to the
Secretary's diligence in that regard with waste. But at the same time we also
have a citizens' task force that's going into every department of Government,
and it is in the Defense Department looking for management mispractices for
those things that can - where modern business practices can be put to work to
make them better.

I told Cap once that I thought that he betrayed a lack of political skill in
that very early he found savings of some $3 1/2 billion, and he made the savings
and then submitted the budget. And I said, Cap, you should have submitted the
budget with the $3 1/2 billion in and then found them afterward. But he'd done
it before.

But I think that it is becoming efficient. You stop to think the greatest
portion of the Defense budget is the pay for the men and women in uniform which
was literally the starvation level before we came in and improved that.

A. Yes, Ralph.

Sale of Jets to Israel

Q. Mr. President, shortly before the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, the
Administration informally notified Congress that it was planning to send more
F-16's to Israel. There's been no formal notification since then. Is the delay
linked to difficulties in relations with Israel? When do you think formal
notification will go up and under what conditions?

A. They're - they're still on tap and we haven't sent the formal notification up
and, very frankly, it was simply because in the climate of things that were
going on, we didn't think it was the time to do it. However, there has been no
interruption of those things that are in the pipeline, spare parts, ammunition,
things of that kind. The only thing that we have actually withheld, after the
controversy that came on in Lebanon, was the artillery shell, the socalled
cluster shell. Yes, Ted.

Football Negotiations

Q. Mr. President, I want to know if you personally miss N.F.L.  football? And
another fairness question: do you think the players and owners are being fair
with us millions of fans?

A. Well, I hate to comment on their affairs and involve myself in all -there
doesn't seem to have been the consideration for the fan that there could have
been, and should have been. They do seem to be very far apart, however, in their
goals. Sometimes I thought we ran the Screen Actors Guild better than that.

Stance on Job Policies

Q. Mr. President, I'd like to go back to the question of jobs. On Long Island
yesterday more than 4,000 job applicants showed up for fewer than 300 jobs at a
new hotel that was opening. And there is speculation that on Oct. 8 when the new
unemployment figures come out they'll reach double digits, the highest level
since the Depression.  And I'm wondering if there's a point at which these high
levels of unemployment become unacceptable to you, and you will reconsider some
of your policies to try to deal with it?

A. Well, let me tell you: Those levels are unacceptable to me as long as there's
one person unemployed who wants a job and can't find one. And I've said before,
maybe there's some others in the room who remember it first hand, job-hunting in
the Great Depression. I do vividly. And I don't know of anything that bothers me
more than this situation. In those days, of course, there weren't any
provisions, as there are now, for unemployment insurance or help or anything for
quite some time.

It is possible that we might touch 10 percent. I hope not. But if we do, I would
also like to point out that there is a higher percentage of the eligible workers
in the land - that is considered to be everyone over age 16, man and woman -
that there is a higher percentage employed today than has been true even in the
past, in times of full employment. I've used the year 1953 when unemployment was
2.5 percent, they didn't have as big a percentage. So it isn't all recession.
What has happened is, a greater percentage of adult Americans have entered the
work force, are in the work force than ever before. But we believe - I wish
there was an instant answer - we believe the answer lies in what we're doing to
inflation, which in turn will bring down interest rates and which in turn will,
as people are able to buy more and people will once again be able to look at
home mortgages and build homes, buy automobiles, and so forth, we know that for
the last several months there has been an increase in auto sales.

Now this is not solid. You've got to remember these figures are a little
volatile - that you look at what is the chart line. And there are dips in it.
They'll come up. This coming month, when the figures are released, we think that
August has been in a kind of doldrums and it may show a dip. But that'll be a
glitch. It won't be down lower than what it's been for the last several months.

But we believe that rather than artificial programs that make for dead-end and
temporary jobs, as we've had in the past, they don't last. They aren't permanent
and they also just delay the bringing back of a solid base to the economy. We
think we're on the way to establishing that solid base. And that is the hope for
the unemployed.

Now, may I just add something else here. Some of you, I know, have commented
that our job-training program was training people for jobs that don't exist.
Well, do you remember once up here when I cited how many pages in the
metropolitan newspapers on Sunday, how many pages of help-wanted ads there are.
And if you look at them, they're all for people with particular training or
skills, and so forth. Well, there are still that many help-wanted ads, meaning
there are that many open jobs looking for someone to fill them. And I was
misunderstood at the time, I wasn't trying to minimize unemployment, I was
suggesting at the time that part of our job must be to train young people, who
are the greatest percentage - I mean they are in the greatest percentage of
unemployed - train them for those jobs that we know are there and are not being
filled. And at a rate of a million a year, we think this is a good investment.

P.U. 3d ADD

U.S. Relations With Israel

Q. Mr. President, I seem to get the impression from what you're saying about our
relationships with Israel that nothing has really changed in the wake of the
massacre in Beirut or the temporary rejection, anyway, of your peace plan, is
that correct? Is there no change at all?

A. Well, there's no change in the sense that we're still going with everything
we can. We're going to try and persuade the Arab neighbors of Israel to do as
Egypt once did and Israel to negotiate out a permanent peace solution in which
Israel will no longer have to remain an armed camp, which is making their life
economically unbearable. And at the same time an answer must be found that is
just and fair for the Palestinians. And I don't think anything has happened to
change that if I understood your question correctly.

Nothing has changed in our feeling of obligation to bring about, if we can, such
a result.  Q. Sir, I really meant our relationship with the Begin Government.
Is it cordial and friendly? Is it now tense? What is the situation?  A. What I
can tell you is one thing it isn't. It isn't what some of you have said or
written, that we are deliberately trying to undermine or overthrow the Begin
Government.

We have never interfered in the internal government of a country and have no
intention of doing so. Never have had any thought of that kind and we expect to
be doing business with the Government of Israel and with Prime Minister Begin,
if that's the decision of the Israeli people.

I think that Frank Reynolds last night voiced something that we believe, and
that is that the Israeli people are proving with their reaction to the massacre
that there's no change in the spirit of Israel and they are our ally. We feel
morally obligated to the preservation of Israel and we're going to continue to
be that way.

Timing of Recovery

Q. Mr. President, last December, when you were making out your budget, you came
down very hard against any tax increases then. And yet, six months later you
were forced to go in for a rather hefty package. Some of your top aides are
already speaking pessimistically of the economy being - the recovery - being
here in time to affect your budget next year. How can you really afford to stand
here and vow that you won't raise taxes, when if you're not going to, where are
you going to take up that slack?

A. Well, I've expressed my personal feeling about the taxes. We still have a tax
cut coming in July of 1983; I believe that that tax cut is essential. So far the
people have had a 15 percent cut, they now have the other 10 percent coming.

I think that indexing is vital. Of course, at the same time that I say indexing
is vital, I have a feeling that if we can be as successful as we've been and
keep on going curbing inflation, then indexing won't make much difference.

Helen?  Q. Thank you, Mr. President.  A. Thank you. I thought you'd never say
it.

Israel As Goliath

Q. Mr. President, it has been reported that you believe that Israel is
sabotaging your peace initiative, and also that you now believe that Israel has
become the Goliath in the Middle East and that the other countries, the Arab
countries, are the David. Did you say that? Do you believe that?

A. I didn't say it exactly that way. In fact, I didn't say that I had said that
I thought they were the Goliath. I said that one of the things, as the
negotiations approach and we proceed with this peace-making business, that
Israel should understand, as we've come to understand from talking to other Arab
states, that where, from the very beginning, all of us including Israel, have
thought of it as a tiny country fighting for its life, surrounded by larger
states and hostile states that want to see it destroyed, that their military
power has become such that there are Arab states that now voice a fear that
they're expansionist, that they may be expansionist, and they have the military
power.

So all I was referring to was that. The first part of your statement there
though, about Israel and trying to undermine - no, I don't believe that. I think
that both sides have voiced things that they feel very strongly about. And
contrary to what I have suggested in my proposal, and having been a long-time
union negotiator, I happen to think that some of that might be each side staking
out its position so as to be in a better position when it comes time to
negotiate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 909 words


International
U.S. Marines will land in Beirut today and will remain there until Israeli and
Syrian forces are withdrawn from Lebanon, President Reagan announced at a
televised news conference. An American official said the Marines could be in
Beirut ''for some time.'' (Page A1, Column 6.)
A full inquiry on the Beirut massacre of Palestinians was approved by Prime
Minister Menachem Begin. The Israeli leader dropped his opposition to
establishing a judicial commission to carry out a thorough investigation in the
face of intensive pressure from within his governing coalition as well as
mounting criticism by many Israelis. (A1:4-5.)
Israeli troops withdrew from the port of Beirut, and the Lebanese state radio
said that American marines would land today. (A1:5-6.)
Twelve U.S.-Vietnamese children are set to leave Ho Chi Minh City tomorrow for
the United States, State Department officials said. The youngsters, all United
States citizens, are the first substantial group of Amerasians to leave Vietnam
in years, and relief officials hope that others may soon be free to depart.
(A16:1-5.)
National
The Administration's economic plan has brought the nation back from the ''brink
of disaster,'' according to President Reagan. At his first news conference in
two months, Mr. Reagan contended that Congressional delays on budget legislation
were delaying a recovery.  (A1:3.)
Spending for military use of space would be speedily accelerated over five years
under a new policy, according to a senior Defense Department official. He said
the Reagan Administration proposed to increase spending for military use of
space by more than 10 percent a year after inflation while the real-growth rate
for overall military spending has been set at about 7 percent a year. (A1:2.)
Differences over military spending accelerated as a House panel decided not to
begin work on a Pentagon appropriations bill until Congress reconvenes on Nov.
29. In the absence of a committeeapproved bill, military spending might continue
at a lower level under an interim bill approved by the House. (A19:1-3.)
Mexicans are pressing property sales in the United States worth billions of
dollars as a result of Mexico's currency crisis. The dumping of property,
particularly of high-priced condominiums in resort areas, has followed curbs on
currency movement that have made it impossible for most of the Mexicans to make
mortgage payments because they cannot send money out of Mexico. (A16:1-5.)
A derailment and toxic fire forced the evacuation of 2,000 residents of a
five-mile area around the south Lousiana town of Livingston. The derailment of
the 101-car freight carrying explosive and poisonous chemicals ignited a roaring
blaze so intense and explosions so hazardous that officials were at a loss over
how to battle the blaze. Louisiana declared a state of emergency. (A16:1-2.)
Proponents of a breeder reactor broke ground at the Clinch River in Oak Ridge,
Tenn., after more than a decade of controversy. The Senate is nearing a vote on
a proposal to halt financing for the project, which would be the nation's first
plutonium-fueled nuclear breeder reactor. (D27:1-4.)
A milestone for pay-per-view TV has been marked with a showing of ''Star Wars''
for about 1.5 million cable-television subscribers who mailed in $8 apiece to
see the biggest box-office hit ever two years before it will be broadcast by
CBS-TV. The experimental showing, along with others scheduled, will shape the
future of the cable-television industry. (A1:1-3.)
Paul Kollsman, the inventor of the altimeter in the late 1920's, died in a Los
Angeles hospital at the age of 82. Mr. Kollsman was a prolific inventor, and his
altimeter, which enables a pilot to fly ''blind'' by measuring and registering a
plane's altitude, was a milestone in advancing aviation. (D26:6.)
Metropolitan
A trade-in of Westway funds for mass transit aid would get a sympathetic White
House hearing if Lewis E. Lehrman, who opposes the project, is elected Governor
and requests a trade-in, according to James A. Baker 3d, President Reagan's
chief of staff. Mr. Lehrman said he favored a more modest highway for Manhattan
and would seek the trade-in. Mario M. Cuomo, the Democratic-Liberal candidate,
favors Westway. (A1:1.)
The first debate in Connecticut's gubernatorial campaign was held before an
audience of about 600 in a New Haven church. Gov. William A. O'Neill and his
Republican opponent, Lewis B. Rome, traded allegations of incompetence,
irresponsibility and dishonesty.  (B1:2-3.)
Detention of teachers who continue to defy a court order to halt a strike in
Teaneck, N.J., was threatened by Superior Court Judge Sherwin D. Lester. He said
he was ready to order into custody large numbers of teachers and, if necessary,
hold them in a public school, with Bergen County sheriff's men as guards, if
they refused to return to classrooms today. (B2:6.)
Norman Armour died at his home at the age of 94. The career Foreign Service
officer served as minister or ambassador to a dozen countries and had been
Assistant Secretary of State for Political Affairs.  (D26:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 30, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SAN DIEGO MAN TO GREET HIS VIETNAMESE FAMILY

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Sept. 29


One of the first things Luis Villegas did when each of his three children was
born in Vietnam was to register them at the American Embassy in Saigon. That
was, he now believes, the providence of foresight.

In the 13 years since that first visit, Mr. Villegas's contacts with the
American diplomatic authorities have multiplied, and, finally, they are about to
pay off. In days, he has been told, he will be united in San Diego with the wife
and children he last saw in Vietnam in 1975.

His three children are among the 12 in the largest group of mixedrace children,
a legacy of the long United States involvement in Vietnam, to be released to the
United States in years, although estimates of their numbers range up to 20,000.
The State Department has said the group will reach Bangkok on Thursday, under
the sponsorship of the Pearl S. Buck Foundation.

Mr. Villegas's reunion will be the largest of the group. The children, Marco
Villegas, 13, Linh Da Villegas, 11, and Dora Villegas, 10, are to be accompanied
by their mother, Nguyen Thi Chinh. Two of her older daughters, whom Mr. Villegas
adopted, Tuyet Thi Tram, 25, and Mai Tuyet Thi Tram, 23, are also arriving.
Officials are still trying to trace an adopted son, Nam Van Tram, 22, who Mr.
Villegas said was last seen in a refugee camp in Thailand.

'You Have to Be Excited'

''You have to be excited,'' Mr. Villegas said, ''when you're going to have
everything you need at home: attention, happiness, not being lonely like I used
to. Now I don't have to be in the street to find some companionship or
something.''

Mr. Villegas, a 62-year-old retired operator of heavy equipment who worked as a
civilian for an American construction company for nine years in Vietnam, was
separated from his family by a warp in history and politics. He had returned to
the United States in 1975 for what was to have been a brief visit, he said, to
arrange for a transfer with the family to a job in Africa.

While he was in Idaho to make the arrangements, the Americansupported Government
in Saigon fell. He could not return and could not get his wife and the children
out.

''I couldn't send money, either,'' he said.  The family will be settled in a
neat two-family house Mr.  Villegas, a Panamanian by birth, built for himself.

Works Nights as Security Guard

Since he retired from his construction job, Mr. Villegas has worked nights as a
security guard. It has not been much of a life, he said, although he has an
adult daughter and two other sons by an earlier marriage who live in San Diego.

This morning, with the purposeful air of one who has critical business, he drove
downtown to the bank to obtain a letter needed to show American officials that
he is able to support the new arrivals.  ''My son is the principal of that
school,'' he interjected, proudly.  The young bank employee's eyes grew wide as
she grasped the meaning of his request, to be forwarded, he told her, to
''American Embassy, Bangkok.''

Mr. Villegas said he had never given up the goal of reuniting the family in the
United States. He has completed reams of paperwork over the years, he said, both
for the American Government and for the Pearl S. Buck Foundation, which finally
helped him achieve his goal.  From time to time, he was able to get letters to
and from the children and his wife, who after his departure resettled in her
home village of Go Cong.

Says Children Did Not Complain

He said the children ''never complained'' about their treatment, as Americans
and as people of mixed race, but he suspected that censorship of the mail was
the reason.

''I know it was bad for the kids,'' he said. ''because they don't like them.
They only like Vietnamese.'' Then at one point, the letters written by his
daughter stopped. The girl had grown afraid of an uncle, he said, who she feared
had gone over to the Communist side.

Mr. Villegas said he and his wife met when she went to Saigon in 1967, a year
after his arrival, to seek a way to support her family in the village. Although
she speaks little English, he said, he has no fears about her adjustment to life
in the United States. He remembered her as a spunky woman, ''more American than
I am,'' who used to ''fight for the Americans'' against Vietnamese who would
cheat unwary foreigners and wayward wives who ''gambled away the furniture while
their husbands were at work.''

When they arrive, Mr. Villegas's reward will be a rescue from what he says has
been a life of limbo, seven years of an empty, ''lowtype'' existence, of
''getting drunk, no companionship, being in the streets, really.'' He betrayed
no second thoughts, and seems not plagued with doubts about the reunion.

Rather, this will be a time to see about getting his children into schools and
the local community college, a task he has already begun. A time to arrange for
an American wedding, and to acquaint his wife with the electric conveniences of
a snug white house with a statue of the Virgin in the living room. A time, he
said simply, to ''hold them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Luis Villegas his wife and children

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 30, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILIES EAGERLY AWAIT FLIGHT FROM BANGKOK

BYLINE: By DAVID BIRD

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 703 words


In the American Embassy in Bangkok and in homes scattered around the United
States preparations were being made yesterday to receive the 11 Amerasian
children who are scheduled to come out of Vietnam today.

The children, who are the sons and daughters of American fathers and Vietnamese
mothers, will fly first to Bangkok, where they will be issued passports and
given medical examinations and immunization shots before flying on to their new
homes in the United States.

''We will begin to move them out Saturday and Sunday, some to the East Coast and
some to the West,'' said Donald Colin, the director of the Orderly Departure
Program at the United States Embassy in Bangkok.

Mr. Colin said the the group would be the largest so far to come out of Vietnam.
''This is not the first group,'' he said, ''just the largest.''

23 Children Have Arrived

Since the Orderly Departure Program began in 1979, Mr. Colin said, 23 Amerasian
children have come to the United States, seven in 1980, eight in 1981 and eight
so far this year. Many more are waiting to come. Mr. Colin said there was a list
of 3,740 names of Amerasian children left behind after the Vietnam War who have
said they want to come to the United States.

Most of the parents, who have waited through years of red tape to see their
children, are planning to welcome them in the United States. But one of the
fathers, Gary Tanous of Camas, Wash., flew to Bangkok to see his 15 year-old
daughter, Jean Marie.

Mr. Tanous, a survivor of the 1968 Tet offensive in Vietnam, said he had not
seen his daughter in seven years.

'I'm More Terrified,' He Says

''To say I'm ecstatic is an understatement,'' Mr. Tanous said from his room at
Bangkok's Imperial Hotel, ''but I'm more terrified than I've ever been in my
life.''

In Fairburn, Ga., outside Atlanta, Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Phillips said they were
preparing to stretch a banner across their house to welcome their daughter Kieu
My Thi Phillips.

When Mr. Phillips and his Vietnamese wife of four years, Be Thy Ly, were
evacuated hurriedly from Vietnam seven years ago they had to leave their day-old
daughter behind.

Mr. Phillips, who is now 47 years old, is a retired Army sergeant.  He first
went to Vietnam in 1976. He retired from the Army in 1971 but stayed on in
Vietnam to work in the Defense Department's office in Saigon. He met his wife,
now 38, at a party at the Caravelle Hotel in Saigon in 1969. Two years later
they were married.

Child Considered Too Frail

When Americans were being evacuated in April 1975, Mrs. Phillips went into labor
and was taken to a hospital where she was delivered of a three-pound baby.

Doctors said the baby was so frail that it would be impossible for her to make
the trip to America.  The Phillipses said they left reluctantly and when they
arrived in the United States immediately began trying to get their daughter out.
Mr. Phillips said the cost to get their daughter here could run as high as
$7,000.

''I don't care how much it costs,'' Mr. Phillips said. ''I would hock the rest
of my life to pay for it.''

List of Children's Names

Following is an unofficial list, compiled from information in Bangkok and
Washington, of the children who are scheduled to leave Vietnam today. The
child's name is followed by his or her age and name of a parent or grandparent
in this country.  Foster, Nancy Yvonne, 7; Wendell H. Foster, Marietta, Ga.
Nguyen Quoc Viet, 11, and Nguyen Thingoc Loan, 10; Mrs. Richard Everton,
Sacramento, Cal.  Huynh Thanh Tung, 11; William G. Glardy, Willcox, Ariz.  Trinh
Quoc Nam, 10; Robert G. Reighard, Garland, Tex.  Brooks, Kenneth Linh, 14; Mrs.
Cao Thi Nhan, Washington, D.C.  Phillips, Kieu Thi My, 7; Joseph N. Phillips,
Fairburn, Ga.  Tanous, Jean Marie, 15; Gary D. Tanous, Camas, Wash.  Villegas,
Marco, 13, Linh Da, 11, and Dora, 10; Luis Carlos Villegas, San Diego.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 274 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 30, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MOYNIHAN PLANS TO STRESS RECORD AS LIBERAL FORCE

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29


Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said today that he would base his re-election
campaign on his record in the Senate as a liberal.

''Six years ago on election night, I said I ran as a liberal and was elected as
a liberal,'' the New York Democrat said at his weekly news conference. ''I think
I have behaved as one and voted as one and will go on doing so.''

His Republican opponent, Florence M. Sullivan, said after her primary victory
that Mr. Moynihan was a liberal who had ''lost touch with the common man.'' Mrs.
Sullivan, a Brooklyn Assemblywoman, will also appear on the Right to Life and
Conservative Party lines.

Mr. Moynihan, who has gone to great pains over the last year to persuade the
Democratic Party in New York that he was liberal enough for them and not a
''neo-conservative,'' said: ''Any argument inside the party was one that
liberalism had to acquire a capacity for selfcriticism and correction.''

Emphasis on 3 Major Issues

The Senator said he would emphasize three major issues for the remaining 34 days
of the campaign: the economy, crime and nuclear arms control.

His campaign manager, Timothy J. Russert, showed reporters three television
commercials, unusual in that they were filmed in black and white, and let them
hear radio advertisements addressing those issues.

One radio advertisement carries what Senator Moynihan describes as the sound of
a nuclear explosion. As the noise subsides, Mr.  Moynihan announces that he
supports a ''mutual, verifiable freeze'' of nuclear weapons by the Soviet Union
and the United States.

The advertisement was created by Tony Schwartz, a political advertising
consultant who made the commercial in 1964 for Lyndon Johnson's Presidential
campaign against Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona that showed a mushrooming
nuclear blast contrasted against a small child picking the petals of a daisy.
The commercial implied that Mr. Goldwater favored the use of nuclear weapons in
Vietnam and was withdrawn after a furor.

On crime, Mr. Moynihan takes credit in a radio spot for cracking down on drug
trafficking. Harking back to his days as a White House urban-affairs adviser,
Mr. Moynihan says: ''I put drug trafficking on the agenda of American foreign
policy. We broke the French connection.''

Death Penalty for Certain Crimes

Mr. Moynihan will emphasize his advocacy of the death penalty for certain crimes
- first-degree murder and treason in wartime - but in a letter to contributors,
he is refuting a contention by Mrs.  Sullivan that he twice voted against the
death penalty, Mr. Russert said.

In the six years that Mr. Moynihan has been in the Senate, there has not been a
vote on the death penalty, the letter points out.  As the first stage of an
effort to attract liberal and moderate Republican voters, Mr. Moynihan
introduced a crime bill that would make it a Federal offense to commit a felony
with a firearm and would impose mandatory minimum sentences for such crimes.

The idea for the bill was part of the campaign of Whitney North Seymour Jr., one
of the losers in the Republican primary, and Mr.  Moynihan publicly thanked Mr.
Seymour for ''such a useful suggestion.''

John Trubin, who managed the campaign for then Senator Jacob K.  Javits in 1980,
said he was considering forming a Republicans for Moynihan committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
