
                               1 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Crack, Bane of Inner City, Is Now Gripping Suburbs

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2644 words


Crack, which has been devastating entire inner-city neighborhoods, has begun to
claim significant numbers of middle- and upper-class addicts, experts have
found.

Bush Administration drug policy officials and many law-enforcement experts have
maintained that crack is predominantly an inner-city problem, and research has
indicated that occasional use of drugs, including cocaine, is declining among
the more affluent.

But now doctors, counselors and crack addicts themselves - in often moving
personal accounts - report substantial increases of addiction among affluent and
middle-income Americans with a variety of special problems.

The director of a New York treatment center, Dr. Arnold M. Washton, among many
others, said there were more crack addicts among white middle-class people than
any other segment of the population, ''despite all the poor black crack addicts
you see on TV and Page One.''

Dr. Washton added: ''These new addicts are business executives and house
painters and doctors and receptionists. And if you met them on the street or at
the Little League game, you wouldn't have a clue they're smoking their brains
out on crack back home in the basement.''

Crack Studies Just Beginning

Poor urban neighborhoods clearly have the highest concentrations of crack users,
experts agree. What is new, in their view, is the rapid growth of more affluent
addicts.

National research analyzing crack addiction by income and race is just
beginning. But reviews of academic research and scores of interviews in recent
weeks show a consensus on these points:


* Perhaps because they have more to lose in terms of income, property and
reputation, middle- and upper-class crack addicts are unusually secretive about
their addiction. ''They smoke it in tight little cliques,'' said William
Hopkins, director of street research for the New York State Division of
Substance Abuse. ''But there are oh-so-many of them. We see their suburban cars
streaming through Harlem to make buys all the time.''


* Also mostly hidden are the larger social costs of middle-class addiction as
families founder on the financial and emotional price of addiction and insurance
companies raise premiums to cover treatment costs. The General Motors
Corporation alone estimates that abuse of all drugs costs the auto maker more
than $1 billion annually for treatment and worker absenteeism; in the year
before seeking treatment the average G.M. employee addicted to drugs comes to
work barely half the time.


* The history that cocaine and crack addicts have most in common is repeated use
of marijuana.


* Cocaine use in all forms, snorted, injected or smoked, is greatest among white
single men in metropolitan areas of the Northeast and West.

Dr. Washton said 70 percent of the more than 200 patients he treats at the
Washton Institute in New York City each year are middle-class addicts with good
jobs. ''There's an extraordinary amount of crack in the American workplace,'' he
said. ''Crack is definitely an equal opportunity drug.''

About 70 percent of the 400 patients treated at the private Horizon Center in
East Lansing, Mich., are crack addicts. ''They're just average Joes with jobs,''
said Mary Kaczperski, senior therapist at the center.

At Sacramento's Aquarian Effort, a private, nonprofit center in California,
Brian Weiss, a senior counselor, said, ''Crack cuts across all the social and
class lines.''

THE BANKER

Hal W. is a 40-year-old investment banker, the oldest son from a Southern
Baptist farm family, who experienced his first drug high in high school when he
took the keys to his grandfather's pharmacy and ''borrowed'' some amphetamines.

''I'd take the amphetamines to study, and smoke marijuana to come down,'' said
the banker, who, like other addicts, spoke on condition that his full name not
be used. ''I drank, like my parents. But I thought I wasn't addicted to anything
because I knew I could quit anytime.''

In college, a friend introduced him to snorting cocaine. ''It made me feel
fabulous, and then very sick,'' he said. ''But I would remember the fabulous and
forget the sick, and I'd run out and buy more and more and more. And I'd use it
pretty much every day.''

Hal first tried crack about five years ago, but because he did not buy his own
pipe and cooking paraphernalia, he knew he could not be addicted. When his
dealer was arrested for shooting a drug supplier, Hal posted the $10,000 bond.
''I thought it was out of the goodness of my heart,'' he recalled.

''You need to understand how the dealer becomes the most important person in a
user's life,'' Hal said. ''I gave him the key to my apartment. He had access to
my bank account so I could phone from the airport and he'd send a car with a
package of crack or he'd deliver it to my apartment at any hour, just like a
pizza.''

He said the dealer was despicable. ''But I didn't care. Even when I found out he
was skimming thousands extra out of my account, you can bet I found another
dealer before I confronted him.'' The new dealer was the friend of a friend, a
graduate in Chinese studies at Harvard and Columbia.

In office meetings colleagues would wink and excuse themselves to go snort
cocaine. Hal found himself spending days at a time by himself or with a
prominent lawyer friend smoking crack, drinking and watching pornographic
movies. ''I can't tell you how high crack made me feel,'' he said, ''or how
frightened of the low I was. I'd smoke even when my left arm went numb and I got
severe chest pains. I'd tell myself it was because I was sitting in a funny
position.''

He lost his girlfriend, who did not use drugs. He was dismissed from his
$300,000-a-year job. He borrowed from friends and banks. He bounced checks. ''I
was miserable,'' he said, ''but I didn't know what to do about it. And I was so
afraid of losing crack.''

Last fall a friend who had quit crack steered him to a psychiatric hospital. But
after two days Hal checked himself out. Within 48 hours of nonstop smoking he
had consumed $5,000 in crack, barely one percent of the money Hal estimates he
spent on drugs in recent years.

He then threw away all his drugs and began serious treatment. ''Last Nov. 5 was
the first day of the rest of my life,'' he said. His doctor says he has tested
clean ever since.

Walking by an airport pay phone can still trigger a craving. ''But I'm
determined that hell is over for me,'' he said.

As a first step in reconciliation with his family, Hal confided his addiction to
an uncle, a psychiatrist who treats many addicts. The uncle then shared a
confidence of his own with Hal.

He was, and still is, a crack addict.



Crack Defies Class Lines

Dr. Jeffrey S. Rosecan of New York City notes that a similar form of smokable
cocaine, called freebase, which gives a quicker, more intense high than inhaling
cocaine powder, has been popular among affluent addicts for more than a decade.

The drug user made small amounts of freebase himself, but with materials that
were expensive and dangerous. In contrast, crack is sold in vials for $5 to $30.

''Crack is just mass-produced freebase,'' said Dr. Rosecan, who heads the
cocaine abuse center at New York's Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center. ''And
it's proving to be just as addictive among the middle class. Only it's more
behind closed doors in nice homes.''

Bill Coonce, who heads the Drug Enforcement Administration's Detroit office,
said: ''It's not just a black or minority drug. We're seeing a rapid expansion
of addiction now into suburban and small town America.''

In July the National Institute on Drug Abuse reported some decline in the number
of Americans who admitted using any illicit drugs. But the institute's survey
found that the number of people who said they used cocaine once a week soared to
862,000 in 1988 from 647,000 in 1985 and the number of daily or almost daily
users rose to 292,000 from 246,000 in the same period.

Virtually all experts believe that crack accounts for much of the increase
because it induces greater euphoria quicker and is more rapidly addictive than
powdered cocaine.

Joseph C. Gfroerer, the institute's director of epidemiology and statistical
analysis, said the computer study of the survey's answers by income and race
would not be done until later this year. But he said preliminary work indicates
that crack is not confined to any income group.

Lee Chase, a recovering heroin addict and counselor at the Care Unit Drug
Program in Grand Rapids, Mich., said: ''There's more crack now than ever. You
see it in the ghettos of Detroit and elsewhere because those addicts get into
trouble with the law right quick. But these middle-class types have got jobs and
savings and checking accounts. So it takes longer to burn through their lives.''

The typical middle-class patient sounds remarkably similar whether he is in Mr.
Chase's group therapy sessions or Dr. Washton's private office: a man, white, in
his 30's or 40's, one of several children of a father with a management or
supervisory job, intelligent, employed, with a marriage in differing stages of
disarray. He arrives for treatment under pressure from someone and is likely to
be addicted to several substances like crack, alcohol and marijuana.

''Can you imagine,'' asked Mr. Hopkins, the New York State researcher, sitting
in his office on Manhattan's 125th Street, ''a half-dozen shady-looking guys
standing around a clean street corner in the suburbs with people on bicycles and
in sports cars driving up to make buys? Too much attention, right? So the
middle-class addicts send one or two into the city to buy. The exchange is made
quietly in the back of the elevator on Wall Street while everyone else is
watching the lights for their floor. Then they go smoke them in Bob's basement
tonight and Lou's on Thursday. There's no holdups, just advances on the credit
cards. They're invisible.''



THE HOMEMAKER

It was during one of the many arguments with her husband that Mary G. suddenly
realized what she had done.

He was loudly complaining about the messy apartment and lack of dinner again
when their 4-year-old daughter rose to her mother's defense.

''Daddy, Daddy, Mommy's O.K. as long as she has her pipe.''

Mary, now 37 years old, was first offered marijuana by her older brothers, both
now alcoholics, when she was 12.

She introduced her high school friends to marijuana and they would smoke and
drive and drink some beer in the basement, depending on whose parents were not
home that evening.

Mary first tried pills in San Francisco, where friends regularly snorted
cocaine. She snorted now and then, too. Slowly it became more now than then. In
the early 1980's a friend began smoking cocaine and Mary tried that just to be
social. ''Immediately and unequivocably I was addicted,'' she recalled.

When she became pregnant, she said she quit just as abruptly. And her husband,
who manages a financial firm, stopped snorting, too. But as soon as Mary's
daughter was weaned, Mary returned to crack. ''I said, 'Hey, I can handle this.'
''

But once a week became twice a week and then three and four times. Mary would
drop her daughter off at nursery school, go to a friend's apartment, smoke crack
all day and pick her daughter up at 5:30. ''I told myself it was O.K. as long as
I didn't take crack home,'' Mary said.

''I'd make dinner, give my daughter a bath, read her stories and put her to bed.
Then when my husband fell asleep, I'd go to a cash machine, get some money and
find a street dealer so I could smoke in my bathroom.''

Mary became so eager to reach her friend's apartment and begin smoking crack
that she would not bother to stop and leave her daughter at the school but would
instead take her along. ''She saw me crawling around on that floor looking for
little pieces of crack, as if it was gold,'' Mary said. ''I could have given up
my husband, my daughter, my whole life and crawled into that pipe. I was so
disgusting.''

She began treatment several times, often ending a day of counseling by heading
straight for her friend's apartment to smoke crack.

One day at a restaurant, after having several drinks at lunch, Mary blacked out.
She awoke in a private hospital where no one said anything about drugs or
alcohol. ''We in the middle class can get away with so much more,'' she said.
''We're not robbing stores. We just steal from ourselves and our families.''

Her daughter's innocent remark about her pipe only eight months into crack
addiction pushed her into treatment, which began with a two-week stay at a
private hospital in another state. She slipped and smoked crack one day after
her return home. But she says she has not smoked in 159 days and attends
Alcoholics Anonymous meetings almost every day.

''It's a long road,'' she said. ''But I feel better about myself. I'm a good
person who had a bad problem. Crack is on the street. But it's not just a street
drug.''



Users Leading Double Lives

Many middle- and upper-class addicts talk of the pressures and sometimes the
perverse joys of leading double lives. One identity is the husband and provider
or the successful career woman, pretending to handle all the pressures, hiding
the fears and insecurities and that silent inner voice that first whispers and
then demands more crack.

But after inhaling the cocaine fumes, which take effect in eight seconds,
another self emerges, more confident, intelligent, in control, sexier.

''When I smoked,'' recalled one recovering addict, a 30-year-old daughter of a
telephone company manager, ''I could talk at parties and laugh. I didn't have to
be shy anymore.''

To finance her $200-to$300-a-day habit, just sitting and smoking for hours, she
sold her jewelery, stole from her family and ran up $20,000 in cash advances on
her credit cards. Every time she would approach her cards' borrowing limits, the
banks would cheerfully announce in a letter that her limit had been increased.
''Hey,'' she said, ''for a drug addict credit cards are a dream come true.''



THE ASSEMBLY LINE WORKER

For 23 years Fred T. was the man of the family, the oldest of three children of
a registered nurse. His father died in Vietnam. ''I think he was in the
Marines,'' Fred said.

His mother died of cancer at 46. But Fred had a good job on a Michigan
automotive assembly line earning about $32,000 a year. He worked hard and saved
his money, including a modest trust fund left by grandparents.

He had seen many colleagues snort cocaine during and after work; one guy on the
line was the dealer for office executives, too. His friends told him how good it
felt. And one day Fred became curious. He remembers how it felt to be outside
himself, free of responsibilities.

''I didn't know where I was,'' he said. ''But I was just watching me wander
around. It was so easy.''

The next week Fred was curious again. And again. And soon he was smoking crack
for the faster high and drinking a lot to ease the crash.

With $1,500 a week going up in cocaine smoke, the trust fund did not last long.
He was bringing home less money for his wife and daughter. He took out some
loans against his house. And for a while other family members gave him money.

''But then I became an outcast,'' he said. ''They never knew who was at the
door, the real Fred or the stranger who looked like him.''

His wife and daughter left. He lost the house. And at least two efforts at
rehabilitation failed.

''There's a madness out there,'' said Fred. ''There are crack smokers sitting in
offices making decisions and guys working on the line and running machines. And
they don't believe they have a problem. It takes so long to learn. It's like
blind men trying to lead blind men. They can't. So if you're blind, you better
get yourself a dog.''



NEXT: New treatments emerge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Spreading Web Of Crack: First of two articles.

GRAPHIC: Chart of number of cocaine and crack users in the U.S. in 1985 and 1988
(Source: Department of Health and Human Services ); photos of William Hopkins,
director of street research for the New York State Division of Substance Abuse,
shown with materials he uses to teach law-enforcement officials how to recognize
different types of drugs (NYT/Ruby Washington); Dr. Arnold M. Washton, director
of a drug treatment center in New York City (NYT/Vic DeLucia) (pg. 24)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 837 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-27

East Germans left Bonn's embassy in Prague, where they had been camping, and
boarded buses on their departure to West Germany.          Page 1

Ankara, at the U.N., will press Bulgaria on Turks           19

Vatican ties with the Soviet bloc have begun to fundamentally change, with an
easing of mutual suspicions and a lowering of diplomatic barriers that had been
intact for decades.          1

Anglican head prays with the Pope in Rome           4

Who owns the Soviet Union? That debate is to begin tomorrow as the nation's
parliament takes up a law defining the notion of property.           15

Soviet dissidents begin to find the Voice of America boring           18

Poland's censors start to fade           18

President Mubarak of Egypt called Prime Minister Shamir and repeated a
conditional offer to meet with the Israeli leader, officials said.           6

Lebanese legislators hold talks in Saudi Arabia           5

A stepped-up civil war in Cambodia appears inevitable to more people a week
after Vietnam's withdrawal. For many, the main question is what does the Khmer
Rouge want.          22

Cambodian guerrillas claim capture of three towns           23

Guatemala is a major drug source for South American cocaine headed to America
and Europe. The change has occurred in the last two years, with a boom in local
poppy growing.           24

Chilean Army gets U.S. copters           27

Communist runs in Brazil           26

Colombia flower exports surge           25

A plan to renovate a California canal has locked the U.S. and Mexico in a major
dispute over the use of water from the Colorado River.          3

Philippine rebels show strife has not reduced their strength           13

South Africa disbands Koevoet, the special Namibia police           8

In Ethiopia, ex-prostitutes used as warriors against AIDS           10

French premier faces strikes and the left's fire           14

NATIONAL/28-35

Crack has moved to the middle class, despite reports that drug use has declined
among the affluent. The largely invisible use appears to be exacting large
economic costs.          1

Hurricane damage in Puerto Rico is far worse than was thought. On one island,
electricity is still two months away; Puerto Rico unemployment has risen to 70
percent.          1

New York area aids islands           33

Increases in health insurance rates in recent months of 20 percent to more than
100 percent have staggered millions of small businesses that provide health
coverage to employees.          1

Doubts over the Democrats' strategy have been raised this week after a defeat on
a capital-gains tax cut. Some wonder whether appeals based on economic class can
still succeed.          1

The new weapon against cholesterol and saturated fats is said to be the oil
canola, which is made from the rape plant. American farmers hope the oil brings
benefits to them, too.          28

F.D.A. questions use of grain in three cereals           28

A $78 million settlement of a lawsuit against the Government by neighbors of a
uranium plant in Fernald, Ohio, was backed by a Federal judge.           28

Owner and skipper of tanker fined for Newport spill           29

Alaska fund pays big dividend           34

A clash of the 60's is being replayed in Mississippi, where a debate is boiling
about disclosure of information kept by a state agency that harassed the civil
rights movement.          28

Episcopalians reach compromise over female bishops           31

Chicago journal: A new process in a ritual of cleansing           28

REGIONAL/36-41

Can Rudolph Giuliani play tough? His recent defense of his criticism of David
Dinkins made one thing clear: He must raise doubts about his rival without
seeming to attack him.          40

New polls in the New Jersey race for governor show that voters making up their
minds heavily favor the Democrat, James Florio.           38

Radon in New Jersey said to pose a grave risk           41

Hospital workers plan to strike Wednesday against most of New York City's
private hospitals and nursing homes, in a high-stakes push to resolve a contract
dispute.           38

A capital gains tax cut's effect on New York City appears to be unclear. While
it may help the securities industry, city officials worry the cut would reduce
Federal aid.          36

Bronx man beaten in attack that police call race-related           36

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Expects Resurgence of Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1728 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Sept. 29


While Vietnamese officers who have returned from Cambodia routinely assert that
the Phnom Penh army is now good enough to stand on its own, they also volunteer
nearly uniform respect for the guerrilla tactics and skill of the Khmer Rouge,
the main military force opposing Prime Minister Hun Sen.

A week after the last of the Vietnamese forces left Cambodia, more and more
people in the region regard an intensification of Cambodia's civil war as
inevitable. For them the specter of the Khmer Rouge looms, raising questions of
who are the fighters, what are their objectives, how are they supplied and what
are their capabilities. Have they changed, as their leaders maintain, or are
they still willing to pursue policies of murderous terror, as they did when they
stormed into the Cambodian capital on April 17, 1975?

Col. Nguyen Huu Tinh has spent parts of three tours in Cambodia and has just
returned from three years in Kompong Thom province. His views are representative
of those of most Vietnamese field officers interviewed in the last two weeks,
both here and in Cambodia.

With Vietnam's 1,500-man 742d Regiment and Cambodian forces, the colonel was
fighting two Khmer Rouge divisions, the 802d and 616th, which he said totaled
only about 1,600 troops, half of which spent much of their time at logistics in
a province far from their sanctuaries in Thailand.

Even so, he said, the Khmer Rouge fought well, and ''it was hard to eliminate
them, because they live among the people,'' the traditional complaint of any
regular army facing guerrillas.

The Brutal History Of Khmer Rouge Rule

During the Khmer Rouge's time in power, from 1975 until the Vietnamese invaded
in December 1978 and installed a pro-Hanoi Government in January 1979, more than
one million people died from starvation, disease and murder. Given this brutal
history, the Khmer Rouge are widely feared and hated in those parts of Cambodia
where they have been repelled.

The resulting lack of a large sea of committed or sympathetic peasants to swim
in and the difficulty of transporting materiel from Thailand are the major
vulnerabilities of the Khmer Rouge, analysts agree. Recently such failings have
been compounded by the increasingly ambivalent attitudes of China and Thailand,
which have been key benefactors of the shadowy guerrillas.

The Khmer Rouge claim widespread support in the countryside, but it not readily
clear how much is freely offered and how much is extorted. Their guerrillas
often take rice and animals from villagers while killing or kidnapping local
officials and demanding ''volunteers'' for fighting and carrying ammunition.

Still, Chinese military aid and the sanctuaries provided by Thailand for the
Khmer Rouge army and for Khmer Rouge-controlled refugees are indisputable
advantages and thus far continue.

And as some Cambodian officials, diplomats and international relief workers say,
Cambodians have learned to accommodate themselves to whatever force is holding
the guns at any moment, particularly in the remoter parts of the country.

Even in provinces like Kompong Thom, Kompong Cham and Kompong Speu, all
relatively distant from the Thai border, the Government has found it difficult
to get Khmer Rouge fighters to defect.

''We send their families to persuade them, but they don't surrender,'' the
Governor of Kompong Speu, Samreth Sakhan dit Sophat, said last month. ''We have
to be realists. People live with what is around them.'' Despite an offer of
clemency, he said, there were no defectors in his province this year through
mid-August.

Some Political Support In the Countryside

Khieu Kanharith, a member of the Cambodian National Assembly and editor of the
semiofficial weekly Kampuchea, said in an interview that the Khmer Rouge retain
some political supporters. He said they amounted to only a few percent, but he
added that under the Khmer Rouge, who attempted to transform Cambodia into a
Maoist, peasant-dominated agrarian collective, it was the city dwellers and
professional classes who suffered most.

Peasants and ethnic minorities long despised or mistreated by Phnom Penh had
their day in the sun, however bloody that day was, and some lived better than
before, he said, adding that in a few provinces, like Kratie in the northeast,
the only deaths came from disease.

''Kratie was very good under the Khmer Rouge,'' said Mr. Khieu Kanharith. ''No
one was killed there.''

The Khmer Rouge are also respected for their intense nationalism by some
Cambodians, who have seen large parts of their ancient empire swallowed up by
the Thais and the Vietnamese. And it was the Khmer Rouge who carried the brunt
of the fight against the Vietnamese occupiers.

Despite the Vietnamese withdrawal, no one, including Western analysts in
Bangkok, expects the Khmer Rouge to be able to repeat their 1975 victory, which
took place in the midst of the chaos of the wider war in Indochina and the
American retreat. But Eastern bloc diplomats in Phnom Penh and some Vietnamese
officers believe the Khmer Rouge will be able to take some territory in the more
remote parts of the country and perhaps even capture some provincial capitals.

Control Is Possible, But Not Elimination

So long as the Cambodians, especially those in the capital, do not panic and the
army learns to stand its ground, these diplomats believe, the Khmer Rouge can
likely be contained in the more mountainous, forested and malarial areas that no
central government has ever really controlled.

But the Khmer Rouge will be difficult to eradicate, given the intensity of their
core fighters and the starkness of their situation: They must fight or perish.
Even the Vietnamese say that the Khmer Rouge have 23,000 soldiers, 17,000 of
them fighters and 13,000 of those inside Cambodia.

There are 10,000 other fighters belonging to the non-Communist factions of
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who leads the opposition coalition, and Son Sann, a
former prime minister. But according to the Vietnamese, these troops do not do
much fighting, and when they do they operate more like a regular army, making
them easier to kill.

Politically, the Khmer Rouge now present themselves as having abandoned their
Communist beliefs, content to share power with the non-Communists and Mr. Hun
Sen in a new government they do not dominate and to face open, democratic
elections. They say that their main and now infamous leaders - Pol Pot, Ieng
Sary, Ta Mok and others - have retired.

It is difficult to find anyone, even among their coalition partners, who
believes them or who thinks they are interested in a peace settlement or sharing
power, except as a means to eventual control of Cambodia.

These days, Pol Pot lives just inside Thailand in Trat province, in a compound
heavily protected by his own and Thai troops. He reportedly has a new wife with
him and at least one young child. His first wife is said to be insane and living
in Beijing. Defectors say that while he has no formal rank, he is acknowledged
as the Khmer Rouge leader in all matters. Pattern of Rule Persists, Defectors
Say Among the 130,000 or so refugees and guerrillas' family members in Khmer
Rouge camps just inside Thailand, the former pattern of Khmer Rouge control is
little changed, defectors and international relief workers say.

Far fewer than half of these people have any access to aid workers, and contact
with foreigners is discouraged or punished.

A significant portion are kept virtual captives, isolated and illiterate, and
are used to ferry Chinese arms and ammunition to caches or troops deep inside
Cambodia. Those who contribute to the war effort are treated as human, but under
strict military discipline, defectors say. They say those who do not contribute
are treated like pack animals, with food and even sexual relations used as
incentives.

Much of the fighting against the Khmer Rouge has fallen in the last year to
Cambodian units, which took up the burden as the Vietnamese scaled back.
Nonetheless, there is widespread expectation that with the Vietnamese gone there
will be a partial vacuum of manpower and battlefield experience.

Some territory now held by Mr. Hun Sen's forces is bound to be lost. That may
include places like Phnom Malai, where the opposition had bases before the
Vietnamese drove them into Thailand in 1985, some gem-mining areas around Pailin
and even some provincial capitals like Sisophon.

So long as Cambodian forces can counterattack and take most of them back again,
preserving the guerrilla nature of the war, fighting is likely to increase but
not present any immediate threat to the Government. Demoralizaton and Fear Are
the Major Threats But most analysts believe that the Khmer Rouge strategy is one
of a war of demoralization, in which the planting of thousands of mines along
roads and in rice fields, the killing of local administrators and schoolteachers
and the intimidation of the population will play as big a part as the seizure of
prominent objectives.

The concern is about something that would resemble the Vietnamese Communists'
1968 Tet offensive in South Vietnam. One Eastern bloc diplomat said that if the
Khmer Rouge can mount a series of coordinated attacks in many parts of Cambodia,
with the seizure of Pailin, Sisophon or Battambang for even a day, morale in
Phnom Penh ''will collapse like a souffle.''

A Soviet diplomat in Phnom Penh said that the Khmer Rouge would have to move
quickly, making its mark in this dry season before the spring, or risk being
regarded by both the Cambodians and the world as ''a paper tiger.''

If Mr. Hun Sen is in good shape in February or March, the diplomat implied, the
world will begin to recognize him. ''You can't expect the whole region of
Indochina to be excluded from international life for so long just because
someone sits out in the jungle,'' he said. ''The Thais certainly can't wait, nor
can all the refugees,'' who have been marking time for at least 11 years along
the Thai border.

A Vietnamese, Capt. Nguyen Xuan Thang, who served for six years in Oddar
Meancheay province, was interviewed on his troop carrier waiting for a ceremony
to finish before he could cross the border into Vietnam.

''For a year we have let the Cambodians manage themselves and they got some
victories, but we still were there,'' he said. ''Now we hope it will be O.K.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the last Vietnamese Army truck leaving Cambodia (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Michael Caine Turns Homicidal

BYLINE: By JEANNIE PARK; Jeannie Park is a New York-based writer who frequently
reports on entertainment.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1309 words


It is a character that Michael Caine seems born to play. Sinister yet seductive,
immoral yet irresistible, he conceals his madness with a coating of charm. When
a beautiful young co-worker, played by Elizabeth McGovern, discovers that he may
have committed a horrible crime, he quickly and effortlessly puts his powers to
work. He moves close to her, then gives her a coolly suggestive smile. ''Don't
look so worried,'' he whispers reassuringly, and in a second, her fears are
calmed. Despite her better instincts, she finds herself longing for him.

The object of her desires is marketing executive Graham Marshall, another of Mr.
Caine's trademark ''lovable rogues,'' as he calls them, the most recent of which
was his cultivated con man in ''Dirty Rotten Scoundrels.'' In his new movie, ''A
Shock to the System,'' a darkly comic thriller filmed during the summer in New
York, Mr. Caine plays a high-powered businessman who is passed over for an
expected promotion and then discovers that murder is a magical ''bibbity bobbity
boo'' (he sings as he plots) solution to his problems.

''A Shock to the System,'' which is based on a novel by the British author Simon
Brett and is scheduled to open in February, also stars Peter Riegert as the
aggressive young hotshot who gets in the way of Graham's ambitions, and Swoosie
Kurtz as Graham's extravagant wife. It is the third film from Corsair Pictures,
after last year's ''Dear America: Letters Home From Vietnam'' and this spring's
''Miss Firecracker.'' It is also the first studio-backed feature of the
director, Jan Egleson, a veteran of several independent films and American
Playhouse productions.

As depicted by Mr. Caine, Graham's unscrupulous actions are carried out with a
wit and charisma so compelling that the film makers were stumped as to how he
should eventually get his comeuppance. According to Frank Perry, the head of
Corsair, an early version of the script called for Graham to be killed, but it
soon became clear that this ending would not work. ''Michael has created a
character that is so powerful, so charming and so seductive that you love him,''
says Mr. Perry. ''You know this monster has to pay a price, but to kill him is
too extreme.''

Not until the fifth week of shooting could the film makers devise a satisfactory
finale. In regard to the late tinkering with the script, Mr. Perry says, ''Was
it unusual? Yes. Was it terrifying? Yes. Was it necessary? Yes. Films take on a
life - a gestalt - of their own. You ignore that at your own peril.''

Between scenes on the ''Shock'' set in Wall Street Plaza, just a few blocks from
the New York Stock Exchange, Mr. Caine says the film - it is his 65th - ''has
something to say about how we live in an urban society, how you really can't
stand up to the pressure. Everybody breaks a little.'' He says he is appalled by
the rigidity of the Wall Street workday. ''I was walking to my trailer, when all
of a sudden everybody came cheering out of the buildings. 'Is it a fire?' I
asked, and I was told, 'No, it's lunch.' Then the restaurants empty out all at
the same time. This regulation - it's not a natural life for any human being.

The first films by the director, Jan Egleson - ''Billy in the Lowlands'' and
''The Dark End of the Street'' - took place in a blue-collar neighborhood quite
far from the towers of Wall Street. His new film - while set mostly in a cluster
of gleaming offices overlooking the Brooklyn Bridge - also incorporates the grim
reality of city life below, where the homeless haunt the street corners and the
subway tunnels. In fact, it is a persistent panhandler who sets the frustrated
Graham on his murderous course.

A one-time actor who lives in Cambridge, Mass., and occasionally sports an
earcuff, Mr. Egleson says he is struck by the contrast of wealth and poverty in
New York, which ''is tuned up to a pitch unlike other cities,'' he says. ''We
have some scenes in Grand Central, where there is a rush of successful
businessmen, but also a tremendous number of homeless and indigent.''

Although Mr. Egleson does not intend ''Shock'' to carry a strong social message,
he believes the audience will share with Graham a resentment for the business
world's ''cutthroat, unfeeling attitude about money and power. Here's a man
who's worked hard all his life, and he gets a raw deal. The Young Turks, the new
young driven people, move in and discard people with experience and skill. It's
a waste.''

In fighting this process, Graham goes off the deep end, but Mr. Egleson is
convinced that the audience will identify with him because ''while he is doing
diabolical things, he never loses his sense of fun.'' And of course, there is
the satisfaction of revenge: ''Everyone's had a boss they'd love to do in.''

Mr. Egleson, whose direction of American Playhouse's ''Lemon Sky,'' with Kevin
Bacon, was praised by critics last year, says he is not awed by his first
big-budget project. To be sure, at less than $10 million, its cost is still
below the Hollywood average. ''In a practical sense,'' he says, ''there really
aren't any differences in my job. There are actors, a camera and a scene to be
solved. Now there is a larger canvas for a larger group of people, and sometimes
there is more time.''

The director is also assisted in his work by a striking set designed by Howard
Cummings, Mr. Egleson's partner in previous films. Built on a vacant floor 26
stories above Wall Street, the burnished wood headquarters of Graham's marketing
firm are at once posh and functional, decorated with tasteful artwork and dotted
with clients' product displays. Part of the tension between the characters, says
Mr. Egleson, is created by the arrangement of the glass-walled offices, which
all face a central work area so that ''everybody can spy on everybody else. All
the plotting is visible.''

In one office, Graham contemplates his future, while through the glass he can
keep an eye on his confident competitor, Bob, played by Mr. Riegert, who
gleefully calls his character ''the man in the sharkskin suit.'' At the same
time, Graham can gaze at the sweet, trusting Stella, played by Ms. McGovern, who
says her role is the ''one moral character in the piece.''

In the end, the movie is dominated by Michael Caine, and the other members of
the cast express wonder at his unshakable calm. ''I'm unpressurizable,'' says
Mr. Caine. ''I don't flap. I'm not neurotic. I never yell.'' While waiting for
lighting adjustments, he puffs on a cigar and hones his skill as a raconteur.

''I used to yell a lot,'' he admits, until many years ago, when he worked on a
film directed by James Clavell, the author of several novels, among them
''Shogun,'' set in Asia. ''I blew up one day. He called a break and took me
around the corner, and he taught me about losing face, about how I demean
myself.'' Since that lesson, Mr. Caine says, he has always kept his temper in
check.

''Amazing! On the first take!'' one novice actor exclaims after watching Mr.
Caine create a subtle change of facial expression that conveys to an office
mailboy instructions for an illicit transaction. ''My approach to acting,'' says
Mr. Caine, ''is to make the wheels disappear.'' He adds, ''It's a bit
self-defeating, actually. Because then the critics say, 'He just plays himself.'
How they can say I am playing myself when they don't know me, I don't
understand.''

Soon Mr. Caine will take a break from films to write his autobiography for
Random House. But before that, he will wear the mantle of lovable rogue at least
two more times. In ''Bull's-Eye,'' he and his close friend, Roger Moore, will
play ''two very charming gentlemen crooks.''

He will also star in an ABC-TV production of ''Jekyll and Hyde.'' Playing the
classic embodiment of good versus evil, says Mr. Caine, will be ''the epitome of
everything I've ever done.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of director Jan Egleson, the actress Swoosie Kurtz and Michale
Caine, while making the comic thriller ''A Shock to the System'' (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Vietnam Goes Home, Still Casting an Eye Over All of Indochina

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


AT the final farewell ceremony for Vietnamese soldiers here last week, the
General Secretary of the People's Revolutionary Party of Cambodia, Heng Samrin,
was the centerpiece of a typical socialist-style tableau of Politburo leaders
and distinguished guests.

But flanking Mr. Heng Samrin on the dais, taking precedence over the rest of the
Cambodian party and Government hierarchy, were the Vietnamese and Laotian
ambassadors. It was a reminder that even as the Vietnamese formally ended their
11-year-long military presence, close ties remain between Vietnam and the
Cambodian Government, which the Vietnamese installed after ousting the brutal
Khmer Rouge in 1979.

It also spoke to the continuing idea of Indochinese solidarity and of the nature
of Vietnamese influence over Cambodia and Laos, whose revolutions Vietnam did
much to inspire and effect.

At the heart of the considerable legacy of Vietnam in Cambodia is the debate
about whether the current Government is a Vietnamese ''puppet.'' But the
relationship between Vietnam and Cambodia is now more complicated than that,
shaped in part by complaints by both sides that touch on real historical
antagonisms. Cambodians tend to criticize what they view as Vietnamese
arrogance, as well as Vietnam's historical expansionism - until the 18th
century, much of what is now southern Vietnam was Khmer. The Vietnamese complain
of what they see as Cambodian passivity, incompetence and, in particular,
ingratitude.

At the ceremony, Mr. Heng Samrin, who is often eclipsed in Western eyes by the
young Prime Minister, Hun Sen, gave a short and unsurprising speech, thanking
Vietnamese soldiers for performing ''their internationalist duty'' and driving
out the brutal Khmer Rouge regime of Pol Pot. And throughout the long parade of
troops in personnel carriers, trucks and buses, loudspeakers played what has
become the relentless theme song of these troop withdrawals: ''Vietnam and
Cambodia united, hand in hand.''

But while the very structure of the Cambodian Government, party and army is cut
from Vietnamese cloth, this is still a time of some tension between the two
countries over their future relationship. That was reflected in the first
question put to Mr. Hun Sen at a press conference following the ceremony, asked
by a Vietnamese journalist.

He wanted to know the status of the 1977 agreement reached between Vietnam and
the members of the Cambodian Front for National Salvation, the Khmer Rouge
defectors who had sought refuge in Vietnam from fierce internal purges and who
now form the core of the Government. The question caused a small stir among the
Cambodian leaders on the dais, but Mr. Hun Sen said simply that Cambodia's
relations with Vietnam would be the same as those with any friendly, neighboring
country.

A Sore Point

Later, asked more directly about relations with Vietnam, he said Cambodia had
announced a position of ''permanent neutrality'' and that any treaty that
contradicted this was ''invalidated.'' Did this mean the Vietnamese-Cambodian
treaty, which includes a mutual defense clause, was now abrogated? He replied,
''We are ready to discuss with Vietnam any points that would contradict this
neutrality.''

A Vietnamese official said that renegotiation of the agreement was a sore point
in Hanoi, and that ''it was not clear to either country what will happen to the
treaty.''

Vietnam signed a similar treaty with Laos in 1977, and the Vietnamese are
unlikely to appreciate it if Laos also calls for renegotiation, especially given
the growing business relationships between Laos and Thailand. Vietnamese
generals have regularly said that the security of Indochina is integral to the
security of Vietnam itself, and the political idea of a Vietnamese-dominated
Indochinese federation has not necessarily died the death Vietnamese officials
claim.

In fact, the Vietnamese are a bit annoyed with the Thais, who are also pressing
forward with commercial and unofficial diplomatic ties to Cambodia despite
Bangkok's formal support for opponents of Mr. Hun Sen. Just now Vietnam needs
Thai accommodation and recognizes that Phnom Penh needs it even more, since
non-Communist Southeast Asia and the West persist in their refusal to recognize
Cambodia or to provide aid and trade to Vietnam, even with the withdrawal of
Hanoi's troops.

Thai willingness to rupture the anti-Cambodian stance of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations is important to Vietnam and Cambodia. But it has its
price, both in self-respect and in commercial dealings, which is resented in
both countries.

Similarly, it remains doubtful whether Mr. Hun Sen did, as he insists, request
the early and unilateral withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.
Vietnamese officials say the initiative was taken by Hanoi, albeit in ''close
consultation'' with Phnom Penh. Vietnamese officials say their Government had
decided at the end of 1988 to pull out by the end of 1990 in any case - earlier
in the event of a political solution - and decided in mid-February to pull out
unilaterally by the end of September.

There is no doubt that the decision was based on a military analysis of
Cambodia's capacity to hold off the Khmer Rouge. But it was predominantly a
judgment that Vietnam's international isolation should not be borne any longer
than necessary, given Hanoi's own tattered economy, which is in desperate need
of Western investment. Hanoi was also under pressure from Soviet President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who has more urgent requirements for the Soviet budget
than to finance the Vietnamese army's sojourn in Cambodia.

But the whole process seems to have put some strain on ties between Hanoi and
Phnom Penh, which now must confront the Khmer Rouge without the benefit of the
excellent Vietnamese infantry.

In various ways, from the creation of a more formal mechanism for diplomatic
exchanges to the increasing abuse by Cambodian officials and citizens of
Vietnamese residents in Cambodia, Phnom Penh is showing more nationalism. While
the Vietnamese seem unconcerned about this just now, they also seem to feel that
Cambodia takes too lightly the military and economic sacrifices Vietnam made to
drive out the Khmer Rouge and help most Cambodians to resume a more normal life.

If Mr. Hun Sen can somehow be characterized as a ''puppet,'' a label he
vehemently rejects, he is at least a particularly prickly one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cambodians bidding farewell to Vietnamese troops last weekend
(Sygma/Jacques Langevin)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRACK'S DESTRUCTIVE SPRINT ACROSS AMERICA

BYLINE: By Michael Massing; Michael Massing, a New York writer, is a 1989 Alicia
Patterson Fellow.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5061 words


AS BROADWAY CUTS UP through the Upper West Side of Manhattan and into Washington
Heights, it gradually turns into a giant Caribbean bazaar. The avenue abounds
with bodegas, farmacias, unisex beauty salons, bargain clothing outlets,
restaurants serving pollo and platanos, and travel agencies offering bargains to
the Dominican Republic. Women squeeze mangoes, children lick flavored ices, men
play hard at dominoes, all to the accompaniment of a hundred different radios
blaring salsa music. Long a magnet for immigrants, Washington Heights today is
home to large colonies of Irish, Jews and, most numerous of all, Dominicans. As
the ever-present crowds make their way up and down the street, the Heights seems
a living embodiment of the American Dream - a vibrant, energetic urban melting
pot.

Wander off Broadway, though, and the neighborhood quickly seems like an American
nightmare. On side streets in the 150's and 160's, clusters of tough teen-agers
wearing beepers, four-finger gold rings and $95 Nikes offer $3 vials of crack,
the high-octane, smokable derivative of cocaine. On every block there are four
or five different ''crews,'' or gangs, each touting its own brand of the drug,
known to aficionados as ''Scotty'' (as in ''Beam me up''). Some blocks are
''hotter'' than others, depending on the availability of the crack. On the
hottest blocks Scotty is available ''24/7'' - 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
So much business is transacted on these streets that Washington Heights has
gained a reputation as the crack capital of America.

The experience of the Heights has been repeated in large cities throughout the
country. And now, in smaller communities, too, crack is striking with swift
fury, From rural woodlands to shady suburbs, prairie townships to Southern
hamlets, no community seems immune. The roster of the infected reads like a
roll-call of Middle America itself: Roanoke, Va.; Seaford, Del.; Sioux Falls,
S.D.; Cheyenne, Wyo.; Sacramento, Calif.; Portland, Ore. Fort Wayne, Ind., once
known as the City of Churches, is now home to an estimated 70 crack houses,
causing law-enforcement personnel to christen it ''the crack capital of
Indiana.''

How did it happen? How did a drug once confined to a handful of large-city
neighborhoods make its way to Main Street in just a few short years? Much of the
answer can be found in data generated by the Federal Government's unprecedented
intelligence-gathering operation against crack. In 13 cities across the country,
crack teams created over the last three years by the Justice Department are
methodically tracking the importation, distribution and consumption of the drug.
In New York, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (D.E.A.) operates
a special Unified Intelligence Division staffed by experts from a dozen
agencies, including the F.B.I., the I.R.S., Customs, Immigration and the local
police department. Twenty-four hours a day, the information pours in - from
wiretaps and surveillance teams, witnesses and informants, police raids and drug
busts. By combining this data with testimony from D.E.A. agents, police
captains, sociologists, undercover agents, community leaders, criminologists,
prosecutors, addicts and treatment experts, it is possible to trace crack's
destructive sprint across America.

WASHINGTON HEIGHTS HAS COME NATU-rally by its status as the nation's crack
capital. It would be difficult to design a better location for marketing a new
drug. First, the area is highly accessible. To the west, the George Washington
Bridge brings in potential customers from New Jersey; to the north the Henry
Hudson Parkway pulls them in from Westchester County. For residents of Passaic
or Peekskill who want a quick high, the Heights offers easy-in, easy-out
convenience. By all accounts, Washington Heights transacts more out-of-town drug
deals than any other neighborhood in New York City.

The neighborhood itself provides a substantial pool of users. For every newcomer
who has made it as a shopkeeper on Broadway, there are others who have dropped
out of school, had a child out of marriage, become permanently unemployed
-likely candidates for drug use. Here, as throughout the country, crack does
best where Americans -especially minorities - do worst.

Finally, Washington Heights is home to New York's most enterprising drug
dealers. No, they are not Colombians. Although most people associate Colombians
with cocaine and crack - especially now that open warfare has broken out between
the drug lords and the Government in Bogota - Colombians are not generally
involved in the retailing of crack in the United States. They just produce
cocaine in South America and smuggle it into the United States. The Colombians
living in New York are too few in number and too insular to have the array of
contacts necessary to move drugs on the street.

The Dominicans, New York's fastest-growing immigrant group, do have such
contacts. They also have the marketing talent. Crack dealing, like more
legitimate lines of work, requires the ability to exercise quality control, hire
a dependable workforce and develop a steady clientele. At all of this, the
Dominicans (only a small percentage of whom are involved in the drug trade) have
had a lot of experience. In the Caribbean, they are known as merchants and
tradesmen. In New York, they have applied their savvy to become highly
successful shopkeepers - and the city's top crack traffickers.

ALTHOUGH CRACK'S ORIGINS RE-main obscure - no one really knows who invented it -
the Dominicans are generally credited with having first developed it for a mass
market. The breakthrough seems to have come about by accident, an improvised
response to shifting consumer tastes. Until 1983, cocaine was used almost
exclusively in powder form (known as cocaine hydrochloride). Extremely
expensive, the drug was often consumed at parties and discos, where it was
sprinkled on mirrors and snorted - usually through a high-denomination bill.

Gradually, though, many snorters, seeking a more intense high, turned to
freebasing. This involved treating cocaine powder with ether and reducing it to
a crystalline base, which, when smoked, produced a sharp, pleasurable rush.
Unfortunately, freebasing was complicated and messy, the subject of instruction
booklets running on for many pages. It was dangerous, too, risking explosions
like the one that hospitalized the comedian Richard Pryor. To avoid the hassle,
customers began demanding that their dealers convert the powder to freebase in
advance.

This presented dealers with a dilemma. For, when cocaine is converted to
freebase, it loses much of its weight. If they wanted to sell ready-made
freebase at popular prices, dealers would have to absorb the loss - unless they
could find an undetectable filler .

The search was on. One researcher who observed it was Terry Williams, a
sociologist at the City University of New York who in 1982 began hanging out
with a teen-age cocaine gang in Washington Heights. Williams, who recounts his
experiences in a recently published book, ''The Cocaine Kids,'' recalls that the
local Dominican gangs ''came up with something called 'comeback,' '' a chemical
adulterant akin to lidocaine, a prescription anesthetic. ''When comeback is
blended with cocaine powder and cooked, all of it remains in the mix,'' Williams
explains. ''This became the first chemical that you could cut freebase with.''
The result was the prototype for crack.

Eventually dealers found other, less expensive substances that worked in
conjunction with comeback. The cheapest and most effective was common baking
soda. Formulas varied, but the typical instructions were as simple as a recipe
out of ''The 60-Minute Gourmet'':

Take two ounces cocaine hydrochloride. Mix with two ounces comeback and one
ounce Arm & Hammer. Add water. Bring to a boil. Let cool into a solid mass.
Break into small pieces. Smoke. Intense rush should follow instantly. Serves
2,000.

Before long, Dominican dealers were out on the streets of Washington Heights
peddling the new substance in pellet form at a few dollars a pop. (The name came
from the crackling sound the drug made when smoked.) The ''champagne'' of drugs,
once limited to the elite, was now available - somewhat diluted - to drifters
and dropouts, welfare mothers and unemployed youths. Dealers set up shop across
the street from schools, enticing teen-agers with free samples. They also
offered two-for-one deals and ''Mother's Day'' specials timed to coincide with
the arrival of welfare checks. Soon, customers were seeking out dealers rather
than the other way around, helping establish Washington Heights as America's
first major crack market.

The Dominicans then began fanning southward into Harlem and eastward into the
South Bronx. They also began supplying cocaine to other ethnic groups. In
Harlem, in South Jamaica, Queens, in the Brooklyn neighborhoods of Bushwick and
Brownsville, poor young blacks - jobless, uneducated and desperate - hungered
for a piece of the ''crazy money'' crack offered. To get started, it took as
little as an ounce of cocaine, an investment of perhaps $1,000.

Obtaining it was not much of a problem. By the mid-1980's, cocaine was arriving
in New York by the ton. Importation was controlled by the Cali Cartel,
Colombia's second-largest syndicate, after the Medellin Cartel. Desperate to
unload their supplies, the Colombians found dependable customers in the
Dominicans of Washington Heights. The two groups got along well, joined not only
by a common language but also by similar entrepreneurial values. The Dominicans
became New York's chief middlemen. As sales boomed to aspiring young dealers
outside Washington Heights, the city was eventually carved up along ethnic
lines, with Dominican-supplied blacks controlling Harlem, Queens and Brooklyn,
and the Dominicans dominant in upper Manhattan and the South Bronx.

FROM THE START, CRACK'S DISTRI-bution system distinguished it from all other
drugs. Heroin, for instance, was highly centralized. From poppy cultivation to
street sales, the trade was dominated by a single organization - the Mafia,
which, though ruthless, imposed a certain order on the trade. Gang wars were
rare, and police officers were never fired upon. Because distribution was so
tightly controlled, it was possible, with diligent police work, to put an entire
network out of business, as occurred in the French Connection case.

With crack, there could be no French Connection. In effect, it took
the(Continued on Page 58) ''organized'' out of organized crime. ''The unique
thing about crack is that for a relatively small investment you can buy some
cocaine, convert it to crack in the kitchen, and begin distributing almost
immediately,'' says John Featherly, staff coordinator of the D.E.A.'s cocaine
section in Washington. ''This makes for a lot of entrepreneurs.''

If heroin was the Fortune 500, crack was Mom and Pop. A typical crack
organization would have no more than seven or eight people - a street seller or
two, a steerer to direct customers, a guard to protect the merchandise, a police
lookout, a weigher (known as a ''scale boy''), a manager and a ''Mr. Big'' to
count the profits. Competition was intense. In busy areas like Washington
Heights, one block might host four or five crews, all contending for the same
consumer dollar.

With no overall hierarchy or command structure to impose order, turf wars broke
out over the most lucrative spots. Dealers regularly ripped off customers and
stole from one another, leading to frequent shootouts, stabbings and executions.
Crack created a new breed of urban guerrilla, members of a fierce, proliferating
army that left the police badly outnumbered and outgunned.

By late 1985, when crack first came to the attention of the national press, it
was deeply entrenched in New York's poor neighborhoods. In the rest of the
country, only two cities - Los Angeles and Miami - had comparable crack
problems. All three cities were major distribution points for cocaine, so it was
natural that crack would engulf them first. Soon, however, the drug began to
move out from these gateway cities and into the heartland. It would travel via a
fearsome new set of traffickers - illegal immigrants from Jamaica - who would
quickly and radically transform the way crack was distributed around the
country.

DELROY EDWARDS GREW up poor in the tough, stifling shantytowns of Kingston,
Jamaica. In 1980, at the age of 20, he went to work as a street enforcer for the
Jamaica Labor Party of Edward Seaga. Seaga was locked in a bitter election duel
with the People's National Party, headed by Michael Manley, and each side was
forming armed gangs to intimidate the other. The gangs did their job only too
well, killing 800 people by election day. After his victory, Seaga launched a
crackdown, and many gang members, feeling the heat, headed for the United
States. Among them was Delroy Edwards. Slipping into Brooklyn on a tourist visa,
he eventually made his way into the marijuana business, selling nickel bags out
of a neighborhood storefront.

At the beginning of 1985, Edwards learned to make crack. Soon he was selling
little else. He worked out of two ''flagship'' spots in Brooklyn - one, a
two-story house, the other, an abandoned brownstone near a housing project.
Enough poor blacks coughed up enough $5 bills to enable Edwards to buy a
$150,000 home on Long Island - and to pay for it in cash.

That wasn't enough for Edwards, who began looking to expand his business.
Unfortunately, New York was already crowded with crack dealers; outside the
city, however, lay plenty of virgin territory. In Washington, Baltimore and
Philadelphia, for instance, crack was just beginning to catch on. Enterprising
local dealers would travel to New York, buy a few ounces of cocaine, return
home, convert it into crack, and sell the product for three or four times the
New York street price. In the fall of 1986, Edwards traveled to Washington and
set up shop; by the following spring his lieutenants had established thriving
businesses in Philadelphia and Baltimore as well. At its peak, Edwards's
organization, known as the Rankers, employed 50 workers and made up to $100,000
a day.

The glory days did not last. Edwards - nicknamed ''Uzi'' for his taste in
weapons -was pathologically violent. People who crossed him were pistol-whipped,
beaten with baseball bats, shot in the legs. One 16-year-old worker, suspected
of cheating, was beaten unconscious with bats, scalded with boiling water, and
suspended by a chain from the ceiling until he died. Eventually, the police
caught up with Edwards, and in July a Brooklyn jury convicted him on 42 counts
of murder, assault, kidnapping and drug dealing. Edwards is now awaiting
sentencing. The Rankers have disintegrated.

But there are 40 other groups just like the Rankers, running crack out of New
York and Miami to points across the country. Posses, they're called, after their
members' affection for American westerns (and the guns used in them). Most, like
the Rankers, took shape as gangs during the 1980 Jamaican election, then fled to
the United States and regrouped. Here, their 10,000 to 20,000 members, organized
in posses with as few as 25 members and as many as several hundred, keep
incessantly on the move, slipping in and out of the many Jamaican communities
scattered across the country. To maintain loyalty, each posse generally
restricts membership to the residents of a particular neighborhood in Kingston.
Posse members travel with fake IDs, making it tough for policemen to identify
them. Sometimes, as a cover, they attach themselves to reggae groups touring the
country. Today, Jamaicans are believed to control 35 percent to 40 percent of
the nation's crack network.

''They're very good businessmen,'' says John A. O'Brien, an agent with the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (B.A.T.F.), the Federal agency that most
closely monitors the posses. ''They follow the law of supply and demand. When
they see that a vial of crack selling for $5 in New York will get $15 in Kansas
City, they'll move in.'' New York is their ''training school,'' O'Brien says,
''like going to Wharton. They'll take a guy doing a good job in Harlem and send
him to open an office in the Midwest.'' On his arrival in the new area, the
posse sales rep will rent a motel room and conduct a market survey of sorts to
determine the most lucrative spot in town. Then he'll rent an apartment or,
better yet, get a single female to lend him one in return for crack.

When asked how the posses move the drug from city to city, Bill McMullan, the
assistant special agent in charge of the D.E.A.'s Washington office, jokingly
cites the title of a recent movie: ''Planes, Trains and Automobiles.'' Amtrak,
Greyhound, commercial airlines, Federal Express, U.P.S. - the posses use them
all, regularly.

To carry cocaine on commercial flights, the Jamaicans tend to recruit overweight
women able to conceal one- or two-pound packages on their person. Also popular
are rental cars, preferably Volvos, sent over the nation's highways, preferably
Interstates. ''When I see some of the places the posses are operating, I can't
find any other explanation than the presence of a nearby Interstate,'' says
Stephen Higgins, the B.A.T.F.'s director in Washington.

In deciding where to strike, the Jamaicans generally follow the path of least
resistance. Cities with well-organized criminal groups, such as Newark, St.
Louis and Chicago, tend to get bypassed. At first glance, Chicago would seem to
be an ideal posse target. It is a major transportation hub, has a vast
inner-city population and offers block upon block of public housing projects, a
favorite crack target. But Chicago also has plenty of established homegrown
gangs doing a brisk business in cocaine and heroin. Intent on protecting their
trade, they have worked determinedly to keep outside traffickers from entering.
''When crack first appeared, some groups did try to come here and stake out some
territory, but they quickly left,' '' says Vincent Lang, chairman of the Chicago
Housing Authority. ''They wanted to remain alive.'' Today Chicago is awash in
powder cocaine, but crack is very hard to find. Perhaps wary of the anarchic
market forces crack has unleashed elsewhere, local dealers have opted out of
selling it themselves.

In other cities, dealers tend to be too weak and disorganized to stand up to the
posses and their tactics. The Jamaicans are fanatics for weapons. Taking
advantage of lax gun laws in Texas, Florida and Virginia, they have stockpiled
Uzis and AR-13 assault rifles. When breaking into a new area, the Jamaicans come
in with all barrels blazing. ''One cause of the violence we're seeing in many
cities is Jamaican traffickers pushing out American blacks,'' says Jonny Frank,
a prosecutor in the Delroy Edwards case.

According to the B.A.T.F., the posses have been responsible for approximately
1,000 murders since 1985. Washington, Philadelphia, Dallas, Houston, Kansas
City, Denver - all have suffered Jamaican invasions. In New York, the posses
have succeeded in taking over much of Brooklyn and Harlem, establishing
themselves as the city's second largest traffickers, after the Dominicans.

Many smaller cities have been hit, too. New York-based posses have set up a
thriving operation in Hartford, shipping their merchandise there via bus and
train. In New York State, the Jamaicans are moving crack up Interstate 87,
hitting such tiny Hudson Valley towns as Newburgh, Kingston and Saratoga
Springs. In West Virginia, the posses have established crack houses in
Martinsburg (population 13,000) and Charles Town (3,000). From there they have
moved out along Interstate 81, shipping crack as far north as Chambersburg, Pa.,
and as far south as Roanoke, Va.

Roanoke! It would be hard to imagine a more unlikely setting for crack. A town
of only 90,000, Roanoke is nestled in the heart of Virginia's dairy and orchard
country, several hours' drive from the nearest city. Yet members of the Shower
posse, the largest in the country, have managed to find their way there from New
York.

On closer examination, though, the presence of crack in Roanoke is really not so
surprising. Even towns with Norman Rockwell-like reputations have pockets of
alienation and despair, open sores in which crack can take hold and fester.
Roanoke has its own modest ghetto, beset by the same social ills afflicting
larger cities. ''We have a sizable minority community, and that's where the
Jamaicans set up,'' observes Tom Bondurant, an assistant United States attorney
in Roanoke. Demand was obviously high: crack was selling for $25 to $30 a vial -
more than enough to catch the attention of big-city traffickers.

Roanoke's case is typical. Across the country, crack has displayed remarkable
consistency, taking root in those sectors of society least able to resist it. In
places like Charles Town, Newburgh, and even Fort Wayne, Ind., crack has found a
foothold among poor blacks and - to a far lesser degree - Hispanics.

Will it stay that way? Or will crack break out like some threatening contagion
into the middle-class population, white and black? In some places, it already
has. In Washington - the city with the nation's highest rate of drug-related
violence -crack has leaped across the city lines into the middle-class suburbs
of Maryland and Virginia. Until June 1988, for instance, crack was virtually
unknown in Howard County, a tranquil, middle-class area midway between
Washington and Baltimore; today the drug is being distributed in 20 locations,
including some attractive town houses.

Dr. Mark F. Gold, the director of research at Fair Oaks Hospital in New Jersey
and the founder of the national ''800-COCAINE Helpline,'' detects a subtle shift
in the profile of America's crack users. Until recently, he says, virtually all
of those calling in to seek help with crack were young inner-city residents,
poor and unemployed. Today, they remain the most common users, but, Gold says,
''crack appears to be making some inroads into suburban and rural America. I now
get many calls from the Sunbelt, whereas before I didn't.'' Gold, a member of
William Bennett's kitchen cabinet, says that the nation has reached a ''turning
point. Whether crack expands and changes the typical crack user or not, only
time will tell.''

TodAY'S REALITY, meanwhile, is most visible in Kansas City, Mo. A year ago, the
city was declaring victory in the war on crack. A Federal organized-crime task
force had succeeded in dismantling a thriving crack operation run by the
Waterhouse posse. Working out of a fortresslike house in the heart of the inner
city, the Jamaicans had employed an estimated 1,000 people at one point. Demand
was so great that the posse had had to import Jamaicans from New York and Miami.
This proved to be its undoing. The new workers felt little loyalty to the group,
and, when arrested, tended to talk, providing the task force with invaluable
information. In late 1986, the Feds struck, raiding ghetto crack houses and
rounding up dealers. Eventually, 178 traffickers were prosecuted and 25 more
deported. By the start of 1987, no more than 75 posse members remained in town.
Across the nation, Kansas City was hailed as a stunning success story.

The sense of triumph was short-lived, however. ''A year ago, we were really
feeling good about the successes we had had,'' says the first assistant United
States attorney Rob Larsen, who directed the task force from 1983 to 1987.
''Then the L.A. gangs began arriving.''

Los Angeles's black street gangs are the fastest-growing set of crack
traffickers in the country. Already they have established a national network
second only to that of the posses. They are grouped into confederations known as
the Bloods and the Crips, each with its own color (blue for Crips, red for
Bloods), slang and hand signals. Fiercely territorial, the gangs have
traditionally concentrated on fighting one another over impoverished patches of
south-central Los Angeles.

Crack has changed that. Sensing the enormous profit potential in the drug, the
Bloods and the Crips are now paying less attention to one another and more to
transporting crack. Today, more than 10,000 gang members are at work in some 50
cities from Seattle to Baltimore. Generally, they emulate the tactics of the
posses, infiltrating black communities by working through local contacts. So
far, the gangs and the posses have avoided fighting one another. In fact, they
seem to be dividing up the country between them -the gangs working eastward from
California, the posses westward from New York. The two national networks are
gradually crisscrossing - with devastating consequences for towns caught in the
middle.

Thus, in Kansas City, when the crackdown on the posses created a vacuum, the
Bloods and Crips quickly filled it. Today, crack is just as plentiful in the
city as it had been before the Waterhouse roundup. Meanwhile, the Waterhouse
posse, routed from Kansas City, is beginning to resurface in Des Moines and
Omaha -even across the river in Kansas City, Kan. ''It was a startling
experience'' says Larsen. ''Nobody feels like we're making any substantial
progress at all.'' Crack, he adds ruefully, ''is a very difficult thing for law
enforcement to deal with.''

Indeed, even if the posses and L.A. gangs were somehow tamed - an extremely
unlikely prospect - there are plenty of other groups ready to take their place.
Both Cubans and Guyanese have established fledgling interstate operations, while
Haitian traffickers based in Fort Pierce, Fla., are transporting crack along the
East Coast, via migrant farm workers. In Miami, Detroit and countless smaller
cities across the country, local black rings are at work, looking intently for
opportunities to expand.

Not everyone has lost hope. Robert M. Stutman, special agent in charge of the
D.E.A.'s field office in New York, points to a natural selection process taking
place in the crack trade, with smaller organizations gradually being absorbed by
larger ones. ''The crack business is becoming more highly organized, more like
heroin,'' says Stutman. In New York, he observes, ''crack is now controlled by a
finite number of groups. That was not true two years ago.'' The effect, he says,
is to provide law-enforcement officials with a ''more discernible target.''

Stutman cites a Dominican organization in Washington Heights that, in three
short years, went from being street-corner peddlers to becoming a multitier
conglomerate selling more than 10,000 vials of crack a day. The group was so
well organized that it marketed its crack under a brand name (''Based Balls'').
Such practices eventually attracted the attention of the D.E.A., which, after an
intensive investigation, put the group out of business.

Unfortunately, the D.E.A.'s efforts had little effect on the supply of crack in
New York - the usual outcome of law-enforcement action aimed at the drug. No
matter how determined the effort to root it out, crack seems always to thrive.
That has been the experience in Kansas City. In Brooklyn, crack continues to
sell for $3 a vial despite the prosecution of Delroy Edwards. In Washington, the
police recently seized Rayful Edmond 3d, allegedly the city's largest dealer,
but crack remains available in 120 locations throughout town. ''Right after we
locked up Edmond, the homicide rate slowed down for a while,'' says Collin
Younger, commander of the narcotics branch of the D.C. police. ''Now it's
beginning to pick up again as other dealers fight over his territory.'' Crack is
getting so plentiful in the District of Columbia that Younger expects the price
to drop any day now.

As if crack weren't enough to contend with, a new drug has recently appeared on
the horizon. Called ice, it is a smokable version of methamphetamine, or speed.
It creates a high that lasts for up to 24 hours, compared with crack's 20-minute
high, followed by a ''crash'' so severe that it can resemble paranoid
schizophrenia.

President Bush's anti-drug strategy, unveiled on Sept. 5, calls for a heavy
reliance on police and prosecutors. Fully 70 percent of its projected $7.9
billion spending will go for law enforcement, including $1.6 billion for new
prisons and $3.1 billion for state and local police. The remaining 30 percent
will go toward treatment, prevention and education.

Judging from the record of the police to date, though, the Bush plan seems
unlikely to make any real dent in the amount of crack on the streets. A sense of
resignation is settling over America's drug agents. More and more of them are
beginning to sound like Francis Hall. For four years, until his retirement in
March, Hall served as commanding officer of the New York Police Department's
narcotics division, making him, in effect, New York's top narc. Hall helped
design the Tactical Narcotics Teams (T.N.T.) -the special police units that
carry out sweeps through drug-infested neighborhoods - that today are the city's
principal weapon in the fight against drugs.

Looking back over his four years on the front lines, Hall compares the war on
crack to another conflict. ''Drug enforcement,'' he says, ''is like the Vietnam
War. In Vietnam, we underestimated the number of Vietcong and their will to
fight. We appear to be doing the same thing with street-level drug
traffickers.'' Noting that the staff of the narcotics division has increased
from 525 in 1985 to 2,000 today, Hall observes, ''It's like Westmoreland asking
Washington for two more divisions. We lost the Vietnam War with a half-million
men. We're doing the same thing with drugs.''

The Vietnam analogy might be taken a step further. The Vietcong grew largely
because of the social, political and economic breakdown engulfing Vietnam. No
matter how much firepower the United States expended, the guerrillas always
managed to regroup, nurtured by the poverty and injustice around them. Much the
same is true of crack in America. No matter how many sweeps, raids and busts our
police departments mount against crack traffickers, they always manage to
resurface. Only when we address the conditions that have given rise to crack -
the desperation of our inner cities - will we begin to see the light at the end
of the tunnel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Two photos show a dealer selling Crack near the Florida A&M University
in Tallahassee, Florida. 1988. (MARK WALHEISER/TALLAHASSEE DEMOCRAT)(pg.38); A
woman on New York's Upper West Side smoking crack. (MERRY ALPERN)(PG.39); Crack
use in Anchorage, Alaska. 1987. (AL GRILLO/PICTURE GROUP), An addict displays
rocks of Crack valued in Talahassee, Florida at $10 (left) and $20. 1988 (MARK
LHEISER/TALAHASSEE DEMOCRAT)(pg. 40); Kansas City, Missouri police make arrests
at a suspected ''crack house''in the Swope Park area where the police saw as
many as 52 cars stop in an hour. October 1988.(JOHN SLEEZER/KANSAS CITY
TIMES)(pg. 41)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Quest for a Pacific Beach

BYLINE: By Phyllis Rose; Phyllis Rose is the author of ''Jazz Cleopatra''
(Doubleday), a biography of Josephine Baker.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 35, Column 2; Sophisticated Traveler Magazine

LENGTH: 2700 words


UNDER SOME COCONUT PALMS NEAR THE entrance to Manuel Antonio Park, a woman sells
juice. Little capital investment has gone into this business: a booth, a glass
juice squeezer for oranges, a machete to cut coconuts constitute the operation.
The woman twists and presses the oranges for me with wholehearted vigor. I hope
her hands are clean, because I really want this juice.

It's hot, and I have to cross some open beach and wade a stream to reach the
entrance to the park, where rocks and trees will give shade.

American tourists who make their way to Manuel Antonio Park, on the Pacific
coast of Costa Rica, tend to carry binoculars and serious cameras along with
their sunscreen. This is a naturalist's paradise, 1,707 acres of jungle coming
right to the high-tide mark on some of the most beautiful beaches in the world.
The park protects 109 species of mammals, including white-faced and howler
monkeys, sloths, coati-mundis, raccoons, iguanas and squirrel monkeys, for which
this is one of the last remaining habitats. There are also 78 species of fish
and 184 species of birds. One devout American bird watcher, who hiked to a
remote part of the park with a guide and sat in the same spot from sunup to
sundown, said that he had seen more kinds of birds in that single day than he
had seen in all the rest of his bird-watching life.

I arrived in Costa Rica exhausted. Because of flight delays and postponements,
it had taken us about a day to get from New York to Quepos, the town nearest the
park, by way of San Jose, the country's capital. I wasn't eager for ambitious
trips to see the wildlife. Fortunately, in this area, the wildlife often comes
to you. At the hotels, iguanas stretch and pose in the sun as you eat lunch. At
the beach, white-faced monkeys dance nervously up and down the trees, descending
toward an offered banana, retreating, returning, snatching the banana and
heading to the leaves to eat in peace. At midday, my friends and I sometimes
looked up into the leafy canopy over the path and saw the monkeys sleeping,
tummy-down on the branches, with arms and legs hanging like socks on a
clothesline. (I preferred them asleep. Awake, their solemn human faces promised
a wisdom they could not deliver. Instead of revealing the meaning of life, there
was this undignified grabbing for bananas.) Manuel Antonio Park, four miles
south of the town of Quepos, was founded in 1972 largely to protect the beaches
and adjacent forest from real estate development such as has encased so much of
Mexico's coastline in condominiums and hotels. A national park system occupying
nearly 10 percent of Costa Rica's landmass, it is a far-sighted government's
hedge against destruction of this country's glory, its virgin forests, by
developers, loggers and slash-and-burn farmers. (By many estimates, whatever
forest is not preserved by law in this country the size of West Virginia will
have disappeared within 10 years.) There are four accessible beaches at Manuel
Antonio: Espadilla, Espadilla Sur, Manuel Antonio and Puerto Escondido. Most
people, however, simply call the nearer beaches by the numbers One, Two and
Three. I chose to concentrate on Beaches Two (Espadilla Sur) and Three (Manuel
Antonio). Beach One (Espadilla) is not technically within the park, and though
it is spectacularly beautiful to walk on, it is extremely dangerous for
swimming. Riptides, which can overcome even experienced swimmers if they panic,
are frequent on Beach One; in our first week at Quepos, five people drowned, all
at Beach One, all Costa Rican tourists. (Puerto Escondido, the fourth of the
beaches, is accessible only at low tide. It is an hour's hike from the park
entrance along an overgrown path; to get there, you must sign in in a ranger's
book and be warned about poisonous snakes. Personally, I didn't think it was
worth it.) Beach Two, on the north side of the high, forested bluff called
Cathedral Point, which divides the farther beaches, offers a long stretch of
pure white sand, with offshore rocks and awesome views across the bay and into
the mountains. B EACH THREE, ON THE south side of the point, is totally
protected, with no surf whatsoever. Both provide perfect swimming -soft sand, no
pebbles or shells to hurt the feet as you enter the water, warm water (83 to 85
degrees on the average) with occasional cold spots for refreshment, gentle waves
or none. The snorkeling on the north side of Cathedral Point is very good,
although you have to remember to put heavy sunscreen everywhere.

The Costa Rican sun is equatorial, brutal. (Go due west, and if you missed the
Philippines, you'd hit Vietnam.) It is impossible to sit in this sun for long,
no matter how much you love sunbathing. Fortunately, the beach is edged in
first- and second-growth trees, towering natural umbrellas. Many Costa Ricans
bring hammocks and hang them from branches. On Beach Three, there are picnic
tables under the trees. Each beach also has toilet facilities and showers, set
back unobtrusively in the forest.

The most common tree on the shore is the manzanillo, whose shimmering foliage
seems particularly attractive to sit under. But a sign at the entrance to the
park warns (in Spanish) that the manzanillo's fruit, bark, twigs and leaves
contain a highly toxic sap - if any drips on your skin or towel, it can cause a
nasty burn. We played it safe and made camp beneath a banyan tree whose fruit
attracted iridescent hummingbirds and tanagers. Another day we tried lying under
a coconut palm. Beach life here is made of such decisions; which tree to lie
under, which beach to swim at. F OR HOURS, I LAY ON the beach in the shade and
watched the ocean and the offshore rocks, which, as the light played over their
monumental forms, seemed like natural, primeval, Pacific versions of Monet's
haystacks. I was aware of the jungle at my back. I heard the birds and smelled,
sometimes, the sausage tree, whose long, potato-like fruits, when they fall and
smash, smell like the essence of everything rotten.

One day when we felt unusually energetic, we walked the nature trail around
Cathedral Point, which takes about 45 minutes. Roots on the path and slippery
leaves give a taste of the difficulties of jungle hiking. The path climbs
steeply through the cooling trees to a hot, exposed point surprisingly high over
the rocks below, reminding me - not for the first time -of Capri, and
particularly of the spot from which Tiberius pushed his no-longer-favorite
favorites to their deaths.

My friends and I were staying at the Mariposa, a 10-suite hotel high on a
mountaintop overlooking the Manuel Antonio beaches, Cathedral Point, the
offshore rocks and islands and the vast Pacific. None of the good hotels in this
area are directly on the beach, and getting to and from the beach becomes
something of a project. One can walk from the Mariposa down a broad path through
the forest to the northernmost end of Beach One in 15 minutes (coming back up
the steep path takes at least 25), to the park entrance in another 15 minutes
and to Beach Three in another 10. One can take a Quepos city bus, which passes
in front of the hotel, find a cab or hitch an occasional ride with the hotel van
to the oasis of juice vendors near the park entrance. If figuring out how to get
to and from the beach every day is a problem - and the heat makes even little
problems seem big - still, it's about the only problem one has.

Eventually, we did the really lazy thing and rented a car. We parked in the
shade of the coconut palms near the juice vendors, behind the $15-a-night cabins
on the beach. (We met a 26-year-old Californian who was staying there with her
husband and described the cabins as ''pretty basic.'') A boy of 11 asked us if
we wanted him to watch the car. ''Watch it?'' said my friend Wendy, who speaks
Spanish. ''What could happen to it?'' He smiled happily and pointed up at the
coconuts. ''Very dangerous,'' he said.

A protection racket? In any case, we gave him some change and found him seated
by the car, watching, when we returned at the end of the morning. He smiled
again and held up his forefinger close to his thumb. ''One came that close!'' he
said. W HEN DAVID TUCKER, the resident owner and manager of the Mariposa, and
his partner, Garth Kistler, built the hotel 13 years ago, there was no water in
the area and no electricity. They had to bring in both, as though they were
building a small city. The hotel has an open-air, tile-floored dining area,
framed by large arches and edged in pots of crimson bougainvillea, that offers
knock-'em-dead views - as do all the two-story villas, which are ranked a few
yards away from the main house.

There are no drapes or shades in the villas. The sun and birdsong wake us at
5:30. Life gets going early here, because at midday a siesta is the only
sensible activity. After the beach and lunch, we nap and hope that clouds will
come out and cover the sun. Later, we sit on our terrace and watch the day pass
as though at the most absorbing performance. The sound of the ocean and the
songs of the birds induce a meditative trance easily focused on the offshore
rocks - perfect objects of meditation from this distance, the Pacific rippling
around them like sand in a Japanese garden.

In the late afternoon, people tend to move to the pool, with its thatch-roofed
bar, and gather in force to watch the sun go down at 5:45. (Because we are so
close to the Equator, there is little variation in the length of day.) A fanfare
of cicadas announces the sunset, then a hush falls, and in the silence we can
hear the breakers. Daiquiris or cameras in hand, we turn to face the orange sun.
It is one of the simple, pleasurable rituals of a place so lovely that pleasure
needn't be complicated.

Nature may be pretty to look at, but it's not benign. That is something you
don't forget in Costa Rica. One night during our stay, it rained, a welcome,
cooling rain, torrential but short-lived. The rain uprooted some trees in the
jungle, including one that fell onto the toilet facilities behind Beach Three,
destroying one of the few works of man in the vast area of the park.

The ocean demands the most wariness of all. On Beach One, there are no signs
warning of the riptides, such as one sees on dangerous beaches in California.
Don Melton, an American who has lived in Quepos since the mid-70's, has been
working on a beach safety program that would educate the public about the
currents and place lifeguards on the beaches. Surprisingly, his goals are
controversial. Some local businessmen think that to publicize the danger would
scare away tourists. M R. MELTON AND HIS wife, Anita Myketuk, are both
Berkeley-trained archeologists who came to the region to work on pre-Columbian
turtle traps. The Quepo Indians, who lived here in centuries past, built
semicircular stone barriers on the beach, topped by forked poles. At night,
decoy female turtles were used to lure the males behind the trap, where they
were caught by the receding tide. Immense stones from one of these traps are
still visible, sunk in the sand at the far end of the third beach.

In 1519, the Quepos scared away Ponce de Leon, the first Spanish explorer to
investigate this coast, when he proposed to land during their sacred season of
gathering turtle eggs. But when Juan Vasquez de Coronado arrived in 1563, the
Quepos welcomed him, on the condition that he help them win back prisoners taken
by a tribe down the coast. In one of his toughest battles, Coronado stormed the
neighboring village and freed the Quepo prisoners.

Three Franciscan priests accompanying Coronado erected the first Catholic
mission in Costa Rica in the area of Puerto Escondido. Although relations
between the Indians and the Catholics were not good, the mission survived until
1716, when it was abandoned and its location forgotten. Mr. Melton discovered
the site in 1974 and is trying to raise money to preserve it. Parts of the
mission have already been encroached upon by farmland.

Very little of the Indian heritage survives in Costa Rica today. Tourists who
come here expecting a culture like that of Guatemala or Mexico will be
disappointed. There are no ruins, no colorful houses and, except for hammocks
and braided belts, virtually no crafts, no textiles.

Costa Rica never had a great Indian empire like that of the Mayans or Aztecs,
and whatever Indian population existed was decimated by war and disease early in
colonial times. With no exploitable work force and without mineral wealth, Costa
Rica - in a sense buffered by its poverty - largely escaped the brutal hand of
Spanish colonialism. Colonists and Indians both worked at the subsistence level
and class antagonism could hardly exist. Alone among the countries of Central
America, Costa Rica developed a habit of tranquillity.

WHEN I TOLD PEOPLE I was going to Costa Rica, many reacted as though I were
going to a war zone. In fact, even though it is bordered by Panama on one side
and Nicaragua on the other, the country itself could hardly be more peaceful.
Known as the Switzerland of Central America, Costa Rica abolished its army in
1949. It is a functioning democracy with regular elections and a higher literacy
rate than the United States. Costa Ricans - Ticos, as they call themselves -
tend to be extremely proud of their country, of its democratic tradition, its
commitment to education, its beauty and its peace.

Although one may not be able to bring back interesting souvenirs from Costa
Rica, one can bring back the memory of people proud of their government,
friendly, at peace - rare anywhere, rarer still in Latin America. And one can
bring back the memory of virgin forests, pristine beaches, clear water and
abundant wildlife increasingly hard to find as the war goes on between nature
and man.

ON AND OFF THE BEACH

In Quepos, Phyllis Rose writes, ''The only concession to tourists is a gift shop
called La Buena Nota, run by Anita Myketuk, which is invaluable as much for the
information she offers as for the goods it sells. She provides a sheet
explaining riptides, can arrange a fishing charter or a house rental, sells
beach wear, hammocks and unusual canvas hats that are manufactured in the Costa
Rican highlands. She also sells the best guidebook, 'The New Key to Costa Rica,'
by Beatrice Blake and Anne Becher ($9.95). Her two-bedroom furnished house near
La Mariposa rents for $350 a week. Call 506-770345 or 770292.''

La Mariposa (800-223-6510) offers 10 villas, each with private deck, which cost
$150 a night, including breakfast and a fixed-menu dinner. Children under 15 are
not accepted; neither are credit cards. The villas include a bedroom, living
room, bathroom and foyer. There are ceiling fans in the bedrooms - the constant
breezes at that elevation make air-conditioning unnecessary, although some
guests have complained that the rooms get too much sun. The hotel provides van
service to the beach several times a day. The restaurant, which is open to the
public, offers such dishes as shrimp in sweet cream and white wine and shish
kebab of pineapple, plantain and papaya; dinner for two, with wine, costs about
$60. Reservations for villas should be made well in advance; as much as a year
is recommended by the manager, David Tucker, who says, ''We specialize in
stressed-out New Yorkers.''

Among the less expensive hotels, La Karahe (506-770-170) is set at the foot of
the mountain, sandwiched between beach and park. There are nine villas, each
with bedroom with ceiling fan, bathroom and patio overlooking the ocean. Rates
are $40 a night in low season, $50 between December and May. (An additional 21
air-conditioned units are planned; these will probably rent for $60 to $70 a
night.) A steak or lobster dinner for two, with wine, costs about $20.
Reservations for high season should be made six months in advance.

Also near the beach are such cabin colonies as La Velabar Cabinas (506-770-413),
eight units with a view of the mountain, bathroom, ceiling fan and deck, for $33
a night. The restaurant specializes in fresh fish and seafood; dinner for two,
with wine, is about $25. Reservations should be made at least a month in
advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Costa Rica

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF AN ANGELHEADED HIPSTER

BYLINE: By PAUL BERMAN; Paul Berman, a New York critic, was a contributor to the
anthology, ''On the Poetry of Allen Ginsberg,'' edited by Lewis Hyde.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2220 words



GINSBERG
A Biography.
By Barry Miles.
Illustrated. 588 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $24.95.

The key to Allen Ginsberg's singular life surely lies in the attitude toward
madness that was thrust on him by the circumstances of his childhood. His
father, Louis, was a respected lyric poet and a sensible man. But his mother,
Naomi, was exactly how her son described her in his searing poem ''Kaddish'':
warm, loving, clinically paranoid, unbearable, neurotically nudist, dragged off
now and then to mental institutions, counseled, lobotomized, helpless. To win
his father's confidence, Mr. Ginsberg had to demonstrate a sane and upstanding
outlook, which was easily done, since he was pretty much sane and upstanding
himself. To win his mother's confidence, he had to participate in her deluded
imaginings. He did this, too. It was a matter of a child learning to get what he
needs. Mr. Ginsberg accustomed himself to living in the world of sanity and the
world of madness at the same time.

His initial ambition, when he registered at Columbia College in 1943, was to
become a Clarence Darrow-type labor lawyer, which corresponded to his father's
socialist and liberal ideals. But almost immediately, as he would later write in
''Kaddish,'' ''a moral avalanche, whole mountains of homosexuality'' fell on
him. He drifted into the student netherworld that for many decades had sustained
itself on Morningside Heights - half-intellectual, half-criminal, more than
half-crazy. His companions were fanatics of decadent literature, the
avant-garde, morphine, benzedrine and petty crime. His apartment kept filling up
with stolen goods. An enormous cigarette machine occupied his kitchen.

One day he found himself fleeing with friends from a stolen car that overturned
during a police chase. Lionel Trilling and other Columbia professors were always
having to mobilize forces to keep him out of jail. Mark Van Doren told Mr.
Ginsberg that ''some of us here have been thinking that it might be a good thing
for you to hear the clank of iron.'' A startling number of his friends,
especially the girlfriends of friends, ended up killing themselves. Three
members of his circle had the experience of killing someone else.

Yet from college days to now, Mr. Ginsberg himself has never sunk into
addiction, thievery, violence, suicide, murder or instability. In the years when
he might have been most susceptible to lures of glamorous doom, when he was too
young to know better or when he was always falling hopelessly in love with
reckless men who did not always reciprocate his sentiments, somehow he, nearly
alone among his circle, held down jobs in fields like market research. He worked
as copy boy at the Associated Press. He did spend seven months at Columbia
Presbyterian Psychiatric Institute, as part of a legal maneuver arranged by
Trilling to keep away the clank of iron. But Mr. Ginsberg was not even mad, let
alone criminal. He merely selected his friends and lovers from among people who
were, and declined to judge them in any way but favorably, and adored them
limitlessly - just as he lived with his mother's ravings about Mussolini and
Roosevelt and wires in her head, and interpreted her in a sympathetic light, and
was ''crazed for love'' of her, as his father said.

The strange leap Mr. Ginsberg was always making between sanity and madness
accounts, I think, for the distinctive traits of his best poetry. His very early
work, when he trod in his father's traditionalist path, was not too successful,
as Barry Miles, a British journalist and writer, shows in ''Ginsberg: A
Biography.'' Later he built a style around his peculiarities - a grand style in
what he called an ''open breath'' mode of sometimes long lines, like Whitman,
but in which the individual notes were characteristically anything but grand. He
was rueful to the point of pathos. He dropped articles and capitalized nouns to
induce an air of bug-eyed mystical grandiosity. He was ridiculous. And the
contrast between grand and grandiose, the little pleading voice that sometimes
peaked out from huge sweeping lines, the saxophone honks where melody should
have been, the incongruity - these expressed him perfectly.

The effect was heartbreaking, and funny. For Mr. Ginsberg, in his best poems,
has always been a supremely funny writer, no matter how grotesque or painful his
topics. Mr. Miles tells us that ''Howl'' in its first thrilling readings at
Berkeley, Calif., in 1955 caused the audience to shout ''go!'' between the lines
and to boo and hiss at every invocation of ''Moloch.''

Mr. Ginsberg's ardor for his vulnerable and dangerous comrades led him, together
with Jack Kerouac, to construct a mythology to accompany the style. He invented
a sky with new stars in it, in Robert Duncan's phrase. The invention progressed
in stages. In the early subterranean years he pictured a pursuit of wisdom,
Rimbaud-like, through every sort of hair-raising experience. Later he took to
affirming that wisdom sought was found. This elevated his ''angelheaded
hipsters'' into a breakthrough in consciousness. William S. Burroughs and others
who were genuine writers, the hipsters who were more in the vein of mad
scribblers, the characters who were more marginal still, the whole raffish lot
of them became, in this greater mythic stage, literary geniuses.

Other writers recoiled in irritation, as if Mr. Ginsberg were pulling a hoax
(Mr. Miles quotes a puzzled and annoyed Richard Howard), or else concluded that
the author of ''Howl'' was an idiot, or figured that he was weirdly flogging his
own career. But he wasn't so much promoting himself as venting his never-ending
ardor. And in conducting his lifelong, touching, impassioned campaign on behalf
of companions who were madder and wilder than he, Mr. Ginsberg stumbled, as
early as 1958, on still another stage of the mythology.

The angelheaded geniuses became a project for spreading ''Love bliss''
throughout the younger generation. This, the most improbable of Mr. Ginsberg's
ideas, was, of course, a worldwide success. The poet discovered that
down-at-heels mysticism, love of spontaneity, the ''sexual Fourth of July
fireworks'' (in Saul Bellow's phrase), the conviction that the crazy have
insight and the sober are blind, the paranoid fear of C.I.A. conspiracies that
later turned out to exist, the cult of ecstasy and long car rides - in short,
everything that Mr. Ginsberg had worked so hard to express, except the charming
ruefulness and comic self-consciousness - was suddenly the key to history.

The vanguard found followers. The circle of friends became neighborhoods. An
almost political utopianism emerged, and atop the whole astounding development
sprouted tufts of half-serious millenarian expectation. And still there were
more followers, until Mr. Ginsberg, on a whim, telephoned the White House to
expound his views on the war in Vietnam, and it was Henry Kissinger who got on
the other end.

The political sensibility that flowed from Mr. Ginsberg's circle to the mass
counterculture of the 1960's and 70's seems inevitable in hindsight, like a
hurricane or a population boom. But Mr. Miles's biography reminds us that
avant-garde traditions of extremism, recklessness, madness and obscurity aren't
necessarily the brothers of sunny enlightenment. Kerouac was a McCarthyite and
an anti-Semite, good for an occasional pro-Hitler taunt. Mr. Miles's biography
harps so insistently on Kerouac's nasty rightism, along with his tightfistedness
and other unpleasant personal traits, that one begins to wonder what anyone saw
in Kerouac once his looks were gone.

William Burroughs likewise cultivated, in his younger days, right-wing
instincts, mostly along avenues of loony misogyny. And even Mr. Ginsberg, with
an infinite ability to tolerate noxious points of view, was quick to celebrate
predecessors with fascist pasts. This biography records the pious visits he paid
in Europe to Ezra Pound and (together with Mr. Burroughs) to Louis-Ferdinand
Celine. Pound, as it turned out, was regretful about the past and bemoaned his
''stupid suburban prejudice'' against the Jews. ''At seventy I realized that
instead of being a lunatic, I was a moron,'' he said. Celine, unrepentant, was
railing against the Jews still. Which didn't inhibit Mr. Ginsberg from saying,
''We salute you as the greatest writer in France!''

It is daunting to picture what might have happened if Mr. Ginsberg's harmonium
and finger cymbals had ever led the crowd in directions more congenial to his
right-wing friends. But Mr. Ginsberg's non-netherworld orientation, his Clarence
Darrow ambitions, were solidly rooted. It was just that, as he grew older, what
his father called his ''former, fine, zeal for a liberal progressive, democratic
society'' blossomed into philosophical anarchism, the ''big pacifist eyes''
widened and Mr. Ginsberg roamed the country preaching, as a base for liberty and
fraternity, a merry doctrine of free love (with emphasis on bisexual orgies and
allowance for Socratic teacher-student erotics) together with pharmaceutical
mind-expansion and Hindu and Buddhist mysticism.

Mr. Miles has very little to say that is critical of Mr. Ginsberg, but he does
object to the consistency with which the poet, ever serious about his anarchist
inspirations, has stood for individual rights. In 1965 Mr. Ginsberg visited Cuba
at the invitation of the Castro Government. He could not believe the persecution
of homosexuals and literary rebels; he thought he was entering an ''Orwellian
dreamworld -Total suppression of conscious and unconscious fantasy everywhere,''
and launched a campaign from his Havana hotel room to embarrass the Cuban
Government. He said he wanted to sleep with Fidel Castro's brother, Raul. And
the Cuban Government, which came to regard Mr. Ginsberg as an American agent
(thereby mirroring the F.B.I., which cast in reverse the same cold eye on
Ginsbergian radicalism), rousted him from bed and put him on a plane to
Czechoslovakia. (There a crowd of 100,000 cheering students elected him King of
the May under circumstances that were deemed unconducive to Communist order, and
he was again deported.) The biographer is not amused. He views Mr. Ginsberg's
Havana protests as indicative of a narrow-minded lack of sympathy for third
world revolution.

In my own estimation, Mr. Ginsberg's Havana troublemaking points to a canny
acuity, not to mention unshakable courage. Three years after his distinguished
double deportation, Mr. Ginsberg joined the anti-Vietnam War demonstrations
outside the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago and got up, in his
capacity as grand guru of American anti-imperialism, to address the throng. His
speech consisted of nothing but ''Om'' and other mantric syllables - for seven
hours. But how was Mr. Ginsberg's turn at the microphone any worse than what
Chicago's other speakers managed to do? Some leaders of the super-radical left
have discredited super-radicalism from that day until the present. Leaders of
the Democratic Party have been dismembering the Democratic Party. Mr. Ginsberg's
seven-hour syllabic incantation was one of the most sensible speeches anyone
made during that entire political crisis.

This biography has its peculiarities - a severity, for instance, not only toward
Kerouac but toward the Beat publisher Lawrence Ferlinghetti and toward Mr.
Ginsberg's life companion, Peter Orlovsky, the son of a Czarist guard at the
Winter Palace. We learn more than we might like to know about Mr. Ginsberg's
tourist impressions of the Prado and the Taj Mahal (''a sublime joint''), more
than seems necessary about his relations with Bob Dylan, the Beatles and the
Clash, but less than might be expected about John Hollander, Kenneth Rexroth,
Robert Lowell (''America's leading poet,'' Mr. Ginsberg called him, after
turning him on to LSD; ''a good guy with a psycho streak'') or a dozen others.
We read that Mr. Ginsberg's Columbia schoolmate Norman Podhoretz joined him in
signing a petition defending Timothy Leary, the LSD guru. Tell us about that
petition, please. But the page turns and the biography moves on.

The image of Mr. Ginsberg begins to suffer, which was anything but the
biographer's intention. Mr. Ginsberg's doctrine of ''first thought, best
thought'' has encouraged him to see as poems all sorts of prose jottings and
notebook scribblings, and his belief that poetry ought to provide seamless
transcriptions of the mind has encouraged him to publish the jottings and
scribbles. The biographer, who ought to have focused our attention on the best
work, manages instead, with ever-erring ear, to pepper his text with the
flattest phrases he can plunder from unpublished writings. Mr. Miles, slightly
bug-eyed himself, is too entrenched within the Ginsberg redoubt to address his
work adequately to the hostile outside world or to mount a proper defense of Mr.
Ginsberg. His book skillfully evokes the poet's childhood, authoritatively
expresses his opinions on sundry matters of later life and work, gives him his
due as life force of youthful rebellion and the 60's counterculture. Read it;
you'll enjoy yourself. But ''Ginsberg'' by Barry Miles, as a product of the
Ginsberg cult, is more a sign of than an explanation of Mr. Ginsberg's influence
over others.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Allen Ginsberg (Camera Press/Dmitri Kasterne)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE HOSPITAL, WAITING FOR A SAVIOR

BYLINE: by RICK BASS; Rick Bass is the author of a collection of short stories,
''The Watch.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 614 words



DIRTY WORK
By Larry Brown.
236 pp. Chapel Hill, N.C.:
Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill.
$16.95.

Two men, one black, one white, lie in a ward in a V.A. hospital, alone except
for the black nurse who ministers to them. One of the men is a quadruple
amputee, injured in Vietnam; it's been 22 years since he lost his arms and his
legs. The other man, injured in the latter days of the same war, has only
recently arrived at the hospital.

This is the central scene, and the story, of Larry Brown's first novel, ''Dirty
Work.'' The amputee's name is Braiden Chaney, and he's been waiting for a
savior. He thinks he's found one in the other man, Walter James, who's been
hospitalized because he's become prone to sudden and random fainting spells, due
to a wartime head injury. Over the course of a day and a night, from their
adjacent beds in the ward, the two men tell each other their stories.

Braiden and Walter, both from Mississippi, have both been through some tough
times, even as children. But these seem almost trifling once Braiden and Walter
start recalling the horrors of war. They narrate the novel in alternating
chapters, talking at first of their stateside lives. Walter remembers, or tries
to remember, his love affair with a young woman back in Mississippi whose body
bore terrible scars. Braiden, in turn, remembers calmer times from his past. But
they talk about the war as well - a sentence here, a sentence there.

Braiden, who comes from a poor black family, remembers, for example, the last
morning before he went off to war: ''I woke up in my mama's house with her
cooking biscuits for me. Smelled the same way every morning. Always smelled the
same. She never woke me. Didn't have to. Biscuits woke me. . . . I laid in there
that morning. Had my uniform hanging up in there. Soldier of the most powerful
nation in the world. And all I could think was Why, you know, why?''

Mr. Brown writes about such Southern cliches as home cooking as easily as you
please, as if he doesn't realize he's in dangerous waters. But he comes through
cleanly, making it all seem new. The same is true when he writes of the macabre
and the violent. The men (and the women) in ''Dirty Work'' somehow manage to
stay ahead of their many horrors, never yielding to them, and so the grisliness
of the novel is kept at bay. There are no willing victims here, not even the
limbless Braiden, despite the decision he reaches at the novel's conclusion.
Instead, the vitality and humor of the characters' voices rises above the echoes
of the battlefield. As the two men keep telling their stories, Braiden gives
Walter a lesson in existential courage; in return, Walter does indeed, at the
expense of endangering the novel's ending, become Braiden's savior.

Larry Brown's first book, a collection of stories called ''Facing the Music,''
was published last year to considerable acclaim. Now he has accomplished that
rarest of feats, following a strong first work with an even stronger second one.
Like William Faulkner, Mr. Brown is from Oxford, Miss. It must be difficult to
write under such a daunting shadow. Whether this is why he has a man in ''Dirty
Work'' beat a mule to death with his bare hands, I can't say. But the way I read
things, Larry Brown is his own man these days. His well of inspiration may also
spring out of the works of Barry Hannah, Harry Crews, Richard Ford and even
Walker Percy, but what he's given us in ''Dirty Work'' is all his own. This is
an unforgettable, unshakable novel. In it, griefs and joys are met not at a
delicate, self-conciously artistic angle but head-on, with a force that is both
subtle and powerful - and above all compassionate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A WINNING SORT OF LOSER

BYLINE: By ERICA ABEEL; Erica Abeel, the author of ''Only When I Laugh,'' is
finishing another novel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1535 words



MILE ZERO
By Thomas Sanchez.
349 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.

Thomas Sanchez first appeared on the literary landscape some 15 years ago with
''Rabbit Boss,'' a lavishly praised novel of epic dimensions about the tragic
experience of the American Indian. That book, it is now clear, was only a
warm-up for the dazzling achievement of ''Mile Zero.'' Mr. Sanchez' new novel is
marked by the same commanding sense of place, the same mix of politics and
poetry. But ''Mile Zero'' is more shapely, leaner and free of ''Rabbit Boss's''
diffuseness and longueurs. Its brilliantly contrived plot uncoils with the
suspense of a thriller. Nothing is gratuitous: characters and actions are linked
in a hidden web, sometimes with devastating irony. And it is funny, a comic
masterpiece crackling with backhanded wit and laugh-out-loud humor.

The novel is set in Key West, an island that has inspired writers ranging from
Ernest Hemingway to Tennessee Williams. It focuses on a group of dropouts from
mainstream America. At the center is St. Cloud, a burned-out 1960's radical 20
years down the line. His wife, Evelyn, a fellow activist from college days at
Berkeley, has abandoned him for women. He has occasionally made a living as a
courtroom interpreter, but mostly he is a habitue of a bar, the Wreck Room,
where nightly he knocks back the local brew with a dedication not seen since
Malcolm Lowry's ''Under the Volcano.''

Three events combine to halt St. Cloud's downward spiral. He falls for Lila, a
displaced Southern belle half his age, a woman ''born on the losing side of the
American track'' who now works in a tropical bird shop owned by Evelyn. A
boatload of Haitian fugitives arrives in the harbor; Justo Tamarindo, a black
Cuban-American police officer, enlists St. Cloud's help in preventing the
deportation, and certain death, of a teen-age boy, the boat's lone survivor. And
St. Cloud gets drawn into the hunt for a mysterious, voodoo-inspired killer
called Zobop who is terrorizing the island.

''Mile Zero'' is bursting with vital and engaging characters. Among them is Key
West itself, its palette, fauna and Latin beat evoked with a superreal
intensity. At times the background almost becomes foreground; in comic fashion,
the locales virtually overshadow the people in them. In one scene, St. Cloud
spies on Evelyn and her lover from the garden outside Evelyn's house. He is
gripped by jealousy and self-pity. Yet the activities in the tropical garden -
its crooning frogs, leaping lizards and ''a swirl of ants disassembling an
upturned Cuban Death's Head palmetto bug'' - are conveyed as dramatically as St.
Cloud's disarray.

A shifting metaphor, Key West is the last place in America (''Mile Zero'' refers
to the last sign marker before the Atlantic) - a place, Justo reflects, with
''the same scent of rancid inevitability as Saigon had in the final days before
its fall,'' one that can be totaled by a hurricane the locals refer to as El
Finito. Aswarm with drug smugglers, it is ''a marijuana republic, a mere cocaine
principality,'' a land where anything goes. For the refugees from the Haiti of
the Duvaliers, though, Key West is hope and the beginning of America.

For St. Cloud, Key West is an accomplice in self-ruin and ultimately perhaps a
seedbed of renewal. Having lost his youthful ideals without finding anything to
replace them, he has survived, in effect, his own life. He is still atoning for
the American sin of the Vietnam war, trying to ''wash away in a sea of alcohol .
. . a war he couldn't forget, a war no one else remembered except those who
fought in it or against it.'' In real life, a St. Cloud's self-flagellation
might be wearying, but he is a winning sort of loser, always distilling humor
from his own abjection. He has a perverse grandeur; conscience personified, he
is the one man who rejects the prevailing ethos of greed and
self-aggrandizement.

But if beclouded, as his name suggests, by useless remorse, St. Cloud is hardly
a saint. He still desires his wife, mounts a major campaign of conquest for Lila
and lusts for the local ''Latin sizzle.'' St. Cloud belongs among those
characters, common in fiction by male novelists, who oscillate between two
women: one the intellectual equal, like Evelyn, who is onto his game and no
longer wants to play; the other a not-so-innocent, nubile woman like Lila, who
is unable to ''figure what his problem was.''

The scammers and hustlers of the Wreck Room make up the background chorus,
people who ''seemed to have left behind a shadow life.'' Among the more
arresting are Brogan, reduced to obsession about his brother, known only as MK,
a former Green Beret in Vietnam who now directs a drug operation from Latin
America; Bonefish, the local gossip and Cassandra who is ever testing the breeze
for signs of El Finito; and a trafficker in racing dogs named Handsomemost, a
man who ''liked white powder and white women, bought and sold both, used and
abused both, it was a man's right.''

The lone pillar of probity on this ''Redneck Riviera'' is Justo the police
officer, his only vice conch fritters. Justo is the closest that contemporary
fiction gets to an old-fashioned hero. Devoted to his wife and daughters, he is
''an island of integrity on an island of shifting morality,'' with a pithy Cuban
aphorism for every crisis. He's the novel's moral center and guide through the
underworld, doomed, possibly, by his decency. THE crimes of nations cast a long
shadow over these pages. (Especially powerful is the story of peasants fleeing
Haiti on a craft made of rubber tires - better the sharks than slaughter by the
Tontons, or Haitian goon squads.) Yet the novel's prevailing mode is comedy -
dark and frequently X-rated. Mr. Sanchez mocks the derailed thinking of
substance abusers (''twenty-four ideas jumped between his ears, he grabbed the
last one'') and the pseudoprofundities of cokeheads (''animals jumped up on
marching powder with nowhere to go''). Smoothly dovetailed into the main
narrative are comic vignettes, such as the story of Lila's former marriage to a
Southern marijuana grower; strictly a ''meatloaf-and-yams man,'' he takes Lila's
mastery of French cooking - learned from afternoon television - as a personal
affront. In another hilarious set piece, a woman named Marilyn loves the owner
of a licentious parrot called Amigo. The trouble is that Amigo doesn't fancy
Marilyn, so she is doomed to disappointment; her love object ''never went to bed
with a woman Amigo didn't call out his craving for.'' Even the the novel's
horror element, such as a ''Fantasy Fest'' carnival filled with masquerading
revelers, including the killer, is laced with mischief.

Mr. Sanchez shifts fluidly from macho tough talk (Key West's ''incautious end up
on the wrong end of the food chain'') to sentences that, mimicking the movement
of thought, sluice forward like waves. He avoids standard psychological
analysis; he conveys St. Cloud's craving for Lila through dream images or
phrases repeated like incantations (''it takes a fool to love like a fool'').
St. Cloud's ''rum-soaked reverie'' becomes an instrument of artful distortion,
yielding exotic visions - the scrambling of the senses prescribed by the poet
Rimbaud. Mr. Sanchez avoids the predictable. He describes his own stylistic
practice in St. Cloud's professed liking for ''sentences that slipped off one
another with strikingly misguided purpose.'' The book's ending is itself a
marvel of ambiguity - tragic, funny and hopeful all at once. ''Mile Zero'' is a
novel of uncommon richness and resonance.



KEY WEST WAS THE KEY

Thomas Sanchez spent almost 10 years, a Guggenheim Fellowship and the proceeds
from the sale of his house in search of voices to tell the story of America in
the post-Vietnam era that fills ''Mile Zero.'' ''I had really been trying to put
together a novel that would fuse the Vietnam generation with the post-Vietnam
generation, but somehow the voices weren't coming,'' the 45-year-old author said
in a telephone interview from Key West, Fla. When Mr. Sanchez stopped off in Key
West in 1981 en route to the Caribbean, he carried with him hundreds of pages of
notes and sketches for a novel set in California and Mexico. But narrative
voices suddenly came to him in Key West, voices that warned of the cocaine tidal
wave boiling in Latin America and threatening the United States.

''I think the reality of what is really happening in Latin America and Central
America for most Americans is a shadow play,'' he said. ''It's the same way
Vietnam was in the beginning, mostly a shadow play flickering in the window of
television.''

In the novel Mr. Sanchez uses images that evoke television news, and three of
them - the first space shuttle, Haitian refugees fleeing political turmoil and
seizures of cocaine along the Florida coast - gripped his imagination. ''These
three things forged in my mind a new metaphor, and I realized that the themes of
the novel I had been carrying around for all those years had finally coalesced
in some hard voices speaking to me in soft, fresh language,'' he said. ''It was
the language of the new American experience.''

STEPHANIE STROM

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Thomas Sanchez (Rollie McKenna); drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Drunken Drivers Hear From Victims

BYLINE: By SHARON L. BASS

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 6, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words


DRUNKEN drivers are listening to survivors of the tragedies that such drivers
cause, through a new program for first offenders called the Victim Impact Panel.

''It's such a good thing because it brings out the impact of driving and
drinking with real people, not just on a film or on a newspaper story,'' said
John Rimetz, the statewide coordinator of the alcohol education system for The
program focuses on first-time offenders who have been arrested for drunken
driving but were not involved in car accidents. The panel consists of four
victims who spend about 15 minutes apiece describing their ordeals with
drunken-driving accidents. Victims are either relatives of someone who was
killed in an accident or those who have been permanently disabled because of an
accident.

When arrested, the first-time offenders have a choice of going to court or
attending the state's pre-trial education program, which includes counseling and
the victim panel. About 80 percent choose the program for which they pay $250.
Afterward, they are placed on probation for oneyear, and if there are no further
driving and drinking arrests, their first-time offenses are erased from their
records.

The Connecticut Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission and Mothers Against Drunk
Driving, which is known as MADD, are running the victim panel. The program,
which will run for six months in Fairfield and New Haven Counties began in
September at the Stratford Public Library. The next panel will meet at the New
Haven Department of Police Services on Thursday. The panels are held monthly in
each county.

'The Possible Consequences'

''People think it's not such a big deal, especially if their circle of friends
drive and drink,'' said Patricia Palombi, administrator of the Fairfield County
chapter of MADD, who initiated the idea for the panel, which is patterned after
one in Washington State. ''But if people could hear the possible consequences of
driving drunk,'' she said, ''they'd modify their behavior.''

At the Stratford library about 60 offenders heard how one drunken driver changed
the lives of Gary and Toni Woods of Westport.

It was the evening of June 25, 1987, when Ms. Woods and her two sons, ages 12
and 13, were driving back to their hotel room in Florida. From a side street a
man came speeding, his headlights off, racing straight into an intersection and
ramming Ms. Woods's car broadside. One of her lungs was punctured, all her ribs
on her right side were smashed and her back was so badly injured that she never
returnrd to her job as a sales manager for a pharmaceutical company, she said.

But, she said, that was the least of it. One of her sons was thrown into her
arms, bloodied and already dead. The other son died within 30 minutes. The man
had been drinking, but was not legally drunk, she said. Ms. Woods, now a member
of MADD, said the man was arrested six months later and given a one-year
sentence, which he began serving this spring.

'There Is No Justice'

''The system is horrendous,'' Ms. Woods said. ''Those who pay their taxes, go to
Vietnam, do everything they're supposed to do, find there is no justice.''

Mr. Rimetz agreed that the penalties for drunken driving should be stiffer.
About 16,000 people are arrested each year in Connecticut for driving while
intoxicated and about half of the state's 500 yearly traffic fatalities are
caused by drunken drivers, he said. Mr. Rimetz said there should also be more
consistency in the courts when dealing with drunken drivers, better enforcement
in towns and more education in available alcohol-treatment programs.

On Jan. 1, a new state law, called the Per Se Administration License Suspension
Law, takes effect. The law permits the State Department of Motor Vehicles to
suspend the license of drunken driver who is arrested for six months if they
refuse to take a blood alcohol test or if a test shows a level at 0.10 percent
or higher. At present, only the court can suspend licenses.
  'They Deny They Are Addicted'

Denial, Mr. Rimetz said, is one of the obstacles in convincing an alcoholic not
to drink and drive. ''They deny they are addicted,'' he said, ''and deny the
severity of driving drunk, and that's why it's so difficult to get them to act
responsibly.''

But Mr. Rimetz and others who attended the panel meeting in Stratford said no
one denied the impact of the stories on the offenders. ''I think people were
touched by it, they listened intently,'' Mr. Rimetz said.

Janice Heggie, director of the New Haven County chapter of MADD and coordinator
of the New Haven victim panel, said, ''I know the panel made a difference.'' The
offenders could see the consequences of their actions, she added.

Ms. Heggie, a former emergency-room nurse, said she got involved with MADD after
treating ''too many children whose parents were driving and drunk.''

Plans to End Drunken Driving

Of the 60 offenders present at the Stratford meeting, 59 said they would no
longer drive when drinking, Ms. Palombi said. She added that in Washington,
where the panel has been in place for two years, there has been a marked
decrease in the rate of repeat arrests.

Four years ago, on St. Patrick's Day, Ms. Palombi lost her 17-year-old daughter
to a drunken driver. ''It's all so senseless,'' she said. ''There's no meaning
behind it. She was picked out at random. The offender had no vengeance against
her.'' ''It can be any one of us who drinks and drives,'' Ms. Woods said. ''It's
not just the alcoholic and horrible evil people.'' ''No human being should have
to feel this pain,'' she said. ''Sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night
and I say: 'This can't be. It can't be. It must be a nightmare.'''

She said it has been extremely difficult for her and her husband to carry on
with their lives since the accident; she cries frequently and has flashbacks of
her dead sons.

Ten months ago, Ms. Woods gave birth to another son. She and her husband
believe, she said, that the child is their sign that ''our lives should go on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Some Enchanted 'Saigon'

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: LONDON


Seems not so long ago that I produced an NBC radio broadcast from Mary Martin's
dressing room after the London opening of ''South Pacific.'' That smash hit was
an American artistic export based on stories growing out of the American victory
in World War II; some enchanted evening.

The hottest ticket in London today is ''Miss Saigon,'' an Anglo-French
theatrical collaboration growing out of the American military defeat in Vietnam.
As musical spectacle, it's right up there with the same producer's ''Cats'' and
''Les Miserables'' - rousing, poignant, breathtakingly staged -with the big
moment of the helicopter leaving our allies behind to suffer and die at least
comparable in impact to the crash of the chandelier in his ''Phantom of the
Opera.''

Although the plot - with its return to the Orient of an American serviceman and
the heartbreak of the girl he left behind - is sure to evoke comparisons with
''Madame Butterfly,'' the message of this drama is blunter: ''You're not the
only one we betrayed,'' says one G.I., and the second act's big number features
a pimp deriding ''the American dream.''

Theater reviewing is not my thing. However, like the satirist who purported to
review the gamekeeping passages in ''Lady Chatterly's Lover'' for Field and
Stream magazine, I have an interest in looking at the politics behind the making
of the Vietnam myth, to which this extravaganza contributes.

That myth has been set forth in dozens of apocalyptic films, novels,
mini-series, biographies and memoirs: the Vietnam War was an unjustified
intervention by the West in the world of the East; the experience brutalized,
desensitized or traumatized the soldiers forced to go; the whole business caused
tragedy for individual Asians and brought international humiliation for an
absurdly anti-Communist United States.

You cannot find a drama about the nobility of trying to save an ally from
invasion, or a show blasting the indecision that kept us from striking hard
early with an eye to winning the war. Such theses invite only derision and would
sell no tickets. Besides, right-wingers make lousy dramatists.

Instead, the story that is continually hammered home, often violently on film
and more tenderly in this love story on stage, is a variation of this theme: We
were self-righteous, well-meaning ideologues who broke faith, broke heads and
broke hearts. That's the only dish being served up to the next generation. Go
argue with a myth.

I like to think that somewhere in Hanoi a young Vietnamese
dramatist-novelist-musician is thinking of writing a show. His hero is General
Giap, the most successful military figure of the past generation, and his
heroine, a beautiful granddaughter of Ho Chi Minh, is infused with
anti-colonialist fervor.

In the first act, the brave partisans throw the French out of Dien Bien Phu and
assert their nationhood, modeled on strict Leninism. Then Ho sends Giap south,
and despite a succession of American bombing halts, the resolute general -
nicknamed ''Missile'' Giap by a young American Presidential candidate - defeats
the corrupt puppets in Saigon. The act ends with a helicopter taking their
American protectors away. Long intermission of 15 years, during which the world
changes.

The final act is a downer. Vietnam, now united, is a mess. The people in the
South are conquered and sullen, wondering if they should have tried to escape in
boats; the people in the North are poor, hungry, resentful and confused. The
Soviets cannot help, the Chinese hate them, the West is unwilling to trade.
Where are the promises of the long-dead Ho? Where is the spirit that once sprung
from suffering and discipline? What was all the sacrifice for?

In a poignant scene, General Giap reviews the men who were once his
inconquerable army: tired men straggling home from inconclusive years in
Cambodia, coming home to unemployment and singing the Khmer Rouge Blues. At the
end, Ho's vibrant granddaughter, disillusioned and broke, grabs a boat to Hong
Kong, where she becomes a bar girl in a British-American club and joins the
colonialists in dreading the inexorable Chinese takeover.

Needs work, of course; our unknown composer-poet in Hanoi would have to liven it
up because Communist audiences desperately need escape from the despair that
Western audiences enjoy escaping to.

No, ''Miss Ho Chi Minh City'' could never be the megahit that ''Miss Saigon'' is
sure to be. Its derivative concept has this great flaw: True art never follows
real life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Salvadoran Leader, at U.N., Says He'll Propose Cease-Fire to Rebels

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Oct. 2


President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador gave his personal backing today to
peace negotiations with rebel forces arranged in Mexico City last month.

As the General Assembly session entered its second week of speeches, the
Salvadoran President said his Government would propose ''a complete end to
hostilities that would bring a definitive end to fighting'' when officials of
his Government meet in Costa Rica Oct. 16 and 17 with representatives of the
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, the guerrilla alliance.

President Cristiani said at a news conference after his speech that he expected
that the monthly peace talks agreed to by the two sides would last for some
time.

Diplomats said President Cristiani appears to have resisted pressure from El
Salvador's extreme right and now seems firmly committed to peace talks with the
rebels.

No Details on Cease-Fire Plan

Mr. Cristiani, a member of the rightist Nationalist Republican Alliance, or
Arena, took office in June amid concern that his Government would further
polarize Salvadoran society. Arena, founded by Roberto d'Aubuisson, a cashiered
army officer, has been widely linked to right-wing death squads.

Mr. Cristiani gave no details of the cease-fire proposal he plans to make in two
weeks. The guerrillas announced a 10-day cease-fire to coincide with the meeting
last month in Mexico City, but have since mounted an offensive in which scores
of people have been killed.

The two sides are still divided over the nature of the talks. The President
wants the rebels to end all hostilities immediately and enter ordinary political
life. The rebels favor a truce while they negotiate social and economic changes.

Diplomats noted that President Cristiani was accompanied on his visit to the
United Nations by Colonel Jose Emilio Ponce, El Salvador's military Chief of
Staff. They said this suggested that the military accepts the peace
negotiations.

Disarming the Contras

Diplomats said that another encouraging development toward peace in Central
America came today in a speech to the General Assembly by the Honduran Foreign
Minister, Carlos Lopez Contreras. Last year Dr. Lopez told the General Assembly
that the United Nations should use force if necessary to disarm Nicaraguan
guerrillas based in Honduras and return them to Nicaragua, something the United
Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, subsequently ruled out as
politically unrealistic.

This year Dr. Lopez made no mention of this idea, confining himself to general
declarations of support for the peace process. Diplomats had worried that
Honduras might complicate peace efforts by repeating the demand.

In advance of elections next February in Nicaragua, United Nations officials are
to visit contra camps in Honduras next week to begin preparations for disarming
the guerrillas and relocating or repatriating them. Under an agreement signed by
the five Central American Presidents in the Honduran port of Tela in August, the
contras are supposed to disband voluntarilly by Dec. 5, though officials doubt
this deadline can be kept.

Cambodia at Issue

In another regional conflict, five Asian countries said here today that they
will ask the General Assembly to declare invalid Vietnam's contested and
unverified military withdrawal from Cambodia, which Hanoi said was completed
last week.

The members of the Association of South East Asian Nations - Singapore,
Thailand, Brunei, Indonesia, Malayasia and the Phillipines - circulated a draft
resolution that says the United Nations must monitor any Vietnamese withdrawal
before the world can accept it, but adds that it should do so only as part of an
overall political settlement between the country's warring factions. The
resolution is considered certain to pass.

In another speech before the General Assembly, Albania edged away slightly from
its traditional isolation today when Foreign Minister Reis Malile said his
country will host a meeting of Balkan Foreign Ministers next year to discuss
regional cooperation.

Speech on Environment

In his address to the General Assembly today, the Prime Minister of New Zealand,
Geoffrey Palmer, urged the General Assembly to elevate the environment to the
level of national security concerns.

Also addressing the assembly today were Dr. William V. Herbert, the Permanent
Representative for St. Kitts and Nevis; Gadallah Azouz El-Talhy, a Libyan
Foreign Ministry official; the the Foreign Minister of Jordan, Marwan Kasim, and
Foreign Ministers Jean Traore of Guinea, Ranjan Wijeratne of Sri Lanka, Ali
Bongo of Gabon and Rashid Abdullah al-Nuaimi of the United Arab Emirates.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Higher Benefits for Some Veterans Backed

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


The House of Representatives approved a 4.9 percent cost-of-living increase in
benefits today for some 2.5 million disabled veterans and their survivors.

The increase, effective Dec. 1, would raise to $1,539 a month, from $1,468, the
basic benefit payment for a veteran with 100 percent disability resulting from
military service. Maximum monthly benefits would rise to $2,684, from $2,559,
under the legislation, which was approved without opposition on a voice vote.

The increases will raise the annual cost of veterans' disability and survivor
benefits, now estimated at $10.2 billion, by $398 million in the fiscal year
1990, which began Sunday, and by $525 million in the next fiscal year, the
Congressional Budget Office said.

Also approved was legislation extending education benefits for veterans of the
Vietnam War era to 1977 and 1978 graduates of the military academies and 1978
graduates of Reserve Officer and Training Corps programs. In addition, education
benefits for members of the military reserves, now limited to undergraduate
college courses, would be expanded to cover graduate school courses, technical
schools, correspondence courses and on-the-job training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
The Wartime Spirit

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


The Bush-Bennett ''war on drugs'' is not only underfinanced and misdirected
toward predictably ineffective law enforcement rather than needed treatment.
Like any other war, it's sure to produce a dangerous wartime mentality that
''anything goes'' in pursuit of victory.

No one argues that nothing needs to be done about drugs, particularly crack, the
cheap cocaine derivative that creates virtually instant addicts. In a recent New
York Times/CBS News Poll, the number of those who consider drugs the nation's
single worst problem had risen to 64 percent from 20 a year ago; and election
researchers everywhere - as in the New York City mayoral election -are finding
that drugs and crime form the issue most alarming to the voters.

No wonder - not when 875,000 people are estimated to be heavy users of illegal
drugs in New York alone, when 17,500 crack babies were born to addicted mothers
in Florida in 1987, when total cocaine business in the United States is reckoned
at $150 billion annually, when drugs and the crime associated with this dirty
trade are wrecking families and neighborhoods everywhere.

To cast needed counter-effort as a ''war,'' however, and to slant it so heavily
toward combat, arrests and jailing - the Bush-Bennett ''war'' counts on the
states to put up $5 to $10 billion for new prisons - could produce an ugly
backlash. Even Mr. Bush won't claim that his ''war'' can have the kind of
conclusive effect wars are supposed to have, or can redeem his overblown
Inaugural pledge to end the ''scourge'' of drugs.

An inevitable effect of wartime mentality, however, is the expectation that
someday the war will end -in victory, of course. Mr. Bush, in fact, issued a
ringing call for ''victory over drugs'' in his televised declaration of ''war'';
but he already knew, and Administration officials now concede, that nothing like
such a victory can be achieved for decades to come, if ever, and that the actual
Bush-Bennett goals are far more modest.

What will happen to public and Congressional attitudes if a supposed war - like
the real one in Vietnam -drags on endlessly with marginal achievements and no
apparent hope of victory? Some will give up, no doubt; but many, perhaps more,
will call for escalation, new weapons, more troops, tougher tactics - victory at
any price.

The likely ineffectiveness of the Bush-Bennett ''war'' will drive many worried
Americans to such conclusions; already some dangerous attitudes are in evidence.
A Washington Post/ABC News poll published the day after Mr. Bush's speech found
a shocking 62 percent of respondents willing even now to give up ''a few of the
freedoms we have in this country'' to support a ''war'' on drugs. What will they
be willing to sacrifice by, say, 1995?

Specifically, 52 percent said they would be willing to have homes searched, and
67 percent would allow cars to be stopped, by police without court orders, even
if people like themselves were searched by mistake. Thus would these Americans
surrender rights secured for 200 years by a Constitution they supposedly revere.

Perhaps even more dangerous, since the consequences are unpredictable, 82
percent favored allowing the military to combat illegal drugs within the U.S.
Combat how? The Pentagon itself is opposed to any such variant of martial law,
and so should be any American who cherishes the freedom we all extol.

A 55 percent majority supported mandatory drug testing - urine tests - for all
Americans, about the most intrusive program Big Brother could undertake; 67
percent backed such tests for all high school students; and 83 percent favored
reporting drug users, including relatives, not to treatment centers but to the
police.

Other sacrifices of constitutional rights - easing the rules of evidence,
preventive detention, Draconian sentencing - might easily be spawned in a
wartime mentality. Identification cards already are being required in a
Washington housing development beset by drug criminals. Drastic action to ''stop
drugs'' is advocated at all levels, not least by survivors in poor neighborhoods
blasted by crack and crime.

So, as always in this country, the major threat to constitutional freedom is
internal; and the force behind that threat is fear - once fear of subversion,
now fear of drugs. If in this case fear is justified, the resulting wartime
spirit is only the more dangerous. And those ''few freedoms'' that might be lost
will not easily, or ever, be regained.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

ON MY MIND;
Peace for Peace

BYLINE: By A. M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


Every year about this time a particularly unpleasant piece of nastiness takes
place at the United Nations, a ritual of hatred and hypocrisy.

A delegate of an Arab state gets up and demands that Israel be thrown out of the
General Assembly, the one forum where all 159 members of the U.N. have a voice
and vote.

Up rises an envoy from one of the Scandinavian countries to make a technical
motion not to vote on the Arab proposal. That motion carries.

Israel is graciously allowed to sit for another year among the states ruled by
dictators, thugs, terrorist paymasters and fanatics - a sizable proportion of
the membership.

Last year 95 countries voted not to consider the Arab proposal, 41 voted for it,
meaning Israel out. Twenty-two ran away, casting abstentions or not voting at
all.

The challenge to Israel's right to membership in the community of nations is
scheduled to take place again within two weeks. Perhaps, only a faint perhaps,
this year the Arab states will decide they want to make a move of some real
meaning toward peace in the Middle East.

In all the talk about elections leading toward an Israeli-Palestinian settlement
some important things are forgotten.

One is that every Arab nation except Egypt still considers itself officially at
war with Israel - and arms itself as if ready to go to battle tomorrow. These
states will be not bound by any agreement with the Palestinians. They will
continue without risk to use all their political and economic weight against
Israel and to keep the military threat growing.

Syria, Libya, Iraq and Iran will insist that the Palestinian movement make
ever-growing demands on Israel - to meet their goal of eradicating the Israeli
state.

The world may have forgotten this. The Israelis have not. A point in Prime
Minister Yitzhak Shamir's election package was that the Arab states must make
peace with Israel.

From the Arabs and the West, silence about this. But the Palestine Liberation
Organization, still sworn by its covenant to Israel's death, and the Arab states
know exactly what the Israelis know:

No agreement with the Palestinians will itself bring peace to the Middle East.
That will happen when, and only when, the Arab states call off their 40-year war
against Israel.

Israel has been asking the Arabs for peace ever since its foundation -and
before. Jerusalem returned the huge Sinai to Egypt in the hope other Arab states
would make peace with Israel. They have not.

Now, with election suggestions from Mr. Shamir and President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt on the table, the Arab states have their chance to help a Palestinian
settlement.

They can accept Israel as a legitimate member of the U.N. and drop their
campaign to throw her out. That would be a fine prelude to the essential next
step - a commitment to end the state of war with Israel when Palestinians and
Israelis sit down together.

Americans in government and journalism urge Israel to move further toward a
Palestinian settlement. They would be more effective if they also pressured the
Arab states that threaten and surround Israel to make their own peace, which
might make a Palestinian settlement feasible.

Hope that this year the Arabs will be wise enough to extend peace, not hate,
toward Israel is barely alive.

Last week, the Israelis called every Arab delegation at the U.N., asking for a
meeting with Foreign Minister Moshe Arens. All but Egypt refused. Instead when
Mr. Arens began to address the Assembly, all the Arabs except the Egyptians
walked out in one more show of arrogant contempt.

If the Arabs again try to bar Israel from the General Assembly, read the roll
call of states supporting them. Last year it included all the Moslem nations but
Egypt, most African states, Vietnam, Cuba, Nicaragua, the usual crowd -
including the Soviet Union.

After years of glasnost and talk about the importance of regional peace
everywhere, the Soviet Union, as always, voted with the Arabs to throw out the
one country pivotal to Middle East peace - the one country against which war is
being made.

Perhaps this year Moscow will show more courage.

And, with everybody talking about elections for Palestinians, there is a simple
way for the United States and the Soviet Union to bring them closer.

They can stand up at the U.N. and finally say the plain truth. ''Land for
peace,'' the slogan Palestinian sympathizers address to Israelis, is not enough.
There must be another, sent loud to all Arab states:

Peace for peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Huynh Tan Phat, Vietcong Aide And Hanoi Official, Is Dead at 76

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


Huynh Tan Phat, a leader of the Vietcong during the Indochina war and later a
senior official in the Hanoi Government, died Saturday in Ho Chi Minh City. He
was 76 years old.

Vietnamese officials announced that Mr. Phat would be buried on Thursday in Ho
Chi Minh City, the southern capital formerly known as Saigon.

Before the collapse of South Vietnam in 1975, Mr. Phat emerged as the chief
theoretician of the Vietcong, formally the National Liberation Front, the
southern, Communist-led political movement backed by North Vietnam.

Among Northern Colleagues

After the Communist victory, he was one of the few from the South to hold a
leadership position in a Government and Communist Party dominated by northern
Vietnamese. His positions included that of vice chairman of the Council of
State.

Born in My Tho in the Mekong Delta in 1913, Mr. Phat became involved with the
anti-French underground in 1936, after earning an architecture degree from Hanoi
University. He was editor of the anti-French magazine, Jeunesse (Youth), and a
founder of the Vanguard Youth movement.

In 1945, he joined the rebellion in the Saigon region against the French
colonial government, and was arrested by the French on several occasions before
going underground in 1949. He became director of the movement's information
service and was named to the resistance and administrative committee in the
Saigon-Cholon area.

After the defeat of the French in 1954, he returned to Saigon and established an
office as an architect, but continued his political activities as a founding
member and later secretary general of the Democratic Party. In 1959, he again
went underground when the South Vietnamese Government of President Ngo Dinh Diem
began to move forcefully against the political opposition.

Senior Positions

In 1960, he was named to the Central Committee of the National Liberation Front,
becoming its secretary general and vice chairman of its Presidium and emerging
as chief theoretician.

In 1968, he was named chairman of the Alliance of National Democratic and Peace
Forces, another Hanoi-backed grouping, and in June 1969 became president of the
Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam, a shadow government set
up by the Vietcong.

There was no report of immediate survivors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Huynh Tan Phat (Camera Press)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Senators in a Rush to Declare A Bigger War Against Drugs

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


In a boisterous Senate session, Republican as well as Democratic senators came
forward tonight with a host of amendments to remold President Bush's anti-drug
strategy into a bigger, bolder plan.

Among other actions, the Senate adopted a proposal to hire 1,000 new agents for
the Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and 350 for the Drug Enforcement
Administration, along with 300 assistant United States attorneys.

When they recessed just before midnight, the senators had approved 31
amendments, including proposals increasing criminal penalties for distributing
drugs through the mail and making it a crime to corrupt a Federal law
enforcement officer in a drug transaction. Additional amendments will be
considered Wednesday.

Other measures that were adopted direct the Office of Drug Control Policy to
prepare a policy on youth gangs and authorize a Government study on the impact
of anti-drug aid to the Andean countries of Bolivia, Peru and Colombia.

Fast-Moving Session

The personnel measure, put forward by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of
Delaware, was approved in a voice vote in a fast-moving session in which
legislators piled up amendments in an eagerness to show tough stands on the drug
issue. Some senators have also said they find President Bush's strategy too
timid.

It was unclear how many of the measures, offered as amendments to a bill for
carrying out the President's drug strategy, would be approved by the Senate, but
the rush to attach them to the bill offered a glimpse of what could lie ahead as
Congress continues to work on the proposal.

The measures, which have not been accepted by the House, would authorize new
activities under the drug strategy but would not provide money to pay for the
programs. The money would need approval in a separate spending bill.

Other significant measures among nearly 20 amendments prepared by lawmakers
include a proposal to allow indigent drug users to obtain treatment on request
and a plan to encourage states and cities to adopt drug testing programs for
prison inmates, parolees and people released on bail.

As work on the amendments wore on into the evening, few senators were present
for the debate. At times, senators hoping to win approval of amendments vanished
as soon as they were acted on.

On the floor, leaders of both parties consulted frequently as they raced through
complex legislation, some of which was never considered in committee, trying to
complete Senate business in time for a recess planned for Friday.

At several points, the Republican floor manager, Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, was
forced to delay consideration of a proposal as he consulted to find out whether
the Administration was for or against the measure.

Bush's Approach Defended

A White House spokeswoman tonight defended Mr. Bush's strategy and said that
none of the measures under consideration in the Senate appeared to detract from
the President's plan, but rather would augment it. ''The bottom line is no part
of the President's drug strategy is being diluted,'' said Alixe Glenn, the
Presidential spokeswoman.

''We feel after months of careful and thoughtful study that what has been
presented to Congress is enough,'' she said. ''I'm not saying that more isn't
better, but given the funding restraints, the President's plan is realistic.''

However, Mr. Biden said that some senators had significant differences with the
President over whether his strategy is adequate to make significant progress in
combating drugs. ''The amendments that I have are intended to illustrate as
starkly as I can the differences in strategy and approach that I have from the
President's strategy,'' Mr. Biden said.

Shelved Last Week

The amendments were from a series of proposals that had been set aside for later
debate last week, when the Senate voted 97 to 2 to approve a $9.4 billion
compromise financing plan for the anti-drug campaign. The proposals that were
set aside then had been considered too controversial to be acted upon quickly.

The compromise plan approved last week called for spending $1.1 billion more
than President Bush had sought. Much of the increase would be spent for expanded
drug treatment, education and prevention programs.

Throughout the day, rumors swirled through the corridors of the Capitol about
blizzards of competing amendments said to be under consideration. One
exasperated Senate staff member, lost in his efforts to keep track of the
complex and conflcting amendments, confided, ''This is going to be a
free-for-all.''

Some of the amendments seemed to surface at the last minute as senators huddled
with their advisers late in the afternoon, at times resembling backyard
tinkerers anxiously making last-minute adjustments before unveiling their
inventions.

'D-Day or Vietnam?'

Among the most ambitious amendments were a package of proposals introduced by
Senator Biden, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, whose measures, if adopted,
would vastly widen the scope of the drug war.

Mr. Biden, who was the author of the law enforcement personnel measure, was an
early the point man for Democratic criticicism of Mr. Bush's drug strategy. That
criticism called the Bush plan a tepid response to a national epidemic, and one
based on inadequate financing and having goals too low to win the war on drugs.
At a hearing earlier today, Mr. Biden said ''Is this going to be D-Day or
Vietnam?''

At that hearing, John C. Lawn, the head of the D.E.A., and William Sessions, the
Director of the F.B.I., said in response to questions from Mr. Biden that they
could both find uses for additional funds for drug enforcement activities.

Other measures expected to be considered included a proposal for a pilot program
of drug testing in prisons, a proposal to buy $10 million in weapons and body
armor for Federal law enforcement authorities and a measure to require pregnant
drug users to obtain treatment.

Republican senators also introduced amdendments to the plan while praising Mr.
Bush for taking the leading in combating drugs. ''We will be discussing strategy
and funding for drugs for a decade to come,'' said Warren Rudman, a Republican
of New Hampshire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Sessions and Donald Atwood (NYT/Andrea Mohin) (pg.
A20)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Senate Debates Bill Outlawing Flag Burning

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 4


The Senate tonight stopped just short of passing a statute outlawing flag
burning, legislation that many Democrats hoped would defuse the drive for a
constitutional amendment to protect the flag.

The Senate was expected to vote today, but the bill ran into difficulties late
tonight with some last-minute Republican attempts to amend it. Some Democrats
worried that their careful attempts to draft a statute that would pass
constitutional muster would be hindered by the Republican amendments.

Action by the Senate could clear the way for final passage of a law intended to
circumvent the Supreme Court's ruling in June that flag burning was a protected
form of free speech. The House passed a version of the bill last month.

The bill debated in the Senate today is one more stage in a complicated
legislative battle. President Bush and the Republican leadership in Congress are
pushing for a constitutional amendment to overturn the Court's ruling; that
measure is expected to reach the floor of the Senate later this month.

Those who oppose a constitutional amendment are hoping that a rewritten Federal
statute can protect the flag, pass muster with the Supreme Court and eliminate
the need for an amendment. ''This legislation represents a full, sufficient
response,'' said George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader. ''It
will make unnecessary a constitutional amendment to accomplish the same
purpose.''

White House Seeks Amendment

The White House today reiterated its support for an amendment but gave no
indication it would veto the statute. ''The Administration thinks any statute
would be found unconstitutional by the courts, and the best way to protect the
flag would be through a constitutional amendment,'' said a White House
spokeswoman, Alixe Glenn.

Setting aside the crush of budget business that awaits them, senators today rose
to pledge their loyalty to the flag and inveigh against those who would burn it,
particularly the Texas protester whose acts provoked the Supreme Court ruling.
Their debate stretched throughout the day and into the early evening, even as
Congressional leaders fretted over the possibility of missing an Oct. 16 budget
deadline, which would force avariety of automatic spending cuts.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, told his colleagues today,
''Certainly we've talked more about this flag burner in Texas than we have about
the fiscal disaster that we're going to leave the next generation.''

Echoing earlier debates over how to respond to the Court's ruling, some senators
argued for a statute, some for a constitutional amendment and some for both.
Only a small minority argued that the Congress should do nothing.

''There is no need to adopt an amendment or even pass a law merely to express
our anger at a single despicable act of flag burning,'' said Senator Edward M.
Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts. ''We respect the flag most when we take no
action at all.''

The statute debated today, like the measure passed by the House, declares that
whoever ''knowingly mutilates, defaces, burns or tramples'' upon an American
flag ''shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than one year
or both.''

Its drafters hope that by concentrating on the act of flag burning, rather than
the political message of the flag burners, the statute eases the First Amendment
concerns of the Court. The existing Federal statute uses language like ''casting
contempt'' on the flag, which many constitutional authorities say relates
directly to political expression.

Two G.O.P. Proposals

But two Republican amendments caused concern tonight among Democrats. One would
prohibit the ''physical defiling'' of the flag; the other would stipulate that
the bill prohibit public acts of desecration. Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the
Delaware Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said late
tonight that he did not believe the proposals would necessarily render the bill
unconstitutional, but said he would prefer not to see either adopted.

Some senators noted that the public uproar that first greeted the Court's
decision has eased. But that has not removed the political apprehensions
generated by the flag issue after a 1988 Presidential campaign in which the
Democratic nominee, Michael S. Dukakis, seriously damaged by his veto of a law
requiring the recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance in Massachusetts.

Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, who won the Medal of Honor and lost a
leg in Vietnam, urged his colleagues to accept the Supreme Court decision and
called for a patriotism that transcended oratory. Mr. Kerrey quoted Eliza
Doolittle in ''My Fair Lady'': ''Words, words, I'm so sick of words. If you're
in love, show me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Fuentes In a TV Film, On Life And Himself

BYLINE: By JEREMY GERARD

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


With his don't-bother-me sunglasses and flowing white scarf, looking like a high
roller in a Fellini film, the Mexican author and critic Carlos Fuentes thrusts
and parries his way through ''The Journey of Carlos Fuentes: Crossing Borders,''
to be shown nationally tonight on many public-television stations. (In New York
City, the hourlong program will be broadcast at 10 P.M. Sunday on Channel 13 and
at 9 P.M. on Oct. 13 on Channel 31 The targets of this verbal swordplay shift
frequently as the documentary moves from Mexico to Washington to Nicaragua. They
include Mr. Fuentes's views on literary critics (''I love having critics for
breakfast. I've been having them for 30 years in Mexico, just eating them like
chicken and then throwing their bones away. They have not survived. I have!''),
politicians and his interviewers, two San Francisco film makers unafraid to
challenge their subject on the merits of his writing or of his left-wing
political affiliations.

That interplay is one of the first qualities likely to hook viewers on
''Crossing Borders.'' Writers do not often lend themselves to documentary films,
although such distinguished journalists as Bill Moyers have shown that done
thoughtfully, the results can be riveting. The writers profiled by Joan Saffa
and Stephen Talbot, the producers of ''Crossing Borders,'' have been characters
as flamboyant as any in fiction; they have included Dashiell Hammett, Beryl
Markham and Ken Kesey. 'Fuentes Had His Line'

''All the writers we've done have made great camera subjects because they have
great egos,'' said Ms. Saffa, who joined Mr. Talbot in an interview during a
recent visit to New York City. ''But it also causes great difficulty. Fuentes
had his line, over which we could not step. For example, he wouldn't go to the
Vietnam War memorial in Washington.''

Mr. Fuentes's politics are as important to ''Crossing Borders'' as is his
writing. When the film was about to go into production two years ago, Mr.
Talbot, who wrote it, and Ms. Saffa, who directed, agreed to follow Mr. Fuentes
and a friend, the novelist William Styron, to Nicaragua; Mr. Fuentes is an
outspoken supporter of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra and the Sandinista
revolution. ''American Masters,'' the public-television series that the film
makers hoped would underwrite the project, decided it was more of a political
than a literary profile.

''We were told at the last minute that we couldn't go,'' Mr. Talbot said. ''We
were too embarrassed to tell Fuentes.'' Instead, he and Ms. Saffa formed their
own company - aptly called Novel Productions - and became independent producers
to complete the project. (Some money and production help also eventually came
from public television, including Mr. Talbot and Ms. Saffa's home base, the
public-television station KQED in San Francisco.) These days, Mr. Fuentes's
writing is much in evidence. ''Old Gringo,'' a film adaptation of ''The Old
Gringo,'' Mr. Fuentes's novel about the life and death of Ambrose Bierce, will
have its premiere tomorrow, with Gregory Peck and Jane Fonda (the actors discuss
the film in ''Crossing Borders''). In August, Mr. Fuentes's latest novel,
''Christopher Unborn'' - a surreal, horrific vision of Mexico in the
not-too-distant future - was published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux,to wide
acclaim. In a front-page review in The New York Times Book Review, Suzanne Ruta
described it as ''a vital, hopeful; book, a great salvage operation in the trash
heaps of Western culture, Spanish literature and Mexican history.''

Reading What Is Written

''We have a short list of writers, and he's always been on it,'' Mr. Talbot
said. He acknowledged the difficulty of capturing on film someone who deals with
the written word. ''With writing, it's harder because it's not visual,'' he
said. ''How do you communicate the power of the word? You wouldn't do Hemingway
and just show fishing and shooting. One thing we do is have the writer reading
his work.

''We selected passages for him to read, some of which he had difficulty with. He
said, 'It's one thing for me to write something in an early novel; it's another
for you to have me read it in your documentary.' ''

As it happened, the trip to Nicaragua resulted in a scene that Ms. Saffa
described as the most revealing in ''Crossing Borders.''

''We're always trying to capture the epiphanic moment,'' she said. ''With
Fuentes, it came in Nicaragua. We had clicked right from the start. We went to a
children's hospital, full of kids mutilated by the contras. We followed him
through the halls, and he was clearly moved. He's generally formal and in
charge, but he dropped his mask then. We followed him down a hall and started
shooting, and at one point he waved us away and said, 'No more.' Something had
really touched him.''

Mr. Fuentes has his detractors, and they, too, are well represented in the
documentary. For him, however, the public and the private -politics and writing
- emerge in this portrait as inseparable. He has survived ''through risk,'' Mr.
Fuentes says in ''Crossing Borders.''

''Without risk, there is no art, no literature,'' he says. ''You should always
be on the edge of a cliff, about to fall down and break your neck.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

USA Network Film Deal

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 79 words


Cable television's USA Network said Tuesday that it had bought cable TV rights
to 26 recent motion pictures, including the hits ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' and
''Three Men and a Baby,'' in a multimillion-dollar deal. USA, which bought the
package from Touchstone Pictures, said it would start broadcasting the films
next May. USA's purchase price for the 26 motion pictures pictures was not
disclosed, although sources close to the deal estimated it at about $50 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Soviets Said to Double Cambodia Aid

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Oct. 5


The Soviet Union has sharply increased its military aid to the Cambodian
Government in Phnom Penh this year, roughly doubling deliveries of arms and
ammunition over 1988 levels, Asian diplomats and Cambodian rebel leaders say.

Between January and July, these officials say, 11 Soviet cargo ships delivered
some 14,000 tons of military supplies to the Cambodian port of Kampong Saom,
including 100 T-54 tanks, armored vehicles and heavy artillery. The Soviet Union
also sent 16 MIG-21 fighters to bolster the air force of Prime Minister Hun Sen.

These officials, commenting as the debate continued in the General Assembly for
the ninth day, say there was also a substantial delivery of small arms in
September, adding that their information comes from the United States and their
own intelligence efforts inside Cambodia.

Some Asian diplomats say the Soviet effort appears intended to insure that Mr.
Hun Sen retains control of Cambodia after last month's Vietnamese military
withdrawal and is strong enough to resist the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist
opposition groups loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

An 'Afghan Solution'

This suggests, they argue, that Moscow may now foresee an ''Afghan solution'' in
Cambodia, with Mr. Hun Sen following the example of President Najibullah of
Afghanistan, and retaining power by force instead of seeking a compromise with
the opposition.

According to this view, Hanoi and Moscow are now relying on worldwide mistrust
of the Khmer Rouge, whose brutal regime caused the death of at least a million
Cambodians before its overthrow by Vietnam in January 1979, to build support for
a solution that would keep Mr. Hun Sen in effective control of Cambodia, perhaps
in loose partnership with Prince Sihanouk.

Addressing the General Assembly, Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Minister, Nguyen Dy
Nien, attacked the Khmer Rouge saying the key issue facing Cambodia today is to
''prevent the genocidal Pol Pot clique from kindling a civil war and
re-establishing their genocidal rule in Cambodia.''

He assured the General Assembly that Vietnam has removed all its armed forces
from Cambodia, saying ''from this rostrum I solemnly declare that from Sept. 27,
1989, there does not remain a single Vietnamese volunteer soldier in Cambodia -
either armyman, adviser or military employee.''

Assertion Is Challenged

The Cambodian opposition groups and many southeast Asian nations challenge this
assertion, accusing Vietnam of leaving thousands of soldiers disguised as
militiamen and settlers.

This week the six-member countries of the Association of South East Asian
Nations introduced a draft resolution in the General Assembly that says the
United Nations must verify the Vietnamese withdrawal before the international
community can accept it.

The Indian Foreign Minister, Shri P. V. Narashima Rao, addressing the Assembly,
also warned against a return to power of the Khmer Rouge, saying Cambodia must
not fall victim again ''to the universally condemned genocidal policies and
practices.''

Military Operations on Rise

Since Vietnam announced its withdrawal from Cambodia last month, rebel officials
say the three loosely allied rebel forces, which are all armed by China, have
stepped up their military operations in the northwest.

Concerning another tense region, the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz,
painted a bleak picture of the prospects for further progress toward a lasting
peace in the Persian Gulf. In his address, Mr. Aziz accused Iran of sabotaging
Red Cross efforts to organize an exchange of the roughly 100,000 prisoners of
war.

Other speakers who addressed the Assembly today were the Malaysian Deputy Prime
Minister, Abdul Ghafar Baba; the head of the Dominican Republic delegation,
Franklin Andrew Baron; and Foreign Ministers Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania,
Sid'Ahmen Ould Baba of Mauritania, Gareth Evans of Australia, Abdul Aziz al-Dali
of Southern Yemen, Antoine Ndinga Oba of the Congo, Pedro de Castro Van Dunem of
Angola and Shailendra Kumar Upadhyay of Nepal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Journalist Cleared of Libel Charge by Indian

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 671 words


A jury in Chicago ruled yesterday that Seymour M. Hersh, the investigative
journalist, did not libel former Prime Minister Morarji Desai of India when he
described him as a paid informer for the Central Intelligence Agency.

After six hours of deliberations, the jury held that Mr. Desai had not shown
that Mr. Hersh's assertion was false, or that it was written with reckless
disregard for the truth. To win a libel suit, a public figure must show not only
that the offending statement is false, but also that the writer either knew it
to be false or did not care whether it was true or not. The verdict came six and
a half years after the former Indian official filed his $50 million suit against
Mr. Hersh in Federal District Court in Chicago.

In his 1983 book, ''The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House,''
Mr. Hersh wrote that Mr. Desai, India's Prime Minister from 1977 to 1979,
received $20,000 a year from the C.I.A. during the Johnson and Nixon
administrations in exchange for information on Indian foreign policy and
domestic politics. Mr. Hersh based his claim on information supplied by six
confidential sources.

Mr. Desai, now 94 years old, had called the accusations ''sheer madness'' and
''a scandalous and malicious lie.''

Mr. Hersh, who had heard lawyers for Mr. Desai accuse him of fabricating notes,
writing filth and blackening the reputation of one of Gandhi's proteges ''with
the stroke of a pen,'' was jubilant after the verdict was announced.

''This is an amazing decision,'' Mr. Hersh said.

Mr. Desai, who has remained in Bombay during the trial, was not available for
comment. His principal lawyer, Cyriac D. Kappil, of Chicago, said he was
displeased by the verdict and was contemplating an appeal. Mr. Kappil complained
that various evidentiary rulings made it impossible for him to rebut Mr. Hersh's
charges.

The judge, Charles R. Norgle Sr., ruled that while Mr. Hersh must testify about
his sources, he need not identify them. In addition, because the C.I.A. is not
required to open its books, Mr. Kappil was unable to question anyone in its
employ. ''We just had to take Mr. Hersh's words for it that he talked to
someone,'' Mr. Kappil said.

With Mr. Desai too ill to travel, much of his case consisted of videotaped
deposition testimony, taken in Chicago in 1984 and 1985. In addition, his
lawyers subpoenaed former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, who testified
that he knew nothing of Mr. Desai's alleged connections to the C.I.A. That
contradicted Mr. Hersh's book, in which he wrote that Mr. Kissinger was highly
pleased to have a source of Mr. Desai's stature on the agency payroll, and
playfully chastised C.I.A. officials elsewhere for failing to recruit
Cabinet-level informers in their countries. ''The verdict showed that the jury
did not believe Henry Kissinger on the critical issue of the case,'' Mr. Hersh
said yesterday.

''What this court said today,'' Mr. Hersh maintained, ''is that a reporter like
me can write a story based on confidential sources - even to the effect that a
former Prime Minister of India had been a C.I.A. asset - then not be compelled
to identify those sources, and still have a jury of six people who don't know
him or anything he writes conclude that what he wrote was true.'' Mr. Hersh's
case lasted only a few hours, and consisted largely of playing additional
portions of Mr. Desai's deposition and introducing a few exhibits. Mr. Hersh,
who won a Pulitzer Prize for uncovering the My Lai massacre in the Vietnam War,
never took the stand.

One of Mr. Hersh's lawyers, Michael Nussbaum of Washington, called the ruling
''a very important illustration that even a person as prominent as Morarji Desai
cannot intimidate an American journalist entitled to his First Amendment
protections.''

''This case took six and a half years, and its very pendency had a chilling
effect,'' Mr. Nussbaum said. ''We believe we have taught those who would chill
the rights of Mr. Hersh and those like him that they cannot prevail.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bush and Panama: Chance Lost, Perhaps to Hesitancy

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


A senior European diplomat, preparing to leave Washington for another capital,
had this to say last week about President Bush's performance in the realm of
foreign policy during his first eight months in office: ''He's been reasonably
deft, and he's been extremely lucky.''

After the failed coup in

Panama this week, the verdict might have been: Not so deft this time, but his
luck held and saved him from major damage.

Because the two senior Democrats in Congress - Senator George J. Mitchell of
Maine, the majority leader, and House Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington -
both have strongly bipartisan instincts in such matters, they made no all-out
assault on the President's conduct, accepting his assurances that no real chance
to bring Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega to the United States had ever existed.

Because the reports from Panama and from Washington during the first 72 hours
after the coup were so confusing and contradictory, the impression left was not
a sharp picture of American bumbling or bungling but rather a blurry image of
chances perhaps lost.

For the longer run, however, Washington's performance raised several disturbing
questions that many in the Administration freely acknowledge.

Hesitancy Is Perceived

Perhaps the largest one was posed by a hesitancy or passivity that seemed to
characterize the response. For example, a senior Administration aide said that
when supporters of General Noriega, the Panamanian leader, took an unexpected
route to Panama City, United States officials did nothing to stop them ''because
the rebels never asked us to do it.'' Another ranking aide insisted that there
was no point trying to bring General Noriega to the United States to stand trial
because the rebels wanted him kept in Panama.

''It's hard to imagine Lyndon Johnson or Ronald Reagan hesitating, especially in
the case of a man we'd been trying to get rid of for the better part of 10
years,'' said a Democrat with long foreign-policy experience. ''You would have
seen action first, then, after the fact, an explanation that great powers had to
act to protect their interests. But Bush is more cautious.''

The President has moved more slowly that some critics would have liked in
Eastern Europe and in the Middle East. But on Panama, he had taken a hard line,
repeatedly issuing only slightly oblique invitations to the Panamanian military
to rise up and overthrow General Noriega, whom the United States considers a
drug profiteer and a tyrant ranking with the world's worst.

In that context, the Administration's decision not to intervene revived memories
of the 1950's, when President Eisenhower and his Secretary of State, John Foster
Dulles, appeared to invite revolt in Eastern Europe with statements about
''captive nations'' casting off their chains, only to hang back when the
Hungarian revolt came.

Some Unsettling Questions

Beyond such strategic considerations, there were other unsettling questions
about the way Washington acted and reacted this week, including these:

* How sound was the Administration's intelligence-gathering? At one point, the
White House's information was behind what was being broadcast on television, and
at another, it appears, the White House's grasp of the events unfolding in
Panama was so tenuous that it worried that Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of
North Carolina, might actually know more than it did and asked his staff for a
briefing.

* How good was the coordination within the upper reaches of the Administration?
Nothing to write home about, it would appear; not only did several vital
questions about American policy fail to reach Mr. Bush in clear-cut form, but
sloppy procedures marred the whole process of coordination, according to
officials as senior as Robert M. Gates, the deputy director of the National
Security Council.

* What was the Secretary of State's role? In most of the post-mortems, little
mention has been made of James A. Baker 3d, and much has been made of officials
at the Pentagon and of such White House officials as Brent Scowcroft, the
national security adviser, and John H. Sununu, the chief of staff.

* Finally, how good was the contingency planning that underlay the President's
repeated calls for the Panamanians to get rid of General Noriega? The evidence
in this area is still incomplete, but it is clear that many of those involved in
this week's events were unprepared for the ambiguity of motives, the speed of
developments and the general atmosphere of chaos that prevailed in Panama this
week.

Unexpected Ways the Rule

But coups and rebellions seldom unfold in a tidy or predictable manner. Two or
three generations of American officials have had trouble learning that lesson,
which was manifest as long ago as the 1960's in the Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba
and the American-sponsored coup against Ngo Dinh Diem in South Vietnam. Both
developed in entirely unexpected ways and caused great embarrassment to American
planners.

All in all, it may have been the bumpiest week so far for Mr. Bush, whose term
has had astonishingly few setbacks so far and whose standing with the public has
remained at levels unmatched at this stage of a Presidency in a quarter-century.
The previously smooth-working machine put together by Mr. Sununu did not break
down altogether, but it coughed and sputtered not only on Panama but also on
health policy, with Richard G. Darman, the budget director, and Dr. Louis H.
Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, taking starkly
contradictory public positions on the same day.

''This could be an important moment for us,'' a White House staff member
suggested today. ''That review John has ordered won't stop with Panama. He
doesn't like confusion, and he'll find out what's causing it and fix it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GARDENING;
A Prize Winner for Peace

BYLINE: By JACK STEINBERG; Special to The New York Times)

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 66, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


Millions of tourists visit Washington each year and leave without a trace. But
one visitor from Berkeley, Calif. may soon realize her dream of a multi-million
dollar garden dedicated to the pursuit of peace.

Elizabeth Ratcliff, a former English teacher, said she often felt during her
visits here that something was missing among the nation's prominent monuments.
''I saw all the monuments to the past,'' Mrs. Ratcliff said in a recent
interview, ''and I realized we had to have something that said where we came
from and where we are going.''

Mrs. Ratcliff decided that the nation needed an area of its capital dedicated to
the future, namely the pursuit of peace, and she imagined that area might take
the form of an enormous garden. ''A garden is a metaphor for the future,'' she
said. ''A garden has to be tended, just as peace does.''

Last month, Mrs. Ratcliff's dream moved closer to reality when Eduardo Catalano,
a 71-year-old architect from Cambridge, Mass., was named the winner of the
National Peace Garden Design Competition. A native of Buenos Aires, Mr.
Catalano, professor emeritus at the school of architecture at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, has designed buildings in the United States and abroad,
but has never constructed a garden of this magnitude.

Mr. Catalano's prize-winning plan is for a garden in the shape of an olive
branch, the ancient symbol of peace, on a 12-acre site of Federal land called
Hains Point in East Potomac Park, which is bordered by the Potomac River and the
Washington Channel. It is located two miles south of the Mall.

Mr. Catalano received $20,000 for winning the contest, which drew 930 entries
and was overseen by Paul D. Spreiregen, the architect and planner, who organized
the design competition for the Vietnam Veteran's Memorial.

The selection of Mr. Catalano's design is the latest milestone for Mrs.
Ratcliff, who saw her idea reach Congress. President Reagan signed the National
Peace Garden Bill into law on June 30, 1987. Last week, the project drew the
attention of President Bush, who said in a statement: ''This beautiful garden
will welcome visitors from around the country and around the world, serving as a
reminder of our continuing commitment to that most noble of goals - peace.''

According to Mr. Catalano's design, a glass pavilion, dubbed the peace gate,
will mark the entrance to a central, tree-bordered open space, which will
surround the image of a massive, seven-leaved olive branch. Each of the leaves
will be bordered by paved pathways, which will interconnect where leaves near
each other and allow visitors to pass from one leaf to another.

The color scheme of the garden is limited to two colors, green and white, with
green predominant. The leaf forms will be planted with a variety of low
groundcovers and grasses to form a carpet of multiple greens.

Between the large leaves of the olive branch, where their stems join the main
branch, multiple planters containing white flowers will be located, symbolizing
the calyxes of the olive branch.

''There is a kind of simplicity in the idea,'' Mr. Catalano said in a telephone
interview last week. ''I think this garden will last forever because the city
will last forever,'' he said.

Frances Lumbard, director of the landscape design program at George Washington
University, said Mr. Catalano adapted into a modern design the classic parterre,
the 18th-century technique in which low plants are sculptured into a pattern.
''He has used it to make a different kind of form, an organic form, using a
technique that is usually applied to geometric forms,'' Ms. Lumbard said. ''At
least on paper, it's effective.''

Heidi Landecker, senior editor of Landscape Architecture magazine, predicted the
peace garden could have an impact on the future work of other landscape
architects. ''Maybe it will lead people toward more traditional designs,'' she
said. ''The people doing avant garde, strange things - they were sort of left
out in this selection.''

Her eyes filling with tears of joy, Mrs. Ratcliff described how, with the help
of several friends, she managed to pique the interest of William Penn Mott,
former director of the National Park Service, as well as Representative George
Miller, Democrat of California, and Senator Spark Matsunaga, Democrat of Hawaii,
who introduced the bills in their respective houses of Congress.

''We have touched some really profound desire in people,'' Mrs. Ratcliff said.
''The time in history is just right.''

Mrs. Ratcliff acknowledged that her hardest work may be ahead of her. She and
the other members of her board of advisors must raise, by 1992, the $6 to $8
million necessary to complete the project. Though the project secured a $75,000
grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the peace garden bill
authorized no Federal funds for the effort. ''We're still in a desperate
situation, we're doing this on a shoestring,'' Mrs. Ratcliff said. ''We've got
to become a national organization real quick.''

At the very least, Mrs. Ratcliff said she hopes the peace garden will carve a
unique niche among Washington's famous landmarks, including the Washington
Monument, the Jefferson Memorial, the Lincoln Memorial and, most recently, the
Vietnam Veteran's Memorial. ''We want the peace garden to be part of the journey
to Washington, which is a pilgrimage for a lot of families,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: diagram

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Is Political Humor Politic?

BYLINE: By MARK RUSSELL; the writer is host of the Mark Russell comedy specials
on PBS.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2663 words


Do we need political humor? I usually answer that question with the smart-alecky
response, ''I certainly do - I have bills to pay.'' The humorist Tom Lehrer gave
up his practice years ago with the proclamation that political satire died the
moment Henry Kissinger received the Nobel Peace Prize, and my endeavors as a
satirist are often threatened by the verbatim statements of public figures. For
example, during the Irangate investigations a reporter asked President Reagan if
William Casey, the director of the C.I.A., had carried on covert operations
without the President knowing about it. President Reagan's exact response was,
''Not to my knowledge.'' During the pay wars in Congress last January, I quoted
an unnamed Senator as saying, ''If we in the Congress must maintain a higher
standard of morality without a higher salary, where is the incentive? If we must
spend all day long being ethical, how can we do our jobs?'' The quote was pure
invention, but inasmuch as it was completely believable no one questioned it.
The quote was also deemed acceptable by my audience because Congress itself,
unlike the Presidency, is one of those safe objects of ridicule in this country,
along with New York City, the Postal Service, potholes and Geraldo Rivera.

How can Larry Gelbart's play ''Mastergate,'' a satire of Washington scandals and
ensuing Congressional investigations that opens Thursday at the Criterion
Center, compete with reality as it parodies Congress, the Presidency and the
media? Or is the play really a parody at all? Or is it reality? Or Memorex?
Didn't the cartoonist Garry Trudeau take us on a journey through Ronald Reagan's
brain several years ago? When we recently saw the ex-President's half-shaved
head with Mrs. Reagan attempting to cover it with her hand - was that a
photograph, a cartoon or deja vu?

As the mass audience revels in the Gary Hart, Dan Quayle, John Tower, Barney
Frank, et al., pratfalls de jour, the measurement of political humor is in
direct proportion to the number of political gaffes. This is not war-and-peace
satire, but rather Punch-and-Judy slapstick.

It is in gentler times when political jokes are most accepted by the general
public. But when the going gets tough, the comic does a segue. Only the brave
will stay the course and enter the tempest of, say, the mayoral race in New York
City. As the candidate Rudolph Giuliani once said, ''Hey, let's call Jackie
Mason.'' Satire That Stays Ahead of the Curve Once, a satirist wrote an attack
on a well-known political figure. A fictitious name was used, but people had no
trouble figuring out the identity of the satirist's victim, whose erratic
physical features and mannerisms were ridiculed with deft humor. Whereupon, a
large segment of the population became outraged, and several newspapers
editorialized on what right the satirist had to be so impertinent. The humorist
was Charlie Chaplin, the country was the United States, and the object of
ridicule was Adolf Hitler.

The year was 1940, and isolationists in America were quite bothered by Chaplin's
movie ''The Great Dictator.'' Their argument was that Chaplin was stirring up
pro-British emotions and foisting his left-wing opinions on an American public
in no mood for war. Fifty years later we can only imagine that time when a
writer attacking Hitler could be labeled a warmonger. Today we would say that
Chaplin was ahead of the curve, which is where a satirist belongs. Most
humorists have operated behind the curve - a much safer, risk-free zone, i.e.,
ridiculing Hitler, Tojo and Mussolini after Dec. 7, 1941.

Incidentally, Chaplin would later state that had he known of the ghastly results
of Nazism he never would have made such a movie. Indeed, lampooning Hitler
during the war reached sophomoric triviality. I recall a character in Herman
Wouk's ''War and Remembrance'' who expressed disgust at such silliness as the
zany bandleader Spike Jones's popular recording ''In Der Fuhrer's Face.''

Ayatollah Khomeini Is the One Exception

In the 44 years since World War II ended, the targets of American humorists for
the most part have been their fellow Americans. Quick - who was the villain of
the Korean War? In the Vietnam conflict our official adversary was Ho Chi Minh,
whose image in this country was, shall we say, ill-defined. Where were the
Stalin routines? Pol Pot? Didn't their vicious acts qualify them to be suitably
unpopular, therefore safe subjects for humor?

Instead, our targets have been domestic ones - Joe McCarthy, Jack Kennedy,
Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Billy Carter, Ronald
Reagan, Nancy Reagan, George Bush and one more time - Mr. Nixon. And in recent
years supporting players such as Michael Dukakis, James Watt, Oliver North, John
Tower and Dan Quayle have amused. These have all been fun people, and the humor
aimed at them on American television over the years has been mostly
lighthearted, lightweight and an end-of-the-day giggle before snapping off the
bed lamp at 11:40 P.M. and going to sleep after the Johnny Carson monologue.

The only public figure approaching Adolf Hitler as a hate object was the
Ayatollah Khomeini. But as I recall, many of us welcomed the Shah's overthrow
and didn't become terribly worked up over Khomeini until he took 52 American
hostages, at which point jokes about him were rendered behind the curve. (Mr.
Chaplin, we needed you.) In fact, the television networks were country miles
behind the curve. After the hostage-taking, NBC issued a directive forbidding
all humorous references to anything pertaining to the Iranian situation. After a
few weeks of this, a frustrated Mr. Carson would ask the audience to bear with
him as he sidestepped this major news event that was on everyone's mind.

The network's pusillanimous edict was soon violated by George Schlatter, the
producer of NBC's own show ''Real People.'' Mr. Schlatter sanctioned my standing
in front of the Iranian Embassy in Washington doing Ayatollah jokes. Actually,
they were reworked Stalin jokes which originated (surreptitiously) in the Soviet
Union:

''They have come out with a new Joseph Stalin (Khomeini) postage stamp, but it
doesn't stick. People keep spitting on the wrong side.''

 Little boy, who is your mother?
 My mother is Iran.
 And who is your father?
 My father is the great and glorious Khomeini.
 And what do you want to be when you grow up?
 An orphan.

Safe, risk-free, behind the curve and no problem for NBC. But, out of fear of
the public and underestimating our intelligence, the network had muzzled its
creative people.

Major Manley Battle and Capital Lunacy

I had best throw the curve away in an attempt to fix the position of Mr.
Gelbart's ''Mastergate,'' which received glowing reviews when it was presented
last spring at Harvard's American Repertory Theater. Set solely in a
Congressional committee hearing room, the play touches on just about every
Washington-based lunacy of the last 20 years without using any real names.
However, as with Chaplin's maniac fuhrer Hinkle with the funny little mustache,
we have no trouble identifying Mr. Gelbart's hospitalized and dying C.I.A.
director, Wylie Slaughter, who had a detached and befuddled President under his
control. Then, there is the gung-ho, spit-and-polish Marine hero, Maj. Manley
Battle, whose attorney, with the aid of a pointer, indicates to the committee
the many campaign ribbons on Major Battle's chest as a demure Mrs. Battle sits
behind the witness busily knitting an American flag.

Had Mr. Gelbart been able to bring his play to Broadway, say, a week after
Colonel North's riveting six days of testimony, would the Iran-Contra affair
have played out any differently? Would CNN have run lengthy portions of
''Mastergate'' every 30 minutes? Would Ted Koppel have devoted several nights to
the play in order to present to his audience another dimension of Irangate,
albeit a cartoon dimension?

What's Real And What Isn't

Actually, the reality of Irangate and Mr. Gelbart's satire ''Mastergate'' are
two cartoons separated by a very fine line. I don't think an on-target spoof
such as ''Mastergate'' would have changed anything, because the very idea of any
threat to President Reagan's honorable and untarnished retirement was something
most American's didn't want to think about.

One would think that, compared with Mr. Reagan, Mr. Nixon had less of a chance
of survival from the onslaught of political humor. Not so. Mr. Nixon's political
demise was self-inflicted with just the tiniest assistance from the humorists.
We must remember that ''Saturday Night Live'' and ''Doonesbury,'' which could
have turned up the temperature in Nixon's Oval Office considerably, didn't reach
the heights of their popularity until after the Vietnam and Watergate sagas were
over. Although Art Buchwald's columns have always had to be reckoned with in
government circles, his Vietnam era play, ''Sheep on the Runway'' (1970), had
short runs in New York and Washington. Nor did Barbara Garson's Off Broadway
''MacBird'' (1967) capture the country's attention; the play never attained more
than cult status.

In 1968 television's No. 1 rated show, ''Laugh-In,'' had its way with the hawks
of the day - the hosts Dan Rowan and Dick Martin even flaunted peace symbols on
the pockets of their blazers. But by 1970, even as antiwar sentiment increased
across the nation, ''Laugh In'' eased up on its dovishness.

The Smothers Brothers' upstart mocking of America's noble war effort eventually
proved to be too much for CBS and that show was canceled. Dick and Tom Smothers
and the folk singer Pete Seeger singing about ''the big fool Lyndon'' wading
deeper into the muddy water rankled the hierarchy of this same network, which
had abetted in the blacklisting of the humorist John Henry Faulk during the
McCarthy period years earlier.

The civil rights struggle brought us the vantage-point observations of the black
comedian Dick Gregory, who would admonish a nightclub heckler by telling him,
''Why don't you just burn your cross and get the hell out of here?'' Mr. Gregory
began his career in a climate in this country that prompted a well-known
ice-cream company to suddenly cancel sponsorship of the singer Petula Clark's
television show because her hand had touched the hand of Harry Belafonte as they
sang a duet. Dick Gregory gave little comfort to the North or the South when he
said, ''In the South white people don't care how close I get as long as I don't
get too big. In the North they don't care how big I get as long as I don't get
too close.''

In the election of 1956, the satirist Mort Sahl told of the strong opposing
civil rights stands taken by each candidate: ''Eisenhower says we should
integrate moderately, but Stevenson wants to do it gradually.''

The Reagan era practically negated the old 60's establishment-bashing,
exemplified by Mr. Sahl's suggestion that the American Medical Association was
against faith healing and any other cure that was rapid. Mr. Reagan brought us a
corporations-are-people-too sentiment, and it takes a 10-million-gallon oil
spill or the revelation of a $500 million-a-year inside trader to get the
public's attention to the extent that they might possibly relate to humor on
these subjects. Nestled safely behind the curve of the Wall Street scandal, we
can state that Drexel Burnham Lambert's inside-trading escapades were to free
enterprise what mud wrestling is to the performing arts, and one wonders what
Mr. Gelbart could do with Tom Wolfe's ''Bonfire of the Vanities'' or for that
matter the H.U.D. revelations.

All of these events become blurred and run together to those of us ''marinading
in media,'' as Russell Baker describes it. We see the mud wrestler Michael
Milken defended by the attorney Arthur Lyman, whose performance for the
Iran-Contra committee made him my matinee idol in the summer of 1987. In
Washington we toss and turn at night wondering if Mr. Milken knows Colonel
North. Did Richard Secord and Albert Hakim ever meet with Ivan Boesky at Fawn
Hall's apartment? Or was it H.U.D.'s Debbie Dean? Or Donna Rice? Or Jessica
Hahn, who knew Jimmy Swaggart, who converted Manuel Noriega?

As we are warned in ''Mastergate'' - ''watch your nightly news. It's only a
matter of time before you're scandalized by the stars of the next, inevitable
Whatever-Gate: another crowd of photo-opportunistic nobodies who grab the
limelight before either being sent to jail or up to higher office.''

In the Mood For Some Humor

The current glut of topical humor, good and awful, has burgeoned in the absence
of a world war and national unemployment of 25 percent. When either occurs and
the iconoclasts offer up their droll perceptions, the people again will not want
to hear about it. Ask ''Doonesbury's'' Trudeau how those AIDS pieces went over
out there in comic strip land.

Collectively, drugs, AIDS, the homeless and interest on the national debt, which
has increased by millions of dollars since you started reading this sentence,
all add up to Vietnam II, but in comedy clubs across the land Jim and Tammy
Bakker and Leona Helmsley references dominate.

Paraphrasing Mr. Gelbart's paraphrase of Senator Howard Baker: What do Americans
know and why don't they all see the humor in it? I visualize ''Mastergate''
having its premiere in Washington instead of New York. On opening night,
Congressional V.I.P.'s file out of the theater, their goofy parliamentary
parlance having just been thoroughly mocked. A senator bids a colleague
goodnight as he climbs into his limousine and says, ''Great play, wasn't it?
I'll see you bright and early tomorrow for our preliminary hearings with the
sub-staff members of the permanent committee's temporary subcommittee on flag
burning.''

THE WHOLE NINE YARDSKI

This is an excerpt from ''Mastergate'' by Larry Gelbart. The scene is the
Sherman Adams Room of the John Mitchell Building in Washington, where Maj.
Manley Battle is testifying before the House Select Committee to Investigate
Alleged Covert Arms Assistance to Alleged Other Americas. Major Battle, under
examination by Senator Bunting of the committee, stands at a map with a wooden
pointer.


 MAJOR BATTLE: San Elvador lies just right of center here in Central America. It
has a democratic form of government that has been run by its army for the past
40 years. Passionately anti-Communist, with a vigorous opposition press, a
strong, vocal church and free elections that are promised regularly. But most
geopolitically significant, there is San Elvador's unmistakable proximityship to
its immediate neighbor to the far left, Ambigua. SENATOR BUNTING: Ambigua is
totalitarily Lenin-Marxist? BATTLE: It's as red as the ace of hearts, sir. The
whole nine yardski. BUNTING: And completely controlled by Moscow? BATTLE: Does
the Pope ride an encyclical? (CROWD LAUGHS) BATTLE: Not that I mean to make
light of the Communist menace. Or the Catholics, either.

BUNTING: Major, I'm sure that this committee, as well as the country for which
we stand, would be most appreciative for you to share some of your daylight with
us on that sad and benighted land.

BATTLE: Yes, sir. The Republic of Ambigua, or La Republica de Ambigua, is yet
another betrayed revolution in which a legitimate set of high ideals were once
more cruelly twisted and cynically Sovietized. The United States has had a long
period of the most intimate relations with the Ambiguan government, the last 18
of Ambigua's presidents being West Point graduates. But a coup occurred and the
reins of power changed hands three years ago when the former President of
Ambigua, General Delinqua, and the country's Prime Minister, Mrs. Delinqua, were
in New York on an emergency shopping trip, at which point the government was
taken over by Dr. Overtega, a former podiatrist, and his band of foot soldiers.

c 1988. By Larry Gelbart. All rights reserved.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caricature of ''Mastergate'' cast including Wayne Knight, Daniel von
Bargen, Steve Hofvendahl, Jeff Weiss, Jerome Kilty, Joseph Daly, Tom McDermott
Melinda Mullins, Ann McDonough, John Dossett and Zach Grenier (Al Hirschfeld)
(pg. 1); photo of Larry Gelbart, the author of ''Mastergate,'' with Michael
Engler, the director (Martha Swope) (pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

All Some People Really Want to Know Is in Shorter Books

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


SAUL BELLOW'S new novel, ''The Bellarosa Connection,'' began arriving in
bookstores in recent weeks.

Like his previous book, ''A Theft,'' it is just over 100 pages long.

With so serious and popular an author, it is unlikely that the publisher,
Penguin, gave much thought to length. But in this age of information glut - and
with the talk of the shrinking attention span of the TV and MTV generations -
some publishers are paying more attention to the possibility that brevity can be
a selling point.

Early next year Whittle Communications, which is owned by Time Inc., will begin
publishing a series of quick reads that are a cross between a book and a
magazine. Having recruited authors like David Halberstam and Edward Jay Epstein,
it plans to distribute books on current issues, averaging 100 pages and filled
with advertisements, to leaders of business and government. Time-Life Books is
testing a series of condensed books to compete with those of Reader's Digest,
which sell 10 million copies a year in the United States.

Recent best-seller lists can easily leave the impression that brevity is not
only the soul of wit but the secret to literary fortune. Entries include
''Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences, by John Allen Paulos
(135 pages), Annie Dillard's ''The Writing Life'' (111 pages) and Robert
Fulghum's two books of commonplace wisdom, ''All I Really Need To Know I Learned
In Kindergarten'' (196 pages) and ''It Was On Fire When I Lay Down On It'' (218
pages).

Many publishers point out that short books are nothing new. Decades before MTV
and video cassettes, Hemingway's novel, ''The Old Man and the Sea,'' was short
enough to be published in its entirety in Life magazine. And in the 1940's, long
before television became a part of daily life, Americans were reading ''The
Stranger'' by Albert Camus and ''Darkness at Noon'' by Arthur Koestler, neither
of which is much longer than Mr. Bellow's last two books.

The same is true of nonfiction, where Dale Carnegie's ''How To Win Friends and
Influence People,'' published in 1936, and Norman Vincent Peale's ''The Power of
Positive Thinking,'' published in 1952, rendered their wisdom into best-selling
books not much longer than those by Mr. Fulghum.

Stephen Rubin, the publisher of Bantam Books, notes that readers expect bulky
novels from writers like James Michener, Robert Ludlum and Tom Clancy. And even
for some nonfiction subjects they want the depth and texture provided by such
recent books as ''Parting the Waters'' by Taylor Branch (1,064 pages), a study
of Martin Luther King Jr. and the civil rights movement. Sometimes, in fact, a
publisher will puff up a skimpy book with big type and heavy paper.

Colleen Murphy, the public relations director of the Book-of-the-Month Club,
said its members prefer hefty books. She pointed to such recent main selections
as ''A Bright Shining Lie,'' Neil Sheehan's 861-page book about Vietnam, and
''Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All,'' a 718-page novel by Alan
Gurganus.

But even readers who like to be absorbed for weeks in a long story - fiction or
nonfiction - might find more technical subjects easier to take in small doses.
Peter Guzzardi, the editorial director of Harmony Books, said that many science
and business books sell better if they are shorter.

Stephen King's Victory

''It's probably especially true where the subject seems particularly
intimidating,'' he said. When he was at Bantam he acquired and edited ''A Brief
History of Time'' by Stephen W. Hawking, a 198-page book on cosmology that now
has one million hardcover copies in print. ''Readers look at a big, formidable
book and say, 'I want to learn something, but I don't want it to seem like I'm
going to school.' ''

Of course, authors with a good sales record can write to any length they want.
''What are you going to do?'' Mr. Rubin said. ''Ask Tom Wolfe to cut 50 pages?''
Gary Fisketjon, the editorial director of the Atlantic Monthly Press, said the
greatest books are usually those the reader wishes had been longer. ''Anytime
you start specifying the length of a book, you ought to have your mouth washed
out with soap,'' he said. ''Or you should be in the business of manufacturing
widgets.''

But for all the talk about editorial integrity, not every novel has been immune
from the concerns of business managers. Stephen King recently recalled that
before Doubleday published his novel, ''The Stand,'' in 1978, he was told he had
to cut several hundred manuscript pages to hold down the price. As a young and
powerless author, he felt he had no choice. But now that publishers are lined up
to do his bidding, Mr. King has restored what was excised from ''The Stand,''
which will be republished next May by the same publisher.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Is There Life After 'M*A*S*H'?

BYLINE: By Mervyn Rothstein ; Mervyn Rothstein reports on theater for The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 53, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3629 words


LARRY GELBART IS SIT-ting in a Manhattan rehearsal studio, watching some actors
run through a scene from his new play, ''Mastergate,'' and he's laughing.

The subject of his laughter is a line from the play, which is a satire on the
Iran-contra hearings, that asks: ''What did the President know, and does he have
any idea that he knew it?'' The play was presented successfully last spring at
the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., and the decision was made to
bring it to Broadway, where it opens this Thursday.

The actor who portrays Maj. Manley Battle in the ''Mastergate'' version of Col.
Oliver North loudly and patriotically defends his actions. He says he has
provided ''humanitarian aid'' to the guerrilla group that has been trying to
overthrow the rather left-leaning Government of the Central American country of
Ambigua. The nature of that aid? ''Medicine,'' Major Battle says. ''Blankets.
Plus the necessary rocket launchers, tanks and napalm to protect those
blankets.''

Larry Gelbart has been writing comedy for 45 of his 61 years, starting when his
father, a Hollywood barber, helped him get a job with Danny Thomas on the
''Maxwell House Coffee Time'' radio show. His resume includes writing for
''Duffy's Tavern,'' Bob Hope, Eddie Cantor, Art Carney and Jack Paar; working in
the 1950's in Sid Caesar's television stable with Carl Reiner, Neil Simon, Mel
Brooks and Woody Allen; co-writing and winning a Tony Award on Broadway in 1963
for ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum,'' and earning Oscar
nominations for ''Oh, God!'' in 1977 and ''Tootsie'' in 1982.

But his major achievement was as principal writer for the first four seasons of
''M*A*S*H'' on television. Between 1972 and 1976, he wrote or co-wrote the first
97 half-hour episodes of the Emmy Award-winning series. Gelbart and Gene
Reynolds, the show's executive producer, along with Alan Alda and the rest of
the cast, gave new life to Robert Altman's movie about a mobile surgical unit in
Korea. Dr. Hawkeye Pierce, played by Alda, was a surgeon with a world-weary
sense of humor. Through him, Gelbart made frequent pointed references to the
American experience in Vietnam - a use of political humor that he is now
returning to in ''Mastergate.''

The years since ''M*A*S*H,'' however, have had their ups and downs. Yes, there
was ''Oh, God!'' and ''Tootsie'' and a mildly successful film spoof on 1930's
double features that was called ''Movie Movie.'' And a play called ''Sly Fox,''
his modern version of ''Volpone,'' which starred George C. Scott and was a
success on Broadway in late 1976. But there was also his much-heralded and
much-lamented television sitcom about marriage, ''United States,'' which was a
quick and major flop in 1980. And then, in 1983, there was ''Aftermash,'' the
sequel to his big hit, which failed to capture the tone or the humor of the
original and didn't last much longer than ''United States.'' Last season, ''One
Two Three Four Five,'' a musical he did with Broadway in mind, was presented as
a work in progress at the Manhattan Theater Club, and though there were no
reviews, word of mouth was pretty bad. ('' 'One Two Three Four Five,' '' he
says, ''has been eighty-sixed.'') Now he is back, trying to reverse the failures
of recent years. But he is trying to do so with two shows on Broadway this fall
that are both high-risk commodities - a political satire and a musical.
(Musicals have always been chancy; ''City of Angels,'' with $4.5 million on the
line and with music by Cy Coleman and lyrics by David Zippel, opens in
December.) As for ''Mastergate,'' even though it's been two years since the
Iran-contra hearings were front-page news, and the Oliver North trial ended
months ago, Gelbart and his producer, Gene Wolsk, are optimistic about the
$600,000 production.

''I think there's an audience that wants to see that other people have noticed
their concerns,'' Gelbart says. ''I think that political theater went away in
part because it couldn't compete with reality. Well, we'll see if we can.''

HIS FACE COMFORTABLY TANNED, GELBART walks around the Manhattan rehearsal studio
wearing a gray safari jacket and a checked shirt opened just enough to reveal a
well-tanned chest. He looks every bit the southern Californian he has been most
of his life. Even his dark, thinning hair seems tanned. Tanned and prosperous.
Of his wealth, he says, ''It's all come from 'M*A*S*H,' '' which ran for more
than a decade and whose reruns are in constant, financially lucrative
syndication. Gelbart has homes in Beverly Hills and Palm Springs, a house in
Hampstead outside London and a pied-a-terre on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.

Clearly, he's not returning to Broadway for riches. It has more to do with
anger, a political anger that laughter helps mask. It may at first seem
surprising that a man with four homes can be angry about anything, but he cannot
help taking a dim view of those he feels are undermining this country. As a
result, ''Mastergate'' is a very angry play, as well as a very funny one, just
as ''M*A*S*H'' combined humor with anger at a system that created the Vietnam
War.

THE ROOM HAS CHANGED. BE-hind Gelbart is a long picture window that reveals the
lush, late-summer greenery of Central Park, 11 stories below. Beside the window
are mirrors that enhance the view from the living room of his Fifth Avenue
apartment.

Gelbart and his wife, Pat, to whom he has been married for 33 years (they have
five children and two grandchildren) actually spend little of each year in New
York. Mostly, they are in Beverly Hills and Palm Springs, with time out for
visits to London. This year, he will be here four months, getting his two plays
in shape. There's been little chance to follow his strict writing routine.

''At home in California, I get up rather early,'' he says between sips of
Pellegrino. ''That's not because I'm dying to get to work. It's because I'm
getting older and something wakes you up and says, 'Make sure you're still
here.' And I go to my work space and write.''

For years, he wrote with a legal tablet and a pencil. ''Much the same way Nixon
wrote. . . . Only Nixon probably used an illegal tablet.

''A couple of years ago, though, I switched to a word processor. And I'm out
there, except for a lunch break, from 8 in the morning until 5 or 6 at night. I
tend to work on a couple of projects, or maybe more, at the same time.

''First, you get the idea,'' he says. ''It may germinate for a long time or it
just pops into your head. And then you work out a structure. And when you feel
confident enough, you start to write. And you have to allow yourself the liberty
of writing poorly. You have to get the bulk of it done, and then you start to
refine it. You have to put down less than marvelous material just to keep going
to whatever you think the end is going to be -which may be something else
altogether by the time you get there.

''But then, if it was a 'M*A*S*H' script, you've got your 36 or 37 pages. In the
case of 'Mastergate,' I had about 120 pages. Now I've got about 63. I don't even
think of it as rewriting anymore. I think of it as the writing process.

''Actually, the funny part is the last part and the easiest part. The hard part
is not the funny, it's first seeing what you are being funny about, finding a
theme, a premise, a character. And then, if you've done that part, which is not
only not funny but often not even fun, the funny takes care of itself. Because
you have nailed what you're being funny about: how each character can only be
funny in his or her certain way. And that helps you.''

The changes he has made in ''Mastergate'' between Cambridge and Broadway are
almost all small -subtle refinements to sharpen a joke. He cites as an example
the words Major Battle has spoken in rehearsal about humanitarian aid:
''Medicine. Blankets. Plus the necessary rocket launchers, tanks and napalm to
protect those blankets.'' That line originally ended ''to protect them.''

''But 'them' was too vague,'' Gelbart says. ''We had to be more specific to make
the joke, to point out the idiocy of the rationale for the aid.''

Although Gelbart speaks cogently about his current work, he admits he is
uncomfortable talking about himself. This unease seems especially apparent as he
talks about his work in the last few years.

''I wish everything I'd done had worked out and had been better received,'' he
says. ''I wish I liked everything I had done. If I did, some other people would
have as well.

'' 'Sly Fox' and 'Oh, God!' and 'Movie Movie' had a certain value. And then came
a long period of working on things which never got done. 'Tootsie' is a notable
exception. But I guess when I think back, I see a pattern in my life. I see 'A
Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum' being very successful and then I
see myself quickly separating myself from it, going to England and not being
around to rest on the laurels.''

Gelbart is referring to an unusual part of his life. In 1963, flush with the
success of ''Forum,'' he and his family moved to England and didn't return for
almost nine years.

''There was going to be a British production of 'Forum,' '' he says, ''and so we
decided, my wife and I, that we'd go over together and take the five kids with
us and spend a little time there. And the little time turned into almost nine
years. I didn't do much professionally at all. It's a great mystery to me, too.
I was in kind of semiretirement. And it's not as though I was very flush.''

He would come to America now and then and do a pilot for a television series, a
script for a network. He and Burt Shevelove, his co-author on ''Forum,'' wrote a
pretty funny film called ''The Wrong Box.'' He wrote a play called ''Jump,''
''which we tried out in Nottingham, and Nottingham loved it - and so we brought
it to the West End, and the West End did not love it.''

He wrote a musical with Sean Kenny and Lionel Bart, based on ''Gulliver's
Travels,'' which also didn't go anywhere. He did a television series with Marty
Feldman. He doctored some Italian scripts here, some American scripts there.

''I did a lot of stuff,'' he says, ''but it didn't add up to anything. I think I
was taking a kind of nice sabbatical without even knowing it, because by '63 I'd
been working 20 years and I was tired.

''But I wasn't unhappy. I liked living in England. I guess it appealed to the
introverted side of me. I'll do something very good and I'll sort of just
disappear. I don't mean from the scene; I mean my interest disappears.''

And then, he says, something good happens. Like ''M*A*S*H.'' Or now,
''Mastergate.''

''I'm really furious at what went on at the Iran-contra hearings,'' he says,
''this incredible insult to our intelligence and to our language . . . this
parade of people selling themselves as our saviours, and with this incredible
double- and triple-talk. . . . During the hearings, no one ever said, 'Were you
lying at the time?' And no one said, 'I was lying at the time.' They would be
asked, 'Was this at some variance with the truth as you knew it?'

''Like a great many others, I have this idealism that is constantly betrayed.
'Mastergate' is a little cri de coeur that says, 'I want those people to be
better.' ''

The play has a cast of 17, four of whom are holdovers from the American
Repertory Theater production. The director, Michael Engler, also directed the
play in Cambridge.

Gelbart says that at first he had the idea of doing ''Mastergate'' as a film.
''But when I thought of what you have to go through - I mean from conception to
sitting down in a dark room with a lot of friends who are going to lie to you
about how good the picture is - I thought twice about it,'' he says. Films, of
course, also cost a lot more than plays.

THE FEELINGS GEL-bart has expressed about film making are reflected in his other
new show, ''City of Angels,'' which deals with a writer in Hollywood.
''Mastergate'' will get on Broadway about a year and a half after its
conception. He began working on ''City of Angels'' about seven or eight years
ago, roughly in his ''Tootsie'' period.

''City of Angels'' is a reaction to Gelbart's anger at his experiences as a
writer on the West Coast, especially to what he calls ''the 'Tootsie' sturm und
drang,'' the dispute among the multiple writers of that movie over who did what
and who deserved credit for what.

''I came into 'Tootsie' after there'd been at least four drafts by at least
three different writers,'' he says. ''And however immodest it sounds, I did get
it on the right track. I did see it not simply as Dustin Hoffman in drag, but as
a way of showing how a man becomes a better man for having been a woman. And
that I believe was my main contribution to it, plus a great deal of construction
and pages of dialogue.''

Sydney Pollack, the film's director, has long taken credit for thinking up the
idea of making the man-as-woman become a better man.

''Tootsie'' began as two separate scripts with the man-in-drag theme, one by Don
McGuire and the other by Murray Schisgal, working with Dustin Hoffman. The two
projects were united, and several other writers - including Gelbart and Elaine
May - contributed to the final screenplay. Because of the various competing
claims, it will probably never be known for sure who did what - but Gelbart,
Schisgal and McGuire shared the Oscar nomination.

''City of Angels'' is about a writer named Stine who has written several
private-eye novels about a fellow named Stone. Stine goes to Hollywood to do a
screenplay for one of his books, and the audience sees the screenplay acted out
as he writes it. It also sees Stine's life during the period, including his
conflicts with his wife and with a very autocratic producer-director.

The artistic conflict, he says, involves ''the notion of other people helping
you with your work when you don't necessarily want help with your work.''

''City of Angels,'' like ''Mastergate,'' will have no big-name stars, which can
hurt at the box office. But Gelbart says that big names also bring big problems.
''The bigger the star, the shorter the time they're willing to give you,'' he
says. ''We would rather go with people who will stay with us for a year or so
than go with a big name to help you get launched who leaves three or six months
later. Also, 'City of Angels' has an enormous cast -more than 30 speaking parts
- so I don't think we could have gone for the star money.''

The musical, he says, is set in a time he remembers with great fondness - late
40's Los Angeles. ''And it's in a musical area Cy Coleman is the most adept at,
be-bop. That was just when bop was coming in. It was a good time for L.A. The
sky was blue. It was just after the war, which was a very optimistic time. It
was the beginning of my life.''

GELBART'S LIFE AC-tually began in Chicago, in a lower middle-class neighborhood.
The family moved to California in 1943, and the elder Gelbart soon was cutting
the hair of actors like Edward G. Robinson, Gregory Peck, Edward Arnold and
George Raft.

Gelbart had been writing and performing in his high school plays, and his dad
''just took it in his head that I should be a comedy writer, without checking
with me,'' Gelbart says. ''And one day he was shaving Danny Thomas, and my dad
told him he had this very, very clever son who could write comedy, and Thomas
said have him write a sketch for me.'' Thomas liked the sketch, and Gelbart went
right to work on (Continued on Page 89) Fanny Brice's ''Maxwell House Coffee
Time,'' the radio show Thomas was doing.

After two and a half years with ''Duffy's Tavern,'' Gelbart went into the Army.
''Then all those radio credits started happening'' he recalls. ''In fact, it
replaced college. I didn't go on after high school.''

Then came Bob Hope, Jack Paar, Art Carney, Red Buttons and the Sid Caesar comedy
hour.

''He was always generous with his laughter, even in such a competitive
situation,'' says Mel Brooks, a co-writer on the Sid Caesar show. ''If I came up
with something funny - and I must admit I often did - he was the first one to
laugh, and really loud. Which helped sell Sid on the idea that we should use
it.''

Caesar remembers him as ''a brilliant man and a hard worker. He doesn't settle.
He works and works. He'll argue with you back and forth, which is only right.
And he's easy to work with, because he makes it fun.''

Humor is fun for Gelbart, as his friends well know. He is a member of an
informal club called Yenem Velt -Yiddish for ''The Other World,'' or Paradise.
He, Mel Brooks, Dom DeLuise, Carl Reiner, Norman Lear and their spouses get
together for dinner and often go to Palm Springs together.

''Sometimes,'' Brooks says, ''on one of those evenings, I feel like a matador -
like I've killed a bull. I think I've said something that definitely puts an end
to the evening - no one will top this. And I walk away, and throw my cape over
my shoulders, and 10 seconds later Larry comes back with something funnier.''

After Caesar, Gelbart made his first try at Broadway, writing the book for a
musical called ''The Conquering Hero,'' based on the Preston Sturges film ''Hail
the Conquering Hero''; the play ran for seven performances in 1961. (When the
show was trying out in Philadelphia, Gelbart delivered a one-liner still quoted
by theater people: ''If Hitler's alive, I hope he's out of town with a
musical.'') ''Forum,'' which he co-wrote with the late Burt Shevelove and which
had music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim, wound up being his first Broadway
success.

It was a classic example of a show that had great trouble out of town but was
saved at the last minute and became a hit. ''The opening number was originally a
song called 'Love Is in the Air,' '' Gelbart recalls. ''It was lovely, but it
was the wrong tone for what was to follow. And we all discussed the opening
number, and out of it came the idea to say that tonight you're going to see a
comedy. Steve wrote 'Comedy Tonight' very quickly - perhaps in two nights. And I
might be overstating that by one night.'' The number, and Jerome Robbins's
staging of it, saved the day.

Whatever the show's problems, Sondheim has only fond memories of Gelbart:
''Larry is an ideal collaborator. He is one of the most delightful people to
work with, because he has a verbal sense of humor second to none. He's very
quick - he can grasp any subject immediately.''

Jack Gilford recalls that during ''Sly Fox'' rehearsals, everyone would gather
around a table and read over the new lines Gelbart had written. ''When we'd come
on one that didn't get a laugh,'' Gilford says, ''he would take the piece of
paper it was on and crumple it up and throw it aside. And he'd say, 'We'll get
something better.' And it was always better the next time.''

AFTER ''FORUM'' came the years in London and then ''M*A*S*H,'' for which he was
recruited by Gene Reynolds, the show's executive producer who describes
Gelbart's influence on the show as ''seminal, basic and enormous.''

''Larry not only had the wit and the jokes,'' Reynolds says. ''He had a point of
view. He not only had the ribald spirit, he had the sensibility to the premise -
the wastefulness of war.

''I contributed to the tone as well, and Alan Alda had a big influence. Alan
wrote and directed and acted on the show. But there's no minimizing Larry's
contribution.''

Alan Alda remembers that Gelbart had a bicycle and would ride to the set from
his office if there was a problem with a scene or a line. ''He'd say, 'We
deliver' - and he would,'' Alda recalls. ''He sometimes literally had to
separate himself from you by walking over and standing against the wall and
looking at the wall for about 15 seconds. And then he'd turn around and come
back and he'd have a killingly funny line.

''I know when I wrote for the show I tried to use his writing style as a model,
and I think everybody else did, too.''

But there were other factors behind the show's success, as Gelbart points out:
''It was a time - it still is the time, to some degree - of great
disillusionment. And the characters filled a hero vacuum. I think they behaved
in the way a viewer would like to think they would behave in a stressful
situation.''

This great disillusionment, Gelbart says, is still very much a part of his own
personality.

''I'm not a comfortable person,'' he says. ''There are a lot of elbows inside me
bumping up against one another. I think that if you're a reasonably
well-informed, caring person, you think life is basically sad . . . that this is
a sad world we live in. The thing that most appealed to me about 'M*A*S*H' was
not even the movie. It was the theme song (''Suicide is Painless''), the movie
music, which was written in a very minor key and appealed to me emotionally. And
I know that I pegged all that comedy to that sound.''

Has he created any multi-elbowed characters?

''That's easy,'' he says. ''Hawkeye. I didn't have to think of why he was saying
what he said. He was saying what I felt. I mean, he is an idealized me.''

And how would he describe Hawkeye?

''He is capable - that is, at work, at what he does. He's an idealist. He's a
romantic. Somebody who cares about himself and other people. He's often
frustrated by whatever particular system he finds himself fighting against.''

Gelbart looks at his watch and is reminded of the system he is fighting these
days. He has an appointment with the director Michael Blakemore to chat about
''City of Angels'' - ''just some preliminary work.'' He is beginning to get
busy, and there are beginning to be conflicts. The first comes up later in the
week: Rehearsals for ''Mastergate'' start at 11 that day, and so do auditions
for ''City of Angels.''

''I'll just get a bicycle,'' he says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of writer Larry Gelbart. (Robert Maass)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Pointillist Painting

BYLINE: By John Stone; John Stone is a cardiologist and poet who teaches at
Emory University School of Medicine.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 60, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words


A FRIEND'S WIFE RE-cently persuaded him to buy a memory book, one that would
help counteract his lifelong absent-mindedness. The next day, going in to the
office, he left it on the train.

Why do we remember what we remember? Or, put another way, why is it harder to
forget some things than others? Poetry offers some answers. It is, after all,
the poet's duty to be memorable. Robert Frost maintained that all he wanted to
do was to have a few of his poems stick in the world's memory, a seemingly
modest aim until one considers how many are already there. E.B. White, poet and
essayist, had a similar goal and, in his own way, was just as successful as
Frost. A few months ago, my absent-minded friend, while showing me around New
York, asked if I'd read White's essay ''Here Is New York.'' I surprised myself
by dredging up that essay's memorable last line: ''. . .this city, this
mischievous and marvelous monument which not to look upon would be like death.''
Over lunch we talked about what makes something memorable. What makes things
stick? What's the glue? One element we agreed on - one that White used so
skillfully in his essay - is simile. ''Which not to look upon would be like
death'' arrests us with its unexpectedness, its directness (just as death might)
- and we remember.

Memory is a patchwork quilt, a pointillist painting, neither one, though, ever
quite finished. My friend's memory stretches back into childhood farther than my
own. He recalled for me that when he was about 5 years old, his father played an
April Fools' joke on him. ''My father went to the trouble to solder a tack to
one side of a penny. Then he thumbed the tack into the floor and called my
attention to the penny. He howled inwardly, but silently, at my futile attempts
to pick it up, and finished off the practical joke with 'April Fool!' '' His
father's glee and his childish discomfiture keep that moment penny-bright in his
memory decades later.

What else aids memory? Virtu-ally every former medical student would answer,
''Mnemonics.'' Under the crushing weight of anatomical terms heaped on their
bowed heads, many first-year medical students benefit from this memory device,
in which the first letters of words of an unrelated phrase jog into recall the
associated material. Take, for instance, the eight bones in the wrist. They are
small and bird-light, but each is freighted with a heavy name, such as
''navicular bone'' or ''greater multangular.'' Generations of medical students
have resorted to mnemonics, and it is the more outlandish and risque ones that
have survived best. The odds-on favorite when I was in school was ''Never Lower
Tillie's Pants; Grand-Mother Might Come Home.'' ''Never'' stood for the
navicular bone, ''Grand-Mother'' for greater multangular and so forth. I can
still name the bones of the wrist, though the anatomists, perhaps in revenge,
have conspired to call them by different names.

Many elements help determine what gets remembered. The epigrammatic tends to
stick with us. John Ciardi's one-liner ''Exit Line'' is in this category: ''Love
should intend realities. - Goodbye.'' So is William Faulkner's hope for his work
expressed in a letter he wrote when he was 42 years old: ''Surely it is still
possible to scratch the face of the supreme Obliteration and leave a
decipherable scar of some sort.''

SADNESS AND PA-thos accentuate and attend some memories. When I was about 8
years old, my family went to north Mississippi for my grandmother's funeral. Out
of the well of memory, one scene from that day has risen vividly for me at all
subsequent funerals. The procession of cars was leaving the church on the way to
the cemetery. As my father drove by, my brother and I, playing on the porch of
the old family house, waved and called out to him in our childish
misapprehension of what was happening. I remember that he bowed his head low
against the steering wheel for a moment, crying (I now know) not only for his
mother's death, but also (I now suspect) for his own death and those of his
children, off in the future.

Affection, rage, joy, argument and reconciliation, jealousy, every powerful
emotion, can cause the memory areas of our brains to light up like a
multicolored PET scan. Thus memory can engage and embrace us when we least
expect it - and sometimes when we don't need or want it to.

Some people, often through no fault of their own, are trapped by memory, a
phenomenon that can be national, even international, in scope. The war in
Vietnam, the struggle for civil rights and the women's movement are good
examples of the kinds of events that can create entrapping memories. Such
memories, which are intimately tied to the images that emanate from our huge
common television set, share a sense of immediacy, a palpability, an involvement
of all the senses.

Some senior citizens' lives seem to be wondrously arranged around their
memories, a circumstance our brains make easier for us as we get older. Age
makes recent events easier to forget, whereas remote events, decades old,
shimmer repetitively, fading but coming back as surely as the music of Philip
Glass.

Memory, for most of us, is part of a long biochemical and emotional equilibrium.
It is on one side of a reasonably balanced equation that has forgetting on the
other side of the ''equal sign.'' Part of the daily human struggle is not only
to remember what we need to remember - what people pay us to remember, for
example - but also to forget what we'd be better off forgetting. That, finally,
is what we're all after - a felicitous equilibrium.

If I were designing a memory, I'd have it be selectively fuzzy, something like
the conversation heard by a child sleeping on the back seat of a car while the
parents, in the front, drone on through the night. By simply waking, tuning in
and listening, memory would become crystal clear. And if remembering at times
became more of a burden than a joy, some of us could choose, absent-mindedly or
on purpose, to leave a book of memory circling on the train while we got on with
our lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GIVING PERESTROIKA A CHANCE

BYLINE: By ADAM B. ULAM; Adam B. Ulam is the director of the Russian Research
Center at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 931 words



OUT OF THE COLD
New Thinking for American Foreign and Defense Policy in the 21st Century .
By Robert S. McNamara.
223 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

Now an elder statesman after a period of distinguished public service, Robert S.
McNamara never quite got over the shock of the Cuban missile crisis. As he
recounts in ''Out of the Cold,'' recalling the most tense moment of that week in
October 1962: ''On a beautiful fall evening, as I left the President's office to
return to the Pentagon, I thought I might never live to see another Saturday
night.'' The conviction that the United States and the Soviet Union narrowly
escaped a nuclear confrontation on that occasion, and that we must never allow
the world to be exposed to a similar danger, has stayed with him since then and
provides the leitmotif of this book.

One of that remarkable group of people with whom John F. Kennedy surrounded
himself in his Administration, Mr. McNamara, as Secretary of Defense, played a
key role in American policy making during the next eight years - the most
eventful years, certainly in terms of foreign policy (and in the impact of that
policy on domestic politics), of the entire postwar period up to now. The
exuberant hopes of the New Frontier were dampened by the Bay of Pigs and soon
revived by the peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis and the nuclear
arms test ban agreement with the Soviet Union in 1963. But then came the drama
of Vietnam, the most frustrating military conflict in American history, and its
alarming reverberations on the domestic scene.

Not a mere observer of those events but an active participant in American
decision making at the highest level, Mr. McNamara emerged both disenchanted and
hopeful from his experience - disenchanted about the possibility of American
military strength alone containing Communism and eliminating the danger of a
nuclear war; hopeful that a way could be found to assure a peaceful and stable
world through an agreement with the Soviet Union. And now, with Mikhail S.
Gorbachev at the helm there and with what the author believes are very major
changes taking place in Soviet foreign and defense policies, he says that such
an agreement is not only possible but imperative; we must not let the
opportunity slip away. ''Gorbachev is presenting the West with an unprecedented
opportunity to redefine the basic assumptions and conditions of East-West
relations.''

Mr. McNamara would thus like the West to respond to Soviet initiatives on arms
control, both nuclear and conventional, and to seek a broader understanding on
other contentious and important issues, in order to integrate the Soviet Union
more fully into an interdependent world order. While a critic of present United
States defense policies, especially our reluctance to abandon the Strategic
Defense Initiative, he is far from suggesting we could ever entirely give up our
nuclear deterrent. ''Thus, despite the desirability of a world without nuclear
weapons, an agreement to that end does not appear feasible either today or for
the foreseeable future.'' But how beguiling his vision that after arms reduction
agreements we might be able to reduce our military expenditures in half, to 3
percent of our gross national product, and free hundreds of billions for more
productive purposes!

What stands in the way of such blessings? Well, to a large extent those doubting
Thomases in Washington who argue that the recent changes in Soviet policies are
not for real, and that Mr. Gorbachev and his perestroika might soon be
overturned and that we would then see the Soviets reverting to their
expansionist ways. Mr. McNamara is quite convincing in his rebuttal of the first
line of objections, and of course it is ridiculous to maintain that the Soviet
Union is going through this painful re-examination of its policies and revealing
its self-inflicted wounds just to deceive the West. But on the second count, it
is hard to share fully Mr. McNamara's optimism that the foreign policy side of
perestroika is irreversible. It is unlikely that a change in the leadership
would automatically bring Soviet policies back to where they were before 1985.

But unfortunately it is not unrealistic to envisage a scenario in which domestic
and Communist-bloc troubles would constrain the regime to try to save itself and
preserve internal cohesion by invoking foreign danger and once again adopting a
challenging stand vis-a-vis the West. In other words, the present vulnerability
of the Soviet system and the entire Communist system offers great opportunities
for the West, but also holds a potential danger. We cannot preclude the
possibility of a drastic turn against the forces of reform in the Soviet Union,
which might be followed by more serious consequences for the outside world than
the recent crackdown in China has had up to now. And hasn't the United States'
readiness to spend on defense until it hurts been a factor in persuading the
Kremlin to curb the expansionist thrust of its foreign policy?

Mr. McNamara would not heed such cautions and qualifications. Now is the moment,
he argues, to seize the chance for a durable peace and to banish forever the
ghost of the cold war. Some would find his very American blend of impatient
idealism, practicality and optimism an attractive but somewhat oversimplified
view of the problem. Others will see what he advises as plain common sense. But
all readers should find this little book of interest - a succinct guide to the
past, present and future problems of Soviet-American coexistence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ON YOUR OWN;
Where Iron Doses of Stamina Count

BYLINE: By BARBARA LLOYD

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


WHAT does it take to prepare for one of the most arduous sporting contests on
earth? It depends on where you set your sights. You may want to win, or you may
only hope to finish.

Either way, there are 2.4 miles of ocean to swim, 112 miles of hills and valleys
to bike and 26.2 miles of road to run.

The event is the Bud Light Ironman Triathlon World Championship, scheduled to
begin at 7 A.M. Saturday on the island of Hawaii. The 140-mile competition is
expected to draw 1,250 of the world's top athletes.

To be the best, you must have in sight the men's record of 8 hours 31 minutes
set last year by Scott Molina of Boulder, Colo., 29 years old; or the women's
record of 9 hours 1 minute set in 1988 by the 27-year old Paula Newby-Fraser of
Zimbabwe.

Not everyone goes into the Ironman with hopes of winning. But to enter, you must
learn endurance. To even consider the Ironman, you must concentrate on stamina,
consistency and knowing how to pace yourself.

Eugene Matthews, a 30-year-old Manhattan business executive who won his right to
compete this year through a lottery, wants to ''finish in a respectable time.''

Barbara Norman, a corporate lawyer from Greenwich, Conn., wants to improve on
the distance record she set last summer in an Ironman qualifying event on Cape
Cod.

Kathy Bambace-Salvo, a stock trader from Purchase, N.Y., is trying to get back
on her feet after a car accident last year in which bruises she received kept
her out of training for a few weeks. She is working toward a decent finish.

Jeff Devlin, a 25-year-old engineer from Cherry Hill, N.J., wants to end up in
the winner's circle - at least among the top five. He is the only one of the
four who has competed in the Ironman before.

More than 4,000 competitors were vying for the right to compete this year. One
hundred athletes from a pool of 1,800 United States competitors were approved by
winning a lottery. Most of the remaining Ironman contestants had to qualify
through 21 designated races in the United States.

Matthews considers himself lucky to have won a place in the lottery. As
president of ASHTA International, a Manhattan holding company with major
business interests in Southeast Asia, he doesn't have enough hours in the day to
qualify any other way. He has a travel itinerary of more than 300,000 miles a
year. Thus, Matthews's training schedule is a patchwork of exotic places and
ungodly hours.

Being inventive with his training schedule is part of the allure of the Ironman,
Matthews said. He takes his bicycle with him everywhere and tries to stay in
hotels with pools and fitness facilities.

At home, he works out with the New York Road Runners Club; he is also a member
of a city health club. In an average week, no matter where he is, Matthews will
run 40 miles, cycle 150 miles and swim 4 miles.

''I end up in places like Ho Chi Minh City,'' Matthews said. ''I'm running
through the streets at 5 A.M. in my shorts and Harvard T-shirt, knowing that
people are looking at me and wondering why I'm there.''

On a trip to Hanoi, the capital of Vietnam, Matthews remembers one morning when
he had run 10 miles, only to return to his hotel and find that it was out of
bottled water.

''They were out of beverages too,'' Matthews said. ''I was exhausted and
thirsty, and had to sit around for two hours waiting for water.''

Norman, 51, works full time in Manhattan as vice president of WMS Industries, a
company that owns hotels and businesses in Puerto Rico. Her daughter and two
stepsons are adults now, and since her husband died two years ago, she has
turned to triathlons.

A major cancer operation in December has not detracted her from her goals, nor
slowed her down much. Despite a rigorous training schedule, she says she has
felt few of the anticipated side effects of chemotherapy.

Norman often trains with Bambace-Salvo, who at 25 is the same age as her
daughter, as an incentive to work harder.

Bombace-Salvo qualified for the Ironman by winning her age group at the Gulf
Coast Triathlon at Panama City, Fla., in May. Both women average about 6 miles
of swimming each week, 200 miles of cycling and 50 miles of running. If they
don't train together, they call one another to see who did more.

''That's our big contest each day,'' Norman said. Norman set the equivalent of
an Ironman record, 12 hours 25 minutes, for women 50-55 years of age at the Bud
Light Endurance Triathlon at Hyannis, Mass., in September. Bambace-Salvo, who
also competed there only three months after being in a car accident, finished in
12 hours 38 minutes. Norman was surprised at those she beat.

''I passed so many strong, young people,'' she said. ''I frankly think older
people have the endurance that younger people don't.''

Devlin quit his engineering job with Boeing Helicopter in January to dedicate
himself to the Ironman. For him, winning is everything; he has given himself
several years to achieve the goal. He placed 25th over all in the Ironman last
year, his first attempt to crack the Grand Prix of triathlon racing.

To reach that level, training is a full-time occupation. In the last two months,
he has stepped up his training schedule. He rides his bike an average of 400
miles a week, swims up to 15 miles and runs about 60 miles.

Devlin trains by himself to gain a mental edge on the solitude of racing. On
occasion, he will train with another triathlete to push himself harder.

''I feel like I'm capable of finishing in the top five,'' Devlin said last week.
''But I also feel I'm capable of blowing up and not finishing because I don't
have the experience. Anything can happen out there in eight or nine hours.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Eugene Matthews; Barbara Norman and Kathy Bombace-Salvo
(NYT/Jim Estrin); Jeff Devlin (Richard Graham/Triathlon Magazine)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
The Travails of Cambodia As Seen by Prince Sihanouk

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


The recent withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia and the threat of the
return of the infamous Khmer Rouge lend immediacy to ''Cambodia: The Prince and
the Prophecy,'' a political history of that much beset land. This first of two
''Intercom'' programs, at 10 o'clock tonight on Channel 13, takes us from
legends of the ancient empire of the kings of Angkor up to the only too real
events of the 1970's. Next week, ''Cambodia Kampuchea'' reports on the horrors
inflicted by Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge, its defeat by the Vietnamese, who instituted
their own tough occupation, and the jeopardy in which the country now finds
itself.

This history, produced by Jim Gerrand, is told mainly from the point of view of
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who ruled Cambodia for much of its post-colonial
existence, first as a god-king and playboy, then as prime minister and adroit
politician. More objective observers are brought in to render assessments of his
somewhat mercurial career. The result is an absorbing account of a small country
trying to stay alive amid the buffetings of regional conflicts and big-power
maneuverings. Prince Sihanouk himself, still ruddy-cheeked, amiable, cultivated,
makes an engaging if self-serving historian.

For centuries, the more powerful and bellicose Vietnamese were the main threats
to their Cambodian neighbors. Cambodia was saved, in a manner of speaking, by
the French colonialization of Indochina in the 1860's. And it was the French who
elevated the young Sihanouk to the role of god-king in the 1940's, in which
powerless incarnation he enjoyed fast cars, good cuisine and pretty women. With
the help of newsreels of the time, he tells of his postwar strivings for
independence, during which he showed considerable skill as a master of
international publicity. After France left Cambodia in 1953, he was dominant
within the country but had to court both the West and the Communist bloc for aid
and protection.

The war in Vietnam struck Cambodia in the form of North Vietnamese supply routes
and American bombings. Prince Sihanouk blames the military's greed for American
dollars, which proved sufficient to enrich Cambodia's generals but not to win
their war against the Vietnamese, for his overthrow in 1970 by the right-wing,
mystically inclined Gen. Lon Nol.

Prince Sihanouk, resorting occasionally to a French phrase to supplement his
less fluent English, maintains here that he could have saved the country. His
methods seemed Byzantine to Western observers. In exile in China, we see him
embracing the Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot, whom he now calls ''mad, like
Hitler.'' Prince Sihanouk became a figurehead. His hope, he says, was to use the
Chinese to protect his country against its own Communists, who he knew would
''spit me out like a cherry stone'' once they took power. Beijing disappointed
him, throwing its support to the Khmer Rouge, while Moscow backed Vietnam,
leaving the former god-king as odd man out.

The Khmer Rouge propaganda movies shown here are fascinating. The shadowy Pol
Pot stars. He turns out to be a sturdy looking man with a big grin, who the
camera finds wielding a shovel on an irrigation project (''All Kampuchea is a
great work site,'' rhapsodizes the narrator) and regaling supporters with his
accomplishments. By contrast, we are also shown the deserted cities after the
Communists forced their residents into the countryside as well as some of the
corpses of the hundreds of thousands of Cambodians slaughtered at Pol Pot's
direction.

Prince Sihanouk lays blame for his country's physical and political devastation
on ''the madness of the policy of Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger,'' in particular
their support of Lon Nol and the heavy bombing of Vietcong bases in the country.
''Cambodia,'' he says, ''is the Nixon doctrine in its purest form.''

Tonight's program concludes with the victory of the Khmer Rouge in 1975, which
Prince Sihanouk calls ''year zero.'' But, as next week's report shows, the
nation's miseries did not end when the Khmer Rouge were driven out by the
Vietnamese. Cambodians then had to endure famine and Vietnam-style repression.
Today, once again, Prince Sihanouk is trying to find independence for Cambodia,
even if that means another alliance of necessity with the Khmer Rouge. ''I want
to be the man of national unity,'' he says. In the harsh light of the events
recounted in these two hours, his prospects and those of his suffering people
remain dark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of scene from 'Cambodia: The Prince and the Prophet'

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Russians Are Still Coming

BYLINE: By Richard Pipes; Richard Pipes is professor of history at Harvard
University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


We live in an age of image-building - an age in which it is increasingly
difficult to distinguish appearance from reality. Soviet leaders have taken full
advantage of this situation in conducting foreign policy. They say one thing,
and do another. Since most people cannot determine where the truth lies, they
believe noble intentions.

The sense of good feeling is pervasive: An influential essay by a State
Department official, Francis Fukuyama, assures us that the liberal cause has
triumphed globally and that the ''end of history'' is at hand.

Since Mikhail Gorbachev came to power, the Soviet Union has been far less
aggressive in its foreign policy pronouncements. Desperately needing foreign aid
to shore up a collapsing economy, it has projected with all the propaganda means
at its disposal the image of a country that requires peace and defense-budget
cutbacks. Such professions and certain steps, largely symbolic, have had the
desired effect of blurring the perception of the Soviet Union as an aggressive,
hostile power. This has resulted in an increased flow of foreign loans (the
external debt has doubled under Mr. Gorbachev) and a corresponding decline in
the West's willingness to bear the burdens of defense.

How genuine is the change in Soviet foreign policy? Take defense expenditures.
Moscow has finally released what it claims to be its true military budget. The
77 billion ruble figure announced earlier this year is about half of what U.S.
experts believe to be actual defense appropriations.

Washington estimates that military outlays under Mr. Gorbachev continue to grow
at the rate of 3 percent a year in constant rubles. Although there have been
indications of a slowdown in certain categories of weapons, the modernization of
the four military services proceeds under perestroika at the same tempo as in
the ''era of stagnation.''

In the Middle East, the Kremlin has often stressed the desire to replace
confrontation with negotiations. Although rumors abound of worsening relations
with Syria, Moscow's principal ally and a major aggressor, Syria has received
MIG-29 fighters and supersonic Sukhoi 24 bombers. (Moscow has also sold Sukhois
to Libya).

Taking advantage of Syria's massive debt owed to the Soviet Union, estimated at
more than $15 billion, the Kremlin has secured a major naval facility at Tartus.
This port, fully controlled by Soviet personnel, will service surface ships and
submarines, obviating the necessity of having them go for maintenance and
repairs to the Black Sea and the distant Kola Peninsula. The U.S. Navy has no
comparable Mediterranean facility.

In the Far East, the Soviet buildup of client states continues. North Korea has
been provided with MIG-23's and is reported in line for the more advanced
MIG-29's. Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia have been given $2 billion in aid since
1987. Moscow has doubled its economic assistance to Vietnam, and has reportedly
doubled military aid to Cambodia over 1988 levels. Vietnam has allowed Moscow to
improve its new Pacific naval base at Cam Ranh Bay, originally constructed by
the U.S.

Although Moscow has withdrawn combat troops from Afghanistan, it has increased
economic and military assistance to the quisling Government in Kabul. Nothing
suggests that the Soviet Union intends to relax its hold on that country.

In Nicaragua, the Sandinistas were saved from near-disaster by their decision to
allow democratic elections. They have often let it be known, however, that they
will not surrender power, come what may. (The only certainty is that the contras
are doomed.) In Nicaragua, despite Mr. Gorbachev's assurances that no Soviet aid
would be forthcoming, Soviet bloc and Cuban military assistance is reportedly
being generously supplied.

And in Angola, Jonas Savimbi is in retreat and South Africa is pulling out, but
Soviet aid continues to flow in.

There are at least two reasonable explanations for the discrepancy between
Soviet professions and performance. One is that Moscow regards the present
period as a breathing spell, to restore its flagging economy and popular morale,
before resuming a worldwide offensive. The other is that the leadership is so
beholden to its generals, especially in view of growing internal unrest, that it
cannot afford to alienate them with cutbacks in appropriations and foreign
commitments.

Whichever explanation is correct, world stability and peace are nowhere as close
as much of world opinion would like to believe. The Kremlin's professions of
peaceful intent, and certain steps carefully calculated to mollify the West, do
not alter the fact that Soviet military activities at home and abroad under Mr.
Gorbachev have proceeded pretty much as they did under Leonid I. Brezhnev.

The ''new thinking'' in international relations has shown more style than
substance. In fact, the soft-line policy has enabled Moscow to spread its
influence and power abroad more effectively that when it had pursued an overtly
hard line.

One paradoxical effect of the Gorbachev peace offensive has been to promote
Soviet interests in regional conflicts.

Even as the Soviet Union is withdrawing, its clients in Cambodia, Angola,
Nicaragua and Afghanistan have been growing stronger at the expense of U.S.
allies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
Instincts to Be Cautious With Panama Prevail

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


Brent Scowcroft, the White House national security adviser, spoke Sunday about
''the fog of war'' as one element that had sorely complicated the Bush
Administration's reaction to the attempted coup last week in Panama.

He meant the disorder that always attends fast-breaking events on the
battlefield, but in this case the clouds of confusion stretched all the way to
Washington and the decision-making process in the American Government.

Mr. Scowcroft and other officials, resentful of what the security adviser
described as the ''micromanagement'' of foreign policy by Congress, argue that
the Administration's response was severely limited by the precedent set in July
1988, when the Senate Intelligence Committee objected to Reagan Administration
proposals for supporting a coup plotted by a group of dissident Panamanian
officers.

Congress, Mr. Scowcroft asserted, ''has, by its actions and its demeanor,
certainly leaned on us against the kinds of things they're now saying that we
should have done.''

Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma, the intelligence committee's Democratic
chairman, and Senator William S. Cohen of Maine, a Republican who is vice
chairman, both say that is nonsense. A senior White House official sided with
them today, asserting, ''Scowcroft and the rest of them don't really have any
business saying that, because that clearly wasn't the major issue around here
last week.''

What is undisputed, indeed obvious, is that few senior officials in the
executive branch have much appetite any more for small-scale wars involving
American troops. That is as true of Gen. Colin L. Powell as it was of his
predecessor as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. William J. Crowe Jr.
The Vietnam War, a ranking officer said, ''has made us wary of places like
Panama and Colombia.''

Likewise, the Central Intelligence Agency, which would once have been the
obvious organization to get rid of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian
strongman, has been reluctant to become involved, fearful that if anything went
wrong, it would be accused of mounting an illegal assassination plan.

Conversations with a wide range of people this weekend suggest that the
prevailing mood in Washington, from President Bush on down, has become
profoundly anti-interventionist - so much so that however strongly many
responsible officials may have felt impelled to make an exception for General
Noriega, it was hard for them to overcome the cautious instincts that have taken
hold.

In that context, several White House aides said, the absence from the
Administration's top-level deliberations of Ted Briggs, the National Security
Council's leading expert on General Noriega, may have been a decisive handicap.
Mr. Briggs, a former Ambassador to Panama, who has advocated tougher action
against General Noriega, has been relieved of his security council duties,
reportedly at the behest of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d. Mr. Briggs
might have been able more accurately to evaluate the confused information that
spurted into Washington in the crucial hours a week ago.

But even that is questioned by White House officials not involved in the
political damage-limitation exercise and thus more likely to apportion some of
the blame to Administration policy makers rather than placing it wholly on the
shoulders of others.

''The intelligence wasn't good, and it wasn't made good use of,'' one aide said.
''But that isn't really the point, is it? There wasn't a clear idea of exactly
what we wanted to do in case of a coup, so we didn't ask the right questions,
and without the right questions, intelligence doesn't help.''

So what now? In addition to trying to remedy the structural problems that
hampered coordination within the Administration, top officials see a number of
perils against which they must guard in the coming weeks.

The list includes, but is certainly not limited to, somehow assuring the
remaining Panamanian officers with rebellious tendencies that the United States
is not a paper tiger; extending similar assurances to the Colombian Government,
lest it let up on its war against the drug lords; and at the same time avoiding
the temptation to make some flashy, but futile, show of force in Central America
- all while repairing tattered relations with Capitol Hill.

They said Mr. Bush's honeymoon couldn't last forever, and it hasn't.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Dead 'War Hero' Unmasked: A Life of Lies to Hide Failures

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY, Oct. 9


Nancy Fife never doubted that her husband was scarred in mind and body by his
Viet Cong captors and was a war hero. nearly 20 years ago, her sneakers seemed
to drive her husband, Robert, berserk. He told her that his captors wore
sneakers when they came to his cage to beat him and urinate on him and that the
enemy soldier he strangled to escape was wearing sneakers.

Mr. Fife left a 449-page manuscript when he died this summer at 46 of
self-inflicted carbon monoxide poisoning.

But he had never been to Vietnam. He had never been a hero. 'Very Much a
Casualty'

He had seen a therapist, Dr. Corydon Hammond, who had concluded that he was
suffering from post-traumatic stress syndrome and was ''very much a casualty of
the Vietnam War.''

A letter that Dr. Hammond wrote after Mr. Fife's death gave what he had been
told was war experience - 15 days as a prisoner of war after the F-4 fighter on
which Mr. Fife said he was the navigator was shot down in 1966. The plane was
assigned to the carrier Ranger, Mr. Fife had said.

Dr. Hammond said Mr. Fife adopted the heroic identity to cover a life of
failures.

He kept the pose through 23 years of marriage. He used it the day his wife went
with him to see the therapist for the first time, in 1986. After he died, she
sought to have his name included on Utah's Vietnam War memorial. She showed the
letter from Dr. Hammond as part of her evidence.

The Veterans Approved

Last month the Utah Vietnam Era Veterans Memorial Committee decided to add the
name to the memorial, which is to be dedicated on Saturday. But while an
engraver was preparing to add the name on the marble, a reporter for The
Associated Press who had searched in vain for war comrades of Mr. Fife told Mrs.
Fife that her husband had lied.

''I feel like I've been raped,'' Mrs. Fife said. The deception was revealed by
Navy records. She has told her 21-year-old son and her 19-year-old daughter
about it.

Robert Fife had a certificate, purportedly from the U.S.S. Ranger Committee,
listing medals he said he burned to protest bad treatment of Vietnam veterans.
They included the Navy Cross.

Real Records Are Tracked Down

The certificate, which appeared to have been signed by Adm. Thomas H. Moorer,
retired Chief of Naval Operations, said Lieut (j.g.) Robert J. Fife, who had
flown 130 missions over enemy territory, was ''one of only four naval aviators
to escape from enemy prison camps.''

At the reporter's request Jeannie Kirk, the head of the Navy's Awards and
Special Projects Branch, tracked down the real Navy records. Mr. Fife enlisted
in September 1965 and was discharged eight months later as medically unfit
because of bones broken in his right foot in childhood. They had not mended
properly. His only medal was the Defense Service Award, which was awarded to
everyone who served.

Mr. Fife never knew his father. His sister, Lynda Turcsanski, said he blamed his
mother for making him ''a bastard.'' His wife knew him as a pornography addict
who spent hours alone with his paper treasures.

Friends and relatives knew him as unreliable and angry, a dreamer, a failed
businessman who gambled away $172,000 of a partner's money, a sometime truck
driver - and a would-be writer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
'Covert' Means Fiasco

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 777 words


Once again, in misguided zeal to rearrange another nation's affairs, the U.S.
Government has demonstrated all that's wrong with ''covert operations,'' and why
they have no useful place in the policies of a democratic nation.

The latest fiasco in Panama - following earlier pratfall efforts to oust the
odious dictator Manuel Antonio Noriega - continues a disastrous, dishonorable,
bipartisan tradition: Iran-contra and the Bay of Pigs, to name the most
notorious.

Even when covert operations succeed in the short run (in Iran and Guatemala in
the 50's, for example) they damage U.S. interests (not to mention the victim
nations) in the long term. Usually they backfire immediately - for instance, the
C.I.A.'s harebrained mining of Nicaraguan harbors.

Bush Administration officials, trying to explain the latest foul-up, claim to
have been handicapped by lack of information. What did they expect? Little is
ever clear in war and crisis, particularly at long range; and rumors,
disinformation, surmise, silence and either wishful or fearful thinking are the
background to any supposedly secret, outlaw operation.

The attempted Panama coup posed another problem typical of any such situation.
No one in Washington could be sure whether the plotters would form a government
preferable to General Noriega's criminal regime, and Mr. Bush resorted to the
laughable demand that the coup leaders declare themselves democratic. Such
uncertainty of consequence hangs over any covert operation.

Whether they choose themselves, as in the Panama failure, or the U.S. picks its
own man, as in Guatemala, the nature of a successor regime is problematic. Nor
can it be certain what might happen during the operation itself; Mr. Bush and
his aides never learned for sure whether General Noriega's opponents would
remand him to the U.S. for trial on drug-running charges.

For a quarter-century, former Kennedy Administration officials have insisted
that they opposed the murder of Ngo Dinh Diem during a coup they authorized in
South Vietnam in 1963; Diem was assassinated anyway. When the C.I.A. tried to
direct a military takeover to prevent the election of Salvador Allende Gossens
in Chile during the Nixon Administration, the operation succeeded only in
causing the murder of Gen. Rene Schneider, a constitutionalist partial to the
U.S.

These and other ''covert'' operations quickly became public, contributing
heavily to the world's view of the U.S. as a ''great power'' little more
concerned than the Soviet Union to respect the sovereignty of other nations. In
Latin America, the ancient list of gringo interventions -even so inept as last
week's in Panama - deeply prejudices Latin attitudes toward norteamericanos.

Everywhere, the inevitable disclosure of U.S. efforts to overthrow governments -
even the hateful Noriega regime - makes a mockery of American pretensions to
world moral primacy and to American rhetoric about the self-determination of
peoples and the rule of law. But it's not possible -repeat, not possible - in a
democratic society with a free press to keep for long such ''secrets'' as the
C.I.A.'s funding of the contras in Nicaragua.

Worse, perhaps, than any of these other characteristics of covert operations is
the necessity for the U.S. Government, from the President on down, to lie about
them. Nothing so damages government credibility and public trust as the exposed
lie of a formerly trusted leader - for example, President Eisenhower's cover-up
of his knowledge of U-2 flights over the Soviet Union.

For his part, Mr. Bush emphatically assured the public in an effective TV
''sound bite'' that rumors of an ''American operation'' in Panama were ''not
true.'' Since Panamanian officers did hatch their own scheme, the President may
have achieved some shred of ''deniability'' with this formulation. But he and
other officials purposely left two clear but false impressions - that the coup
not only was not Washington's idea but that in Panama the U.S. had stayed
scrupulously clear of the action.

In fact, the coup attempt was inspired by George Bush's repeated invitations to
the Panamanian military to seize power. Without these assurances of U.S.
sympathy and the implication of U.S. support, the attempt hardly would have been
made. U.S. troops, moreover, blocked two roads to aid the plotters, and U.S.
officials negotiated with them for custody of General Noriega.

If both covert action and the open invasion of Panama are to be ruled out, some
may ask, what's to be done about the dictator? Leave him to his people, I say,
to his neighbors, to economic and political isolation; if all else fails, leave
him to Heaven.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Rev. John Lord, 87; Was Methodist Bishop

SECTION: Section D; Page 24, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


The Rev. Dr. John Wesley Lord, a retired bishop of the United Methodist Church
who was active in the civil rights movement and in the racial integration of his
church, died Sunday, apparently of a heart attack, at Huggins Hospital in
Wolfeboro, N.H. He was 87 years old and lived in Wolfeboro and Lakeland, Fla.

Dr. Lord took part in many civil rights protests, including a
Selma-to-Montgomery, Ala., march in 1965 with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr. He also pressed for reform in the penal system and opposed American
involvement in Vietnam, the bombing of Hanoi and nuclear weapons tests.

He presided over the church's Boston area from 1948 to 1960 and over its
Washington area from 1960 until 1972. He was a native of Paterson, N.J., and
studied at Montclair (N.J.) State College, Dickinson College, Drew Theological
Seminary, the University of Edinburgh and Rutgers.

His early New Jersey assignments included Emory Methodist Church in Jersey City,
the Union Community Church in Union and the First Methodist Churches in
Arlington and Westfield.

Surviving are Dr. Lord's wife, Margaret; a daughter, Jean Cooper of West
Lafayette, Ind., and two grandchildren.

His son-in-law, Arnold Cooper, said that shortly before he died, he wrote that
he had ''lived 87 years, died briefly and lives on.'' Earlier, Dr. Lord wrote,
''In a long and arduous career, I was sustained by the thought that the work was
not mine to finish, nor was I free to take no part in it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk, the Key to Cambodian Peace

BYLINE: By Tommy T .B . Koh; Tommy T. B. Koh is Singapore's Ambassador to the
United States.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


With the Cambodian problem moving from the conference table to the battlefield,
many in the U.S. are questioning the wisdom of Washington's support of Prince
Norodom Sihanouk and the non-Communist resistance. These critics are wrong:
Prince Sihanouk, a Cambodian patriot, is the only Cambodian leader who can bring
about national reconciliation.

Nothing fundamental has changed in Cambodia. The West and Asean (the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations) have to continue pressing Vietnam and its Cambodian
surrogate, Prime Minister Hun Sen, for a comprehensive political settlement.
This is the only way to achieve a lasting peace.

Look at the facts. First, Vietnam's latest ''withdrawal'' is the eighth in
almost as many years. In the absence of international verification, we don't
know how many Vietnamese remain as advisers, troops or ''settlers.''

Second, from the outset of last summer's peace conference in Paris, all parties
agreed on the need for a comprehensive settlement. They did not wish to repeat
the tragedy in Afghanistan, where the carnage has continued since the Soviet
withdrawal.

Third, it is unfair to blame the failure of the conference on the Khmer Rouge
and Prince Sihanouk. The conference failed because Mr. Hun Sen refused to share
substantive executive powers with Prince Sihanouk in an interim coalition
government. Mr. Hun Sen was prepared to accept Prince Sihanouk only as a
figurehead.

Fourth, Vietnam and Mr. Hun Sen are waging a propaganda campaign to destroy the
credibility of Prince Sihanouk. He has good reason to fear Prince Sihanouk's
popularity.

Fifth, the Khmer Rouge must be part of the interim coalition government, as
Prince Sihanouk insists. True, the idea of the murderous Khmer Rouge
participating in any government in Cambodia is morally repugnant, and Pol Pot
and his henchmen must never have a role.

However, the Khmer Rouge could be more effectively controlled if they were
included in a coalition government. To exclude them is to invite a military
assault on that government, which would disrupt the reconstruction of the
country and block any attempt to hold free elections. Would the inclusion of the
Khmer Rouge pose a mortal danger to Cambodia? Perhaps, if they had not made
several commitments at the Paris conference.

They agreed that, following a cease-fire, all armed Cambodians should be
regrouped in bases and disarmed. They supported a strong peacekeeping force
under United Nations auspices. They supported an internationally supervised
election that would be free and fair, and pledged to abide by the outcome. Last,
as part of a comprehensive settlement, they did not insist upon sharing power
equally in the coalition government.

We will never know the sincerity of these commitments unless we test them.
Moreover, there is reason to believe China would drop its support of the Khmer
Rouge if they were defeated in a free election. China's cooperation is, of
course, crucial to an effective settlement in Cambodia.

What alternative is there to including the Khmer Rouge? The Vietnamese failed to
eliminate them in 10 years of fighting. Is it realistic to expect Mr. Hun Sen's
army or even a coalition of all the factions to succeed where the powerful
Vietnamese Army failed? Clearly, the way to eliminate the Khmer Rouge is to
require them to submit to the people's will in a free election.

Although all sides are now prepared to settle their differences on the
battlefield, a military contest is likely to be just as inconclusive as the
latest diplomatic round. If so, Vietnam and Mr. Hun Sen may be ready to return
to Paris for another peace conference at the end of the dry season, in late
spring.

In the meantime, we must continue to support Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann.
The Bush Administration's proposal to give arms aid to the non-Communist
resistance deserves bipartisan backing. In addition, the rest of the West, the
Asean countries and Japan need to hang tough against Vietnam and Mr. Hun Sen.

We must not recognize the Hun Sen regime, which was installed by a foreign,
occupying power. To recognize it would be tantamount to accepting Vietnam's
illegal invasion and occupation of Cambodia. Moreover, recognizing the regime
would not stop the killing in Cambodia.

We should not end Vietnam's international isolation until there is an
internationally acceptable agreement on Cambodia. If we maintain pressure, there
is a real possibility that the Paris conference will be reconvened next year. By
that time, Vietnam and Mr. Hun Sen may well be ready to accept a comprehensive
political settlement that will bring peace and self-determination to the
Cambodians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIAN REBELS SEEM BOGGED DOWN

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 14


A modest offensive by troops of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a
non-Communist Cambodian rebel faction, appears to have bogged down in
northwestern Cambodia, diplomats say.

Roughly two weeks ago, about 5,000 troops of the faction, which receives
non-arms aid from the United States, moved across the border north of Sisophon
from their sanctuaries in Thailand as two Vietnamese battalions in the area were
withdrawn. The departure was part of Vietnam's pullout from Cambodia, which, the
Vietnamese say, was completed on Sept. 26 after an occupation of nearly 11
years.

The liberation front, which has long been marked by factionalism and smuggling,
has tried to pull itself together to convince Washington that it deserves
further aid. The Bush Administration says it is contemplating direct arms
supplies to the liberation FRont and the forces of Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
which Washington says it has never supplied. These non-Communist forces are the
smaller partners in a rebel alliance with the Khmer Rouge, a Communist group
opposed by the United States.

Some Praise, Some Skepticism

The liberation front's deputy commander, Dien Del, claims to have captured
''strategic towns,'' but diplomats say most of the populated settlements taken
consist of crossroads with a few thatched houses and small military garrisons.
Still, upbeat Western diplomats say the front has done ''surprisingly well''
given its fractured past and a nearly absolute break between Son Sann, a former
Cambodian Prime Minister who is its titular head, and its military force led by
Sak Sutsakhan.

Diplomats of countries that do not aid the Cambodian guerrillas are more
skeptical. ''There's fighting going on, but not much,'' an Asian diplomat said.

He said he is worried that ''the information is largely coming from one source,
the K.P.N.L.F. itself.''

Under pressure to show their viability after the Vietnamese withdrew, the
liberation front's generals have disciplined their ranks and put about 16,000
fighters under arms, its highest figure in six years, the Western diplomats
said.

Strutting Around the Border

The forces of Prince Sihanouk, the leader of the coalition opposed to Phnom
Penh, ''still isn't doing much of anything,'' a senior diplomat said. ''They're
good at walking around the border in their American uniforms and Singapore
M-16's and attracting recruits, but they don't fight much.''

The Khmer Rouge, Asian diplomats suggest, is happy to allow the liberation front
to get some attention, having understood that major Khmer Rouge offensives or
victories so soon after the Vietnamese withdrawal would be bound to frighten the
West and prove counterproductive.

Aid officials say the Khmer Rouge has recently been improving the management of
its refugee camps in Thailand and responding to aid agency complaints, long
ignored, about human rights abuses and the intentional isolation of civilians
from any contact with Western aid workers or doctors.

Waiting for the Dry Season

The Khmer Rouge is also likely to wait for any larger-scale offensive until the
rainy season is over in November, an Asian diplomat said. ''Right now you can't
get very far off the roads or you're waist-deep in water,'' he said.

Despite charges by all factions of the resistance that Vietnamese soldiers
remain fighting inside Cambodia, General Dien Del told The Associated Press on
Friday, ''To be fair we have never seen Vietnamese in our area.'' But he said it
was his opinion that 50,000 Vietnamese remained in Cambodia near the border with
Vietnam.

The liberation front has hit a dozen or so military garrisons along Route 69,
which runs from the Thai border to Sisophon, the diplomats said, and took a
village named Banteay Chmar, the headquarters of a Cambodian regiment, and a
small town named Thmar Pouk. On Oct. 4, Phnom Penh has announced, the garrison
at Kandol surrendered. From there, Cambodian Government soldiers could shell the
outskirts of Site 2, the large Liberation Front refugee camp inside Thailand.

The liberation front claims to have captured nearly 700 Government soldiers,
hundreds of light weapons and a few tanks and artillery pieces. But it has made
little progress in the last week, failing to take Svay Chek, an announced
objective on Route 69 some 15 miles north of Sisophon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia indicating the Thai border around Sisophon, Cambodia
(NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Boat People Fast To Protest Return to Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 101 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Oct. 14


More than 11,000 Vietnamese boat people in detention centers here staged a
hunger strike today to protest repatriation to their homeland, officials said.

Nearly all the 7,000 inhabitants in the Shek Kong Detention Center refused to
have breakfast and lunch today, a police spokesman said on condition of
anonymity. And a Government spokesman said 4,100 boat people in detention
centers in Shatin and on Lantao Island also stopped eating. The actions came
before talks in Geneva on Monday and Tuesday to review plans to screen
Vietnamese boat people and repatriate those who do not qualify as refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Louisiana Warden Dismissed Over Security

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 470 words

DATELINE: BATON ROUGE, La., Oct. 14


The warden of the Louisiana State Penitentiary has been dismissed because he
operated a cockfighting business at the prison and failed to maintain security
and to report escapes, the head of the state's corrections department said on
Wednesday.

The warden, Hilton Butler, had been on leave since August, and the corrections
department had announced he would retire. But on Tuesday, Bruce Lynn, the
Louisiana Secretary of Public Safety and Corrections, dismissed Mr. Butler for
eight violations of department policy involving administrative malfeasance. ''I
was going to give him the opportunity to retire,'' Mr. Lynn said on Wednesday.
''He chose not to retire.''

Warden Says He Was Coerced

Mr. Butler, who is 59 years old, had filed an appeal with the Civil Service
Commission, asking it to reinstate him and claiming that Gov. Buddy Roemer and
Mr. Lynn had coerced him into retiring.

Mr. Lynn denied the accusation, and Governor Roemer said that he was not
involved in the details of the case but added that he supported Mr. Lynn's
decision to dismiss Mr. Butler.

The charges against Mr. Butler stemmed from a corrections department
investigation that resulted from allegations in a report by an investigator
appointed by a Federal court.

That report, by Ross Maggio, a former warden at the prison, said the
penitentiary suffered from lax management and a failure to assure proper
searches of inmates and visitors for contraband. Mr. Maggio had been ordered by
a Federal district judge sitting on a case involving crowding at the prison to
investigate conditions there after a series of escapes, assaults and suicides.

The report said Mr. Butler was raising fighting cocks for sale on the prison
grounds and was using inmate labor. Several hundred fighting cocks owned by Mr.
Butler were recently removed from the prison.

Cockfighting Legal in Louisiana

Cockfighting is legal in Louisiana, and the administrative charges involved only
questions of the use of state property and resources.

Mr. Butler also failed to maintain searches of employees and visitors at the
prison, which ''resulted in a serious breakdown of security,'' the report said.
Problems with drug and other contraband ''were well known to the warden,'' it
said.

Annette Viator, a corrections department lawyer, said Mr. Butler could appeal
his dismissal to a department panel and the Civil Service Commission. Under
state regulations, Mr. Butler could still deci -

Wearing a military jacket and clutching divorce papers, a veteran of Vietnam
committed suicide Wednesday at the foot of the Vietnam War memorial in Tampa. A
police spokesman, Steve Cole, said the 39-year-old veteran, Robson James Mabry,
was found with a pistol in his lap after shooting himself in the head as he sat
on the grass beneath a flagpole.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LIFE STYLE;
Copters Lift Boston Commuters Over the Traffic

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 54, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


At the height of the rush hour around Boston, a 12-mile drive from the western
suburb of Waltham to Logan International Airport in East Boston can take an hour
and a half or longer. For passengers who use the Hub Express helicopter commuter
service, it takes about eight minutes.

Hub Express, which bills itself as the only Federally registered helicopter
commuter airline in the nation, shuttles about 2,000 passengers a month between
the main terminal at Logan and six heliports, five in the suburbs and one in the
downtown financial district.

The service is unusual because it runs on a regular hourly schedule and because
it offers special package deals in conjunction with about a dozen large
airlines.

''It's been said that because of the traffic delays in Boston, it takes longer
to drive to Logan than it takes to fly from Logan to New York,'' said the
founder of Hub Express, Rhett Flater. ''Our marketing concept was if we could
put a helicopter service where business travelers would like to go, such as to
hotels and major office parks, we would be able to provide a successful
alternative to the gridlocked ground transportation that exists.''

'A Very Bright Future'

Mr. Flater, a corporate-finance lawyer, began Hub Express three years ago after
a friend who was a helicopter pilot for Digital Equipment Corporation convinced
him there was a need. Previously, there had been only charter helicopter
services around Boston.

Mr. Flater, who as a Marine helicopter pilot transported troops and medical
supplies in Vietnam, said, ''Helicopter aviation was in its infancy during the
Korean era. During the Vietnam War, it came of age carrying troops, performing
reconnaissance and medical evacuation.

''Really we're building on the technology purchased by us at great expense
during the Vietnam era, but the technology exists to simply put it to commercial
use for business travelers. I think there's a very bright future for commuter
helicopters in an urban environment.''

The Hub Express flights, which run from 5 to 20 minutes, cost $44 to $54 a
person. When the helicopter flights are booked in conjunction with full fares on
about a dozen airlines, including American, United and TWA, commuters can fly
free or for reduced fares on Hub Express.

The 52 daily helicopter flights are scheduled hourly, from 5:30 A.M. to 11:45
A.M. and from 2 P.M. to 9 P.M. The company owns one helicopter and leases three
others; each seats five to seven passengers, most of them business travelers.

The heliports are near large companies like Raytheon, Polaroid, G.T.E. and
Hewlett-Packard. Some office parks and hotels were so eager to offer the
helicopter service to their clients that they spent the $10,000 to $20,000
needed to install a 70-by-70-foot heliport in their parking lots.

Carol Blair, transportation programs manager for the Metropolitan Area Planning
Council, says automobile traffic in the area is expected to double by the year
2005, so services like Hub Express are valuable.

Such services could become even more useful. A $4.5 billion project to dismantle
the heart of Boston's highway system and build two new underground tunnels over
the next decade promises to further compound traffic congestion at a time when
the number of air travelers in and out of Logan is growing by 7 percent a year.

''This kind of thing gets people into a frame of mind where they think of other
options, so they're less keen on their cars,'' Ms. Blair said. ''They become
less oriented to the car, road and parking spaces and are thinking about what
other possibilities there are.''

Mr. Flater projects that by spring, Hub Express will be flying 8,000 passengers
a month.

Glenn Brown, a Hub Express pilot, said: ''Businessmen can do their trip in a day
versus an overnight. It makes sense for business, but certainly if you talk to
one of our passengers, I'm sure they'd also admit it's fun.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A Hub Express helicopter over Rowes Wharf, across Boston Harbor from
Logan International Airport; David B. Ford, a New York businessman, arriving in
Norwood, Mass., from Logan International Airport (The New York Times/Rick
Friedman)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
Faces and Cries From the AIDS Battleground

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN; Samuel G. Freedman, a former Times reporter, is
the author of ''Small Victories,'' a book about one year in an inner-city high
school, which will be published next spring by Harper & Row.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1612 words


During one of the interviews conducted for ''Common Threads,'' a documentary
about the AIDS Memorial Quilt that will be shown at 10 o'clock tonight on Home
Box Office, a gay man named Vito Russo compared himself to a soldier in the
Vietnam War. With his lover dead from the disease and himself infected, Mr.
Russo said, he understood how it must have felt to stand amid gunfire and
shells. And more than that, he went on, he realized that only others on the
front could conceive of his terror and rage.

Mr. Russo's analogy emerged unprompted, and it does not appear in the final
film, but those words came to inform both the substance and the style of the
documentary. From its testimony by distraught survivors to its listing of the
death toll as it mounts yearly to its lingering images of the commemorative
panels, ''Common Threads'' treats the nine-year epidemic as a kind of viral war.
And in its commingling of first-person accounts and period news footage,
''Common Threads'' borrows closely from ''Dear America,'' an Emmy Award-winning
1988 documentary about Vietnam veterans that employed actual letters from
soldiers to their families and friends, much as the AIDS film uses the quilt
panels.

The similarity is hardly accidental. Home Box Office commissioned and underwrote
both films. Bill Couturie, who directed ''Dear America,'' served as co-producer
for ''Common Threads,'' and sought out as its director Robert Epstein, an Oscar
winner for his documentary about a gay San Francisco activist slain by a
political foe, ''The Times of Harvey Milk.'' By the time Mr. Couturie made his
overture, Mr. Epstein and a co-director, Jeffrey Friedman, were already working
on a cinematic narrative of the AIDS years, with the quilt as its governing
metaphor.

''We felt it was important to give people an image,'' Mr. Epstein said, ''and
for a generation that lived through the war, Vietnam provides a specific frame
of reference. I don't want it to be too easy an analogy, but I hope that by
showing how individuals are affected by historical events, by tracing the nine
years of this epidemic, by saying you can't turn away and pretend this doesn't
exist, an audience will perceive that AIDS is our generation's Vietnam.''

''To me,'' Mr. Couturie added, ''there are lots of similarities between the way
the nation has dealt with people with AIDS and Vietnam veterans. Whether it's
the war or the disease, here's something the country doesn't understand, is
scared to death of. So the victims of both became untouchables. And if anything,
it's more pronounced with AIDS, because the majority of victims are gay men, and
many others are IV drug users. It falls easily into Us and Them. The point of
this film is not to preach to the converted, but to the prejudiced, to say that
people with AIDS aren't 'fags,' aren't 'junkies,' but are your friends, your
neighbors, your families. To say nobody deserves to die the death of AIDS.''

It was shortly after the completion of ''Dear America'' in the fall of 1987 that
Michael Fuchs, the chairman and chief executive officer of Home Box Office,
suggested a similar project about AIDS. The cable service had just produced an
informational special about AIDS featuring Surgeon General C. Everett Koop and
optioned ''Suzi's Story,'' an Australian documentary about a mother and son
afflicted by AIDS. ''The consensus here was that there was much more to be
said,'' recalled Cis Wilson, the director of documentary programming. ''And one
of the goals was to humanize it.''

The proposal reached Mr. Couturie at a sadly propitious moment: One of his
cousins had just died of AIDS, instantly closing the emotional distance he had
achieved from the epidemic. As a resident of San Francisco, Mr. Couturie already
knew of the quilt, which had been begun in that city in July 1987 by the Names
Project. The quilt, which in the spring of 1988 included 3,000 panels, each a
memorial to an AIDS victim, struck him as ''a way to make a film that would be
both hard-hitting and affecting.''

''I thought from the start the film itself should be a patchwork quilt,'' he
continued. ''America is a patchwork quilt. People with AIDS are a patchwork
quilt. The virus is indiscriminate. So people who otherwise would never have
been connected are bound together.''

In a case of parallel evolution, Mr. Epstein and Mr. Friedman had felt similarly
moved when they had seen the quilt displayed in Washington in October 1987. ''Up
to that point,'' Mr. Epstein said, ''nobody had seen the quilt in its entirety,
and the effect was, needless to say, awesome. We were there at dawn and we were
standing around this huge canvas grid, and the names of the dead were being
read. And by the time the quilt was fully unfolded several hours later there was
something before you that was so beautiful and yet so horrifying. Entering this
quilt, entering this weave of lives, interacting with the other people there,
made you feel the weight of this epidemic.''

The two film makers, both San Franciscans, soon contacted the Names Project
about doing a film and began poring over both the panels and the letters from
surviving relatives and friends that frequently accompanied them. By late 1987,
Mr. Couturie contacted Mr. Epstein, whose work he had long admired. Early in
1988, Home Box Office contributed $35,000 for research and development.

That money allowed Mr. Epstein and Mr. Friedman to select from thousands of
letter-writers about 250 survivors to be interviewed by telephone. Some 60 of
those were interviewed on video, 10 were initially selected for inclusion in the
film, and finally that number was cut to six to permit more depth for each
person. Satisfied with the project's promise, Home Box Office increased its
financing to $600,000, twice its level for most documentaries.

In its final form, ''Common Threads'' reflects a balance between the film
makers' goal of showing that AIDS is not solely a ''gay disease'' and of arguing
that medical and governmental responses to it have lagged precisely because it
does disproportionately strike gay men.

Two of the film's subjects, Mr. Russo and Tracy Torrey, lost gay lovers (Jeffrey
Sevcik and David Campbell) to AIDS. A third, Sara Lewinstein, is a lesbian who
had a child with a gay friend (Dr. Tom Waddell) who died. The fourth, Sallie
Perryman, is the widow of a heterosexual (Robert Perryman) who contracted AIDS
as a drug addict. The last two, Suzi and David Mandell, are parents of a
hemophiliac son (David Mandell Jr.) who was exposed to the virus through a blood
transfusion. Mr. Torrey himself died of AIDS within months of being interviewed
for ''Common Threads''; Mr. Russo, according to the film, is suffering from the
disease and Mrs. Perryman carries the virus, although she does not yet manifest
any symptoms. The quilt itself, meanwhile, has grown to some 13,000 panels and
continues to be displayed, wholly or in segments, throughout the country.

''Common Threads'' in large part functions simply by listening to the survivors.
''As we made the film,'' Mr. Epstein said, ''we discovered the strength of the
basic, on-camera storytelling process. There's a direct relationship that can
happen between the viewer and the storyteller, and we wanted that direct
emotional connection.

In some particularly chilling instances, those who died speak through snippets
of earlier home movies and cassette tapes. Dr. Waddell, who competed in the
Olympic decathlon in 1968, is heard dictating a tape for his young daughter,
Jessica: ''Tonight while I was brushing my teeth, I noticed some white patches
on my tongue. Sweetheart, I hope it's nothing, but there's a possibility that
this is an early sign of AIDS . . . . The fear of leaving you before you ever
really know me is my greatest concern.''

Twelve-year-old David Mandell Jr., in a clip from an interview on a San Diego
television station, delivers the film's most decisive statement against the
bias: ''We didn't come from a different planet. We're still the same human
beings that they are. We just have . . . a little difference in ourselves. And I
don't see why anyone should put some person down for that.''

At Mr. Couturie's behest, the directors interspersed the individual stories with
enough news footage to create a succinct history of the epidemic. ''I was
insistent that the film include the larger story of the AIDS issue,'' Mr.
Courturie said, ''because, again, it paralleled Vietnam. The epidemic, like the
war, had taken place over a large period of time. And it is still taking place.
People can't keep the events straight in their heads. Unless you help them with
at least the major points, it all turns to mush.''

The documentary is augmented by a score written and performed by Bobby McFerrin,
a Grammy-winning jazz vocalist, and is narrated by Dustin Hoffman. After
tonight's premiere, ''Common Threads'' will be repeated on Home Box Office on
Wednesday at 9:45 A.M. and 10:30 P.M.; Saturday at 4:45 P.M.; Oct. 24 at 2:45
and 10 P.M.; Oct. 27 at 11:30 P.M.; and Oct. 30 at 12:25 A.M. Mr. Couturie and
Ms. Wilson say it is possible that, like ''Dear America,'' the film will
subsequently be released to theaters.

''The main thing I came to realize in making 'Common Threads,' '' Mr. Friedman
concluded, ''is that you can't make sense out of AIDS, and that it's dangerous
to try to. How do you make sense out of a natural catastrophe? People have tried
by saying it's God's judgment, or this is a way for the gay community to become
active and united. But one of the things we have to learn about AIDS is that
trying to assign it some larger meaning is off the point. The enemy is a
virus.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sara Lewinstein, the father of whose child died of AIDS, in ''Common
Threads'' on Home Box Office (Janet Vanham/HBO)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
The Next Wave From Vietnam: A New Disability

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


WHEN Nguyen Van Be, once a colonel in the South Vietnamese army, emerged from 13
years in a re-education camp last year, he wrote to his wife in Washington,
wondering how to fit into a world that had left him behind. ''He feels he got
lost somewhere,'' says his wife. ''He feels like someone from the jungle.''

Now Colonel Be is among thousands of former political prisoners waiting for a
chance to move to the United States under an agreement reached last summer. Last
week, American officials began interviewing freed prisoners in Ho Chi Minh City,
the first step toward bringing the first 3,000 to the United States.

Another 100,000 former prisoners and their families have requested entry into
the United States. Vietnamese authorities have put the figure of former
prisoners and their families at 500,000.

Resettling this group will be a step toward closing out this nation's debt to
its Indochinese wartime allies. ''These people have been detained because of
their close association with us during the war,'' said Robert Funseth, the
senior deputy assistant secretary of state for refugee affairs, who has spent
most of this decade negotiating their resettlement. ''They are of special
humanitarian concern to the United States.''

The United States has accepted more than a half million Vietnamese since the
first 135,000 fled Vietnam at the end of the war in April 1975. The first were
the lucky ones among the South Vietnamese elite, the ones who succeeded in the
scramble for planes and helicopters.

During the mass escapes by boat that began in the late 1970's, the United States
committed itself to taking 14,000 Vietnamese a month. This exodus included
higher proportions of farmers, fishermen, and other villagers, people who did
not fit so easily into Western society. There were proportionately fewer ethnic
Chinese, with their economic hustle and Chinatown connections. At the same time,
the large numbers of refugees began to strain government and private agencies.

Some communities have been transformed by the influx. In California, a state
that officials say may be home to nearly half the Vietnamese refugees, the
center of Westminster, just south of Los Angeles, is now known as ''Little
Saigon.''

The former prisoners, who could begin arriving in the United States before the
end of this year, include many former leaders of the South Vietnamese society
that the United States was fighting to keep in place.

''There's going to be a lot of the old political leadership, old generals, old
ministers, old party leaders,'' said Dawn Calabia, associate director for
refugee affairs at the United States Catholic Conference. ''Some of them are
going to be very embittered.''

The Lost and the Tough

Some, said Donald Cohon, a San Francisco psychologist who has interviewed former
inmates, are likely to be ''shells of people, brutalized to the point where they
are nonfunctional.'' Most, he said, will have suffered years of malnutrition.

But, as Ms. Calabia said, ''Some are going to turn out to be tough as nails,
survivors of the worst the Vietnamese could do.''

There will be men like Nguyen Hau, an army major specializing in ordnance, who
was released after being severely injured in a camp, fled by boat to Malaysia,
arrived in the United States at the age of 52 and immediately went to school,
after a lifetime of military service, to study to become a mechanic.

Mr. Hau, who was a mechanic until the small company he worked for folded
recently, now heads a nationwide organization of former Vietnamese political
prisoners. Based in Westminster, it is one of the groups that are preparing to
help survivors of the re-education camps.

Another group, the Association of Families of Political Prisoners, is headed by
Khuc Minh Tho, the wife of Colonel Be, a Government clerical worker with two
children and a woman with a keen sense of the difficulties that some of the
released men will be facing.

In his first letter after his release, she said, her husband asked the question
that was on the minds of most of his fellow prisoners: Have you been faithful to
me? Are you still waiting for me?

Some of the wives she knows here, Mrs. Tho said, have found new mates. ''They
tell me, 'I don't think the prisoners will ever get out of the camps,' '' she
said. ''They tell me they give up.''

Even now, women like Mrs. Tho cannot be certain whether their husbands will be
allowed to leave the country or will be held back by the capriciousness that has
marked refugee releases in the past.

''I pray,'' Mrs. Tho said, ''that he will be one of the lucky ones.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Who Are the Refugees, And Who's Going to Pay?

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN 1980, when Congress established a comprehensive policy on refugees, there was
widespread agreement that the Federal Government should pay for their
resettlement because the decision to admit them was made entirely by Federal
officials. But that consensus is coming under severe strain as the Federal
Government cuts payments for refugees' health, education and welfare expenses.

State officials say they can no longer guarantee that the refugee resettlement
program will be as successful as it has been for more than a decade. And it has
been successful, producing high school valedictorians, college graduates,
taxpayers and hundreds of entrepreneurs in such places as Orange County, Calif.,
and Arlington County, Va.

''The majority of refugees currently being resettled have much greater needs
than those refugees resettled in the past,'' said Ron Spendal, the Oregon state
refugee coordinator, who serves as a spokesman for the National Governors
Association on the issue.

''The first wave of refugees who came out of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos were the
doctors, lawyers, politicians and military leaders,'' Mr. Spendal said. ''They
were highly educated, often spoke English and were easily assimilated. The
refugees coming out of Southeast Asia now are farmers and fishermen with much
less education, few vocational skills and little English.''

Many of the new Soviet Jewish emigres are well-educated by Soviet standards. But
that does not mean it is easy for them to find jobs. Soviet doctors, for
example, may need to be retrained as X-ray technicians or physical therapists.

Since 1975, about 1.3 million people have entered the United States as refugees,
according to the State Department. Of that total, more than 857,000 were from
Indochina. In the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, the Bush Administration plans
to admit 125,000 refugees, including 50,000 from the Soviet Union, 6,500 from
Eastern Europe, 51,500 from East and Southeast Asia, 6,500 from the Near East
and South Asia, 3,000 from Africa and 3,500 from Latin America.

The number of refugees is set annually by the President after consultation with
Congress. Federal law does not specify the criteria, except to say the President
should weigh ''humanitarian concerns'' and ''the national interest.'' Fiscal
constraints limit admissions, even as political, ethnic and religious groups
lobby for more.

The quotas are completely separate from those for regular immigrants, who get
visas on the basis of family ties or job skills. Under the Refugee Act of 1980,
a refugee is a person with ''a well-founded fear of persecution.''

A principal goal of the law is to help refugees achieve economic
self-sufficiency quickly. The Federal Government and the states provide services
including medical assistance, job training and instruction in the English
language. Most refugees arrive with no financial resources.

Waning Federal Funds

From early 1980 through March of 1981, the Federal Government reimbursed the
states for all cash and medical assistance given to refugees. Starting in April
1981, the Federal Government limited such payments to a refugee's first 36
months in the United States. In March 1986, Washington cut the reimbursement
period to 31 months, and in February 1988 to 24 months.

For the current fiscal year, President Bush proposed to cut the reimbursement
period to 15 months. Now Congress is providing money for only 12 months. While
planning to admit 125,000 refugees, Mr. Bush acknowledged that his budget would
pay for the resettlement of only 84,000, at an average cost of $6,300 each. He
did not say where the extra money might be found.

Philip A. Holman, acting director of the Federal Office of Refugee Resettlement,
in the Department of Health and Human Services, said the cutbacks did not affect
refugees because they were entitled to the same cash and medical benefits. The
main difference, he said, is that the states pay a larger share.

Walter Barnes, chief of refugee programs in the California Department of Social
Services, said: ''These cuts show the inability or unwillingness of Congress and
the Administration to meet the commitments laid out in the Refugee Act of 1980.
The constant eating away at resources is, I'm afraid, going to eat away public
support for the refugee program.''

Destination: California

California took 45 percent of the 76,391 refugees who came to the United States
in the fiscal year 1988. New York, with 10 percent, accounted for the next
largest share, followed by Florida, Massachusetts and Texas.

Experts warn that the cuts in assistance may increase welfare dependency rates
by depriving newcomers of the aid they need to become productive workers.
Already the rates are substantial: 52 percent of refugees who have been in the
United States for less than two years are receiving some form of cash
assistance. (Rates ranged from 14 percent for Poles to 40 percent for Soviet
refugees and more than 60 percent for Afghans.) Stephen Moore, an economist at
the conservative Heritage Foundation, said: ''As with immigrants generally,
refugees tend to be strong contributors to the U.S. economy. They have low
incomes and high rates of dependency in their initial years in this country. But
after 5 to 10 years, their earnings increase substantially.''

Tax data show that Indochinese refugees who arrived in 1975 had incomes slightly
higher than the national median by 1986, the Department of Health and Human
Services said.

In view of such data, some members of Congress say that refugees should be
required to pay back, after some years, a portion of the money spent on their
resettlement. By taking that step, said Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat
of Ohio, ''we could take in more refugees.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Nicaraguan applicants for refugee status being interviewed by officials
in Miami (Matrix/Alex Quesada); graph of U.S. ceilings on refugee admissions by
region of origin for fiscal 1990 (Source: Immigration and Naturalization
Service)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
Drug Cops, Not Drug Soldiers

BYLINE: By DAVID C. ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 594 words


Drug agents, having penetrated the radio network of cocaine middlemen, spread
the word that all should report to the jungle clearing at an appointed hour. No
one suspected the trap, and when the dealers arrived, local narcotics police and
American agents were waiting to make quick arrests. The cops kept violence to a
minimum. Though some dealers resisted, there were no deaths or serious injuries.
The agents carefully took custody of drugs and weapons for possible use as
evidence and, more important, for whatever information they might yield.

The story illustrates the value of a police response to Andean drug trafficking.
It came from a drug agent who worries that Washington might be too quick to
dispatch combat troops for a job better done by police.

Although the Bush Administration continues to deny interest in sending combat
troops to South America, small numbers of special forces and advisers already
provide training and technical advice - a role that some Green Berets are said
to find confining. Their numbers are likely to grow along with expanding aid.
And President Bush stirred more debate recently when he relaxed the rules
governing their freedom to operate away from base camps.

American diplomats point out that proud Latin governments resist the idea of
U.S. troops joining the pursuit of drug traffickers. Drug agents make another
compelling point: by training and approach, there are big differences between
the cop who sees the drug dealer as a criminal suspect and the soldier who
considers him an enemy to be destroyed.

Had soldiers been along that night in the jungle clearing, the agent worries,
there surely would have been much more shooting and bloodshed, many fewer
prisoners brought in for interrogation, much less in the way of drugs, radios
and other equipment seized for the inspection of intelligence specialists.

Superficially, a military response to billionaire drug barons would seem to make
sense. The traffickers are equipped with airplanes, explosives, military assault
rifles and heavier weapons. And they have sometimes made marriages of
convenience with guerrilla groups.

But it would be a mistake to equate narcotraficantes with guerrillas, or the war
on drugs with the war in Vietnam. The drug barons are interested in selling a
product and making money, not in advancing a political cause. They are prepared
to defend themselves, but mostly with businesslike defenses - their favorite
being the bribery of public officials.

In a few places they have organized small militias of farmers. But that was to
pursue fights with guerrilla groups, not the government. Thus when Colombian
police attack drug laboratories and secret airstrips, they find them only
lightly defended.

Pressed by expanded drug enforcement campaigns, the traffickers could decide to
mount more elaborate defenses. But doing so in enough strength to take on, say,
the Colombian national police force of 80,000 could be an expensive undertaking.
The drug barons' most sensible response is to set up shop somewhere else in
hopes of being left alone.

If combat troops as yet have no obvious role, what kind of American personnel
would make a difference now? D.E.A. agents talk about U.S. cops experienced at
managing informants and setting up undercover drug busts, who don't mind trading
the risks and discomforts of city streets for those of the jungle, who are
willing to learn Spanish and respect the culture of the local police - and the
crooks - with whom they will work.

That's not a job description for the Green Berets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MAN WHO WALKED IN THE WOODS

BYLINE: By WALTER ISAACSON; Walter Isaacson, a senior writer at Time, is a
co-author of ''The Wise Men: Six Friends and the World They Made.'' He is
working on a biography of Henry Kissinger.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1388 words



FROM HIROSHIMA TO GLASNOST
At the Center of Decision: A Memoir.
By Paul H. Nitze
with Ann M. Smith and Steven L. Rearden.
Illustrated. 504 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $25.

A few weeks after the atom bomb induced Japan to surrender in World War II, Paul
H. Nitze stood amid the ruins of Nagasaki calibrating the rubble. He was a very
precise man, but also a man of deep convictions. His work as a director of the
United States Strategic Bombing Survey launched a lifelong involvement with
military and nuclear strategy. Although he became, almost offhandedly, an
enormously successful financier during those occasions when he was sidelined
from Government service, his main vocation was as a modestly successful
statesman who hovered and rumbled on the periphery of power.

In that capacity he became the consummate cold warrior: not a fanatic
anti-Communist or a militarist bent on confrontation, but a pragmatic national
security strategist intent on winning the long twilight struggle against Soviet
expansionism. As director of the policy planning staff in Harry S. Truman's
State Department, Mr. Nitze was responsible for NSC 68, the document that
provided a military framework for the doctrine of Communist containment. As
Assistant Secretary of Defense and Secretary of the Navy under John F. Kennedy
and Lyndon B. Johnson, he was a hawk during the Cuban missile crisis and, during
the Vietnam War, a conflicted pessimist who helped turn Clark Clifford,
Johnson's Secretary of Defense, against the war. As the chief arms control
adviser to Ronald Reagan, he crafted the treaty that eliminated medium-range
missiles from Europe and, as Mr. Reagan's term was ending, made a valiant but
unsuccessful effort to cap his career with a ''grand compromise'' linking
restrictions on new strategic defenses to deep cuts in nuclear missile arsenals.

Unlike most of the wise men of the East Coast foreign policy establishment, Mr.
Nitze was a man of stubborn passion and fervent opinions, which made him prone
to titanic personal clashes. Although he was nonpartisan, he was far from being
nonideological. As a founder of the Committee on the Present Danger, an
organization of arms control hawks, he waged war on those he felt were too soft
in dealing with the Soviet Union; while in the Reagan Administration, on the
other hand, he fought with those he considered too rigid in their opposition to
arms control concessions.

Unfortunately for both history and his readers, this passion and blood are hard
to find in ''From Hiroshima to Glasnost,'' Mr. Nitze's workmanlike memoirs. With
the assistance of Ann M. Smith, an assistant to Mr. Nitze, and Steven L.
Rearden, a historian specializing in national security affairs, he has produced
a competent, straightforward, methodical account of his career. In recounting
his actions, Mr. Nitze, now 82, is, as always, dutiful; in playing down the
clashes of policy and personality that made his life so colorful, he is, as
always, gentlemanly and discreet.

One of those encounters occurred early in his public career. Many members of the
Strategic Bombing Survey, including Mr. Nitze, came to the conclusion that the
relentless bombing of Germany and Japan had produced only mixed results: enemy
resolve and morale tended to be strengthened rather than sapped, and industrial
capacity was rebuilt rather quickly after each raid. A heated debate erupted
among the directors of the survey, described in the memoirs of George Ball and
John Kenneth Galbraith, which later became relevant to the decision to bomb
North Vietnam. Although Mr. Nitze wrote the final report, he barely touches on
the dispute in these memoirs, nor does he say much about his emotions or
insights as he calibrated the rubble of the atomic bomb. Likewise, his account
of the highly charged debate that preceded Truman's decision to develop the
hydrogen bomb is drained of the moral fervor found in other participants'
memoirs.

The most interesting revelation here involves the Berlin crisis of 1961, when
the Soviet Union threatened to cut off that city's access to the West. Mr. Nitze
represented the Defense Department on an interdepartmental task force dealing
with the crisis. The plan they drew up, he says, had as its fourth phase ''the
escalating use of nuclear weapons.'' During the 1950's, Mr. Nitze had been an
early advocate of preparing for ''limited'' nuclear wars, using tactical nuclear
weapons. In this instance, he argued for considering a pre-emptive all-out
strategic strike. ''Since demonstrative or tactical use of nuclear weapons would
greatly increase the temptation to the Soviets to initiate a strategic strike,
it would be best for us, in moving toward the use of nuclear weapons, to
consider most seriously the option of an initial strategic strike of our own,''
he writes. ''This, I believed, could assure us victory in at least a military
sense in a series of nuclear exchanges.'' Robert S. McNamara, then the Secretary
of Defense, says he has no recollection of this discussion. In any event, the
Soviet Union decided not to blockade Berlin, and the crisis dissipated.

Mr. Nitze's combination of practicality and anti-Communist instincts was put to
the test by the Vietnam War. After a 1965 trip to Saigon, he told Mr. McNamara
that it would take more than 200,000 American soldiers for the United States to
be successful and in the end would not be ''worth the cost.'' Bearing down on
Mr. Nitze with ''piercing black eyes,'' Mr. McNamara asked, ''If we withdraw
from Vietnam, do you believe the Communists will test us in another location?''
Yes, Mr. Nitze replied. Could he feel confident, Mr. McNamara continued, that
stopping them in the next area they probed would be easier? ''No, I can't,''
said Mr. Nitze, and thus he remained a loyal soldier in Washington's war effort,
though with continuing qualms. Using a cost-benefit analysis and drawing on the
lessons he learned from the World War II bombing survey, he came to oppose the
bombing of North Vietnam on practical grounds. In the bloodless, strangely
detached tone of his memoirs, he notes that when he was in charge of protecting
the Pentagon from a massive antiwar march, ''three of my four children were
among the demonstrators - I suspect, more out of curiosity than for protest.''

During his half-century of public service, Mr. Nitze has established a
reputation for pugnacity, pungency and flashes of bemused irony. These traits
are portrayed with great gusto in various books that deal with his struggles in
the field of arms control, most notably ''The Master of the Game'' and ''Deadly
Gambits'' by Strobe Talbott, which reveal Mr. Nitze's now-famous ''walk in the
woods'' with a Soviet counterpart. (In his memoirs, Mr. Nitze confirms these
conversations, but he shows little emotion about the failure of Washington and
Moscow to go along with the two negotiators' proposals.) Mr. Nitze's pugnacity
and irony are also discernible in the transcripts of his oral history interviews
for the Defense Department, which form the basis for much of this book. Yet
somehow the saltiness and sizzle seem to have been lost in the translation.

Memoirs are a difficult art form, especially for statesmen. The few volumes that
succeed do so because they contain some special quality that makes them more
than self-serving defenses of their authors' brushes with history. Winston
Churchill had a grand literary flair, Dean Acheson an elegant wit, George F.
Kennan a revealing introspection, Richard M. Nixon a strategic insight and Henry
Kissinger an ability to combine sweeping concepts with delicately detailed
personal sketches.

What Mr. Nitze brings to the genre is a wistful evocation of a dying era. He
concludes by confessing ''a nostalgia for the warmth and beauty of European and
American culture prior to the tragedy of the First World War.'' Less
intentionally, his book evokes a nostalgia for a bygone period in foreign
policy. He was the last active member of the cohort of clubby gentlemen who,
entering public service during World War II, saw their work as a noble and
nonpartisan calling. In that tradition, he has produced a solid and respectable
diplomatic tome, one that adds a bit of wisdom and insight, though little
excitement, to the history of the cold war that he helped wage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRIME/MYSTERY;
MIAMI MAYHEM

BYLINE: By KATHERINE DUNN; Katherine Dunn's most recent novel is ''Geek Love.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words



SKIN TIGHT
By Carl Hiaasen.
319 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $18.95.

This novel is Carl Hiaasen's latest dangerous weapon - Uzi satire in
9-millimeter bursts aimed at those classic baddies, vanity and greed. The
specific targets in ''Skin Tight'' are plastic surgery quacks, trash television
hosts and shady lawyers. The locale is that tropical Gomorrah, Miami. The
question is not whodunit but how - and will they get away with it?

This is the ''Don't Mess With Bill'' school of the hard-boiled, in which the
hero is an outsider because he's more moral than the rest of society. He's also
tougher, smarter and whatever else is required for kicking chaos into shape.
Only he can save us from botched plastic surgery, but it takes something
personal to goad him out of isolation and into action. Mr. Hiaasen twists the
formula's tail with break-bone humor.

Having killed five men and divorced five women, Mick Stranahan has seen enough
of human nature to prefer barracudas. A Vietnam vet with an explosive chip on
his shoulder, Stranahan was an investigator for the Florida State Attorney's
office until circumstances required him to twist a gun barrel up the nose of a
crooked judge and pull the trigger. The grand jury decided it was self-defense,
but Stranahan was suddenly unemployable. The other crooked judges were scared to
have him testifying in their courtrooms.

Stranahan pockets his pension and opts for early retirement as a fishing hermit
in a stilt house on the wilder reaches of Biscayne Bay. But his piscatorial
idyll is interrupted by a sudden tidal wave of attention from the outside world
- a thug sporting a newly designed face tries to kill him, nude cuties invade
his sun deck begging reassurance about the quality of their recent breast
augmentations, a television crew anchors in camera range with lenses bared and
explanations incomplete. It's enough to burn the fuseless Stranahan out of his
lair and back into the fray.

The source of the irritation is an old case, buried and festering, that had once
stymied Stranahan: the disappearance of a college student from a bus bench
outside the plastic surgery clinic where she'd just had her nose bobbed.
Resurrected from its filing-cabinet tomb, the case becomes a zombie festival of
colorful sinners.

Chief among these are the suave Rudy Graveline, a famed though secretly
incompetent plastic surgeon whose fortune depends on his skill in outmaneuvering
malpractice suits; Reynaldo Flemm, a trash television host who's a hilarious
merger of Morton Downey Jr. and Geraldo Rivera; and Maggie Gonzalez, a knowing
nurse who triggers the whole affair out of dual urges - to replenish her bank
account and to wreak vengeance on the man who precipitated her declining
fortunes.

In ''Skin Tight,'' we get the requisite one good woman with brains and guts as
well as battalions of bimbos and Bambis flitting through the Florida sunshine.
There are squads of good and bad guys, including Stranahan's personal albatross,
Kipper Garth. To Stranahan's shame, his kid sister married Garth, a sleazy
personal-injury lawyer whose billboards claim, ''If you've had an accident,
somebody somewhere owes you money!!!''

Carl Hiaasen is deservedly famed for his Technicolor characters. This is, after
all, the writer whose last book, ''Double Whammy,'' gave us Skeet, the
ex-Governor turned hobo who dines on animals killed by passing cars. Still, the
hit man nicknamed Chemo may be Mr. Hiaasen's most triumphant creation. This
bumbling murderer has more personality, more sympathetic frailty and more
hilarious lines than anybody else in ''Skin Tight.'' He may also have the worst
complexion in the history of acne.

Mr. Hiaasen isn't much interested in the sources of human behavior. He offers no
genetic shadows, potty-training secrets or pubescent traumas to explain why his
people act as they do. These folks spring from Zeus' ear at a draftable age and
march directly into trouble. This is occasionally irritating, but it seems a
legitimate function of Mr. Hiaasen's zestful blend of satire and shoot-'em-up.
And if he pumps the stereotypes of Swiftian satire, he also plays fair with
taut, fast-paced action. The story jumps. The dialogue is crisp and hot. The
logic is clean, and the plot twists with sinewy coherence.

Maybe it's Mr. Hiaasen's journalism background (he's a columnist and reporter
for The Miami Herald) that lets him toss in dozens of miniature tales,
consisting of one- or two-paragraph plots that might serve a lesser writer for a
whole book. These nuggets add rich color to the streamlined narrative.
Explaining Dr. Rudy Graveline's revenge mania, for example, Mr. Hiaasen throws
us this:

''One time another surgeon had done a corrective rhinoplasty on one of Rudy's
botched-up patients, then badmouthed Rudy at a medical society cocktail party.
Rudy got so furious that he paid two goons to trash the other doctor's office,
but not before stealing his medical files. Soon, the other doctor's surgical
patients received personal letters thanking them for being so understanding
while he battled that terrible heroin addiction, which now seemed to be under
control. Well, almost . . . By the end of the month, the other doctor had closed
what was left of his practice and moved to British Columbia.''

Mr. Hiaasen's skills are impressive. Yet readers who delighted in his earlier
book ''Tourist Season'' may grieve for the personal warmth of that voice. The
affection Mr. Hiaasen so obviously felt for the characters in that novel is
largely missing from ''Skin Tight.'' The tone here is scalpel-cold.

More troubling is the discovery that the protagonist of ''Skin Tight'' is a
character who is only skin deep. Mick Stranahan is as generic as Clint Eastwood.
He performs feats of brute force, is good to his sister and refuses to jump into
the sack with anyone who can't name all five Beatles, but he packs less
emotional credibility than the Pillsbury Doughboy. He is also physically
invisible to the reader.

It might be argued that heroes are inherently less interesting than villains, or
that a faceless hero allows more readers - not excluded by the wrong hair color
or build - to identify with his glories. But there is no visual description of
Stranahan until roughly 20 pages before the end of the book, and then it
consists of an undistinguished clothing list and the remark that he looks
''strong, but not particularly mean.'' From a writer as versatile and
imaginative as Mr. Hiaasen, this omission has to be a conscious, if
questionable, decision.

Despite the quibbles, Carl Hiaasen is always completely readable. His style has
racing stripes, his reportage on everything from fishing to liposuction is
fascinating, and his wit is Mencken in blue jeans. As he leans closer to the
hard-boiled detective genre, Mr. Hiaasen's villains make the book - and no one
has ever designed funnier, more terrifying bad guys, or concocted odder ways of
doing away with them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Larry McMurtry Tries Crowding

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 927 words



Some Can Whistle
By Larry McMurtry
348 pages. Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

Larry McMurtry rarely crowds the scenery of his novels, whether he is writing of
the Old West (''Lonesome Dove,'' ''Anything for Billy'') or the New (''The Last
Picture Show,'' ''Texasville''). Regardless of whether he is debunking
traditional American mythology or working to fashion a new folklore of Texas,
California and points in between, he leaves a lot of space between his people,
and between his people and us.

Yet what creates the tension of Mr. McMurtry's 13th and latest novel, ''Some Can
Whistle,'' is crowding. The characters not only press one another, they also
assault the reader's sensibilities and threaten to suffocate us with their
boisterous demands. They invade our privacy - if I may borrow the territorial
metaphor that seems to obsess Mr. McMurtry - and yet, oddly enough, their
demands are so direct and human that we accept them, at least for a while.

Our emotional surrogate in the story is Danny Deck, who last played a major role
in Mr. McMurtry's fiction as the hero of his fifth novel, ''All of My Friends
Are Going to Be Strangers,'' in which Danny was a student at Rice University, an
aspiring novelist and the victim of a failing marriage to an uncaring woman
named Sally Bynum.

Now, at the opening of ''Some Can Whistle,'' it is 22 years later. Danny, at the
age of 51, has grown hugely rich from the success of a television family sitcom
he wrote called ''Al and Sal,'' which ran for 198 episodes and every line of
which is still engraved on Danny's troubled memory. Now Danny has withdrawn from
Culver City to live in semi-retirement on a huge hilltop estate called Los
Dolores in Hardtop County, Texas.

There he passes his time fighting off migraine headaches, leaving telephone
messages on the answering machines of various lady friends, and arguing with his
lecherous old buddy, the English sociologist Godwin Lloyd-Jons (another
character out of Mr. McMurtry's earlier fiction), about the first sentence of a
novel Danny is spasmodically trying to get off the ground.

Then one morning, out of a clear blue Texas sky, Danny gets a phone call. ''
'Mister Deck, are you my stinkin' Daddy?' a youthful, female, furious voice said
into the phone.'' He is indeed her Daddy, for the caller is T. R., or Tyler
Rose, the issue of Danny's brief long-ago marriage and a person whom Danny has
never laid eyes on. If Danny can earn T. R.'s forgiveness for abandoning her,
and not ''have AIDS and give it to my babies,'' why T. R. might just allow him
to come down to the Mr. Burger franchise in Houston where she works and fetch
her home to Los Dolores.

Tall, beautiful T. R. is a wonderfully outspoken character who blows through the
pages of ''Some Can Whistle'' like a Texas cyclone. She's so emotionally direct
that Danny begins to feel the walls of his solitude teetering. And she inspires
unusual scenes, like the one in which she and Danny retire to a closet in Los
Dolores, and open the 22 years' worth of birthday and Christmas presents that
Danny has saved because his ex-wife would not allow him to deliver them to his
daughter. (''As the fetus recapitulates the history of the species,'' Danny
explains, ''T. R. and I recapitulated her own history and mine, a history that
had floated unborn in both our consciousnesses until that hour.'') But T. R.
comes with heavy baggage on board, in several senses of the expression. She
brings along her friends from the Houston ghetto, including a Vietnamese girl
and her wizened, humming grandmother, whom Danny imagines to have been a peasant
with a water buffalo but who turns out to have grown up in Paris and ''only
returned to Vietnam in the 50's, to run a travel service.''

T. R.'s two little children, Jesse and Bo, are emotionally demanding to a number
of extremes. And their fathers are, respectively, a feckless thief named Muddy
Box whom T. R. insists on springing from jail and a vicious armed robber named
Earl Dee, who has threatened to hunt down T. R. and kill her.

In short, T. R. and her entourage mount an assault on both Danny Deck's nervous
system and the reader's that is too spiritually costly to be abided
indefinitely. Mr. McMurtry somehow has to get rid of her. This he manages to do
by transforming his farce into catastrophe with a swiftness that only he could
make plausible. Suddenly we find, to our considerable relief, that Danny can
have it both ways. The walls of his solitariness have been broken down, but he
does not have to be swarmed over by too much demanding life.

How does Mr. McMurtry pull off this barely credible switch? As Danny Deck muses
about his up-and-down relations with an insecure actress named Jeanie Vertus,
one of his favorite phone-message recipients: ''The rules of happiness are as
strict as the rules of sorrow; indeed, perhaps more strict. The two states have
different densities, I've come to think. The lives of happy people are dense
with their own doings - crowded, active, thick - urban, I would almost say.

''But the sorrowing are nomads, on a plain with few landmarks and no boundaries;
sorrow's horizons are vague and its demands few. Jeanie and I had not become
strangers; it was just that she lived in the city and I lived on the plain.''

In ''Some Can Whistle,'' Mr. McMurtry somehow inhabits both the city and the
plain. As Danny says of another subject, ''a lot of twain'' lies ''in between''
them. But the novel succeeds in occupying both places. That is what gives it its
uniquely amusing yet wistful flavor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Larry McMurtry (Lee Marmon)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Soviets Abstain in U.N. Vote on Israel

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Oct. 17


The Soviet Union abstained today in a vote to accept the Israeli delegation's
credentials instead of joining Arab countries in seeking Israel's expulsion from
the General Assembly.

It was the first time the Soviet Union had failed to support the Arabs against
Israel since 1982, when they first began challenging Israel's right to a seat in
the General Assembly.

The number of countries voting for Israel's expulsion from the United Nations
fell to 37, compared with 41 in 1988 and 39 in 1987. The number voting to accept
the Israeli delegation's credentials was unchanged at 95, while the number of
abstentions rose from 7 to 15. Twelve countries did not vote.

Afterward, the Soviet Union's representative, Aleksandr M. Belonogov, said the
decision to abstain did not imply approval of Israel's policies but rather
Moscow's belief that all countries should belong to the United Nations as well
as to all its specialized agencies around the world.

'New Formula' for Soviets

''The reason we abstained is that we are coming to a new formula concerning the
universality of international organizations,'' he told reporters. ''This means
the Soviet Union will seek to participate in all international organizations and
recognizes that this should be applied to all countries.''

But the Soviet delegate added: ''The change of vote does not reflect in any way
that we have changed our assesment of Israel, in which so far, unfortunately, we
have seen no change. But I hope this will send a signal to the Government of
Israel that it is high time to listen to the world community.''

Israel's representative, Johanan Bein, called the vote a ''meaningless charade''
that showed the Arabs ''do not want peace.'' But he described the Soviet Union's
abstention as ''a step in the right direction.''

The Arab world's annual attempt to expel Israel has become a ritual that
everyone knows has no chance of succeeding. But it serves as a barometer of
international support for the rival camps.

Libya Calls for Rejection

As current president of the Arab group at the United Nations, Libya opened the
annual ritual by calling for the rejection of the Israeli delegation's
credentials. Libya said Israel has shown that it is not a ''peace-loving state''
as defined in the United Nations Charter by rejecting calls to surrender the
occupied territories and is therefore ineligible for membership in the world
organization.

Denmark, speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries, then introduced its
traditional motion, which calls on the General Assembly not to vote on the Arab
proposal to bar Israel.

All Arab countries, with the exception of Egypt, which has diplomatic relations
with Israel, then voted against the Danish motion, in effect calling for
Israel's explusion. They were joined by other predominately Islamic countries
like Pakistan, Malaysia and Indonesia and some non-Islamic ones, including
Angola, Zimbabwe, Cuba, Vietnam and Ghana.

The Soviet Union, Byelorussia and the Ukraine, which are treated as separate
countries here, all abstained, although last year they voted with the Arabs.
Also abstaining were Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Poland, which
all chose not to take part in last year's vote. Hungary and Rumania again voted
for the Danish motion and in favor of admitting Israel, as they had last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Johanan Bein, the Israeli delegate, turned to listen to Ali
A. Treiki; the Libyan delegate, introducinge the motion for expulsion. (NYT/Vic
DeLucia)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

EDUCATION;
Harvard Scholar May Get Rare Tenure Bid

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 369 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Oct. 17


A Harvard University expert on Vietnamese history says she has been offered
tenure, nearly two decades after Harvard made its last such appointment in the
history department.

''It's a milestone, and I hope it's also a precedent,'' said the scholar,
Hue-Tam Ho Tai, a 40-year-old associate professor. ''I hope it will be the first
of many more such promotions.''

Professor Tai, who received her doctorate from Harvard in 1977, said in an
interview last week that she had been offered a lifetime post but the school
administration had not completed contract negotiations with her. Harvard
officials said a tenure appointment would not be announced until it became
official.

The last junior professors tenured in the history department received their
promotions in 1970.

Internal Promotions Urged

In recent years critics have insisted that the tenure system favors established
scholars over young professors from inside Harvard.

Last year the history department formed a committee to improve the status of
junior professors. It recommended such measures as more internal promotions to
make junior faculty members feel more like valued members of the department.

If Professor Tai accepts the university's offer, she will be the third tenured
woman in Harvard's history department.

She said Harvard's vigorous tenure system is particularly hard on female
scholars because they often have young children. Women and members of minorities
have also charged that promotion depends on the whim of ''old boy'' networks of
white male professors.

Second Book Nearly Ready

Women make up about 8 percent of the tenured professors in the faculty of arts
and sciences, and 27.7 percent of the junior faculty.

Professor Tai published a book in 1983 on peasant politics in Vietnam. A second
book on radical politics in Vietnam is scheduled for release soon, she said.

The history department voted to grant her tenure in 1987, but an advisory
committee expressed reservations because she had not finished her second book.

Rather than being forced to leave Harvard, as is often the case when tenure is
not granted, Professor Tai said she received an extended contract so that she
could finish the manuscript.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

4 Other Members of the Crew

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 443 words


For the flight of the space shuttle Atlantis, the space agency has selected crew
members with extensive flying or scientific experience. Three have been on
previous shuttle flights. One member of the crew is Dr. Ellen Shulman Baker, the
daughter of the Queens Borough President. Here are sketches of the other four
astronauts:

Donald E. Williams
Flight Commander

Captain Williams of the Navy, who is 47 years old, is making his second shuttle
flight. He logged 168 hours in space aboard the space shuttle Discovery in April
1985.

He has logged more than 5,400 hours of flying time, including 5,100 hours in
jets and 745 carrier landings. After flight training in 1966, he was sent to
Vietnam four times aboard the aircraft carrier Enterprise and completed 330
combat missions. Captain Williams attended the Naval Test Pilot School in
Patuxent River, Md., in 1974.

Born in Lafayette, Ind., he received a bachelor of science degree in mechanical
engineering from Purdue University in 1964.

Michael J. McCulley
Flight Pilot

Commander McCulley of the Navy, 46, is making his first shuttle flight.

He has served in the Navy, flying more than 50 types of aircraft, logging more
than 4,700 flying hours and nearly 400 landings on six aircraft carriers.

He was born in San Diego, and received bachelor's and master's degrees in
metallurgical engineering from Purdue University, both in 1970.

Franklin R. Chang-Diaz
Mission Specialist

Dr. Chang-Diaz, 39, is making his second shuttle flight. He logged more than 146
hours in space aboard the Columbia in 1986.

Dr. Chang-Diaz participated in early design studies for the proposed space
station in 1982.

He earned a doctorate in applied plasma physics from the Massachussetts
Institute of Technology in 1977 and has done research and design on fusion
reactors. He is also conducting research on advanced plasma rockets.

Born in San Jose, Costa Rica, he received a bachelor of science degree in
mechanical engineering in 1973 from the University of Connecticut.

Shannon W. Lucid
Mission Specialist

Dr. Lucid, 46, is making her second shuttle flight. She logged more than 170
hours in space aboard the space shuttle Discovery in June 1985.

She was born in Shanghai, China, where her parents were serving as missionaries
in the 1940's. She spent the first year of her life, along with her parents, in
a Japanese camp in Shanghai for prisoners of war.

Dr. Lucid received a bachelor of science degree in chemistry from the University
of Oklahoma in 1963 and a master's degree and doctorate in bio-chemistry in 1970
and 1973, respec-tively, from the University of Oklahoma.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of crew members boarding the shuttle: Dr. Franklin Chang-Diaz,
Dr. Shannon Lucid, Capt. Donald E. Williams, Comdr. Michael J. McCulley and Dr.
Ellen S. Baker. (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE CALIFORNIA QUAKE: HEALING;
Message to Rattled Populace: Try to Talk About It

BYLINE: By MIREYA NAVARRO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 19


At Horace Mann Academic Middle School in the Mission District, only a third of
the 600 students showed up today for the first day of classes since Tuesday's
earthquake.

C. G. Donahoe, a science teacher, walked into a nearly empty classroom, took
roll-call and slowly lifted his head to face the group of eight sixth-graders
staring back.

''What we went through recently has been tough,'' he said. ''I've been to
Vietnam, and what happened yesterday is a lot like war. There's a few minutes
when you're scared and the rest of the time you try to deal with it.''

On Wednesday scores of teachers, mental health workers and other professionals
at schools, shelters and counseling clinics helped Bay Area residents get hold
of themselves as strong aftershocks from Tuesday's earthquake continued to shake
the ground under their feet. Those seeking help were all told: Talk.

'Like Any Other Stress'

''It's like any other stress you have to deal with,'' said Rube Stevens, the
head counselor at Horace Mann. ''They just need to talk about it.''

Across town, at a makeshift shelter housing hundreds of displaced residents from
the Marina district, counselors worked with the much older population that they
said was experiencing particular kinds of problems.

Patt Denning, an emergency counselor with the San Francisco Department of Mental
Health, said about half the people at the shelter were elderly, many of them
suffering from stress that showed up as disorientation and irritability.

''These are the people who are in the most critical state because they've been
displaced,'' she said. ''Especially with the elderly, it's difficult for them to
adjust to a lot of changes.''

Stable Environment Sought

Workers at the shelter, set up at the Marina Middle School at Chestnut and
Fillmore Streets, struggled to offer the victims a stable environment. Food was
brought to them by cart, and announcements and news from meetings were relayed
to those who had trouble moving around.

''You can stay here and relax,'' one worker, Barbara Rough, told a group of
about 20 elderly people, many of them in wheelchairs, who were about to miss a
homeowners meeting. ''You'll be informed.''

Shirley Schnitzler, 65 years old, spent her first night at the shelter
Wednesday. She said she appreciated the efforts of the workers there, but could
not wait to move to a motel.

She said she was given 15 minutes to pack and now wonders whether she will ever
be able to go back to her apartment at Francisco and Divisadero Streets, where
she lived alone. She has not been able to eat since she left.

''I'm all rattled,'' she said. ''I just don't know what's going to happen.''

Concern With Immediate Needs

Mental health workers said most of the callers and people they had talked to
seemed to be concerned with immediate needs, like contacting relatives or
getting electric power.

But once such needs are met, said Harry Collamore, a therapist at the Marina
Counseling Center on Lombard Street near Fillmore Street, long-term problems
will emerge.

''We're going to see depression, people having continuing sleeping and eating
disorders,'' Mr. Collamore said. ''People are also going to experience feelings
of unsafety. We're going to see a lot of phobias, particularly bridge phobia.''

Only 20 Schools Closed

Ramon Cortines, the San Francisco school Superintendent, said he expected school
staff members to adequately allay concerns or fears but said he would provide
special counselors when principals request them.

Only 20 of the 120 schools and day care centers in San Francisco were closed
yesterday, mostly because they had no power, school officials said. The district
has 63,000 students.

The officials said 15 schools would remain closed tomorrow because of the lack
of power. They said the 900 students of the Marina Middle School will probably
be transferred while the school serves as a shelter.

'When Is This Going to Stop?'

At Horace Mann, school officials said they believed the low attendance reflected
parents' fears of being separated from their children while aftershocks
continue.

''People are afraid,'' Horace Mann's principal, Carlos Garcia, said. ''After
another 5.0 this morning, people are thinking, when is this going to stop?''

Some students said they were frightened or could not sleep.

''I'm scared to go somewhere by myself because I don't know if another one will
hit,'' said Renee Shank, 11.

Mr. Donahoe told his students to focus on what they could do to help their
families in the earthquake's aftermath and congratulated them when they said
they had dived under tables and not panicked during the earthquake. He noted
that many of them had been through school earthquake drills since they were
pre-schoolers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of displace residents at a shelter in the Marina Middle School
(NYT/Fred Mertz)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Assassinations: Can't We Learn?

BYLINE: By Daniel Patrick Moynihan; The following remarks, excerpted, were made
on the Senate floor on Wednesday. The author is a Democrat from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 698 words


It happens I was one of a small company assembled in the big southwest corner
office of the west wing of the White House in the early afternoon of Nov. 22,
waiting word from Dallas. In the event, no message came; leastwise, none that I
recall. Rather, at a point we seemed to come to the same realization. John F.
Kennedy was dead. Assassinated.

Within minutes Hubert Humphrey burst into the room, tears streaming: ''What have
they done to us?''

We all knew who they were. The right wing in Dallas. And yet, later in the day,
we learned on radio that an arrest had been made of a man who had been connected
with Fair Play for Cuba. Oh, God, I said to myself. They will kill him, too.  I
began to plead that the Federal Government must get physical custody of Oswald.
Else we would never know. Late that evening I went out to Andrews Air Force Base
to meet the plane bringing the Cabinet back from its aborted trip to Japan. We
must get custody of Oswald. I really worked at this. Assassinations, you see,
linger. Societies sicken. I had more than Castro in mind. Obviously we had tried
without success to assassinate him. Had he succeeded in an attempt at revenge?
But there was something more. It happened that at the time I knew that we had
been in on the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem in Vietnam.

We did not order it. We certainly did not do it. But we were around. I was not
then involved in foreign affairs, but I had friends who were. These friends were
sick at what we had done. Diem was an innocent man; an ally. We had decided we
needed a better one. Get out of the truck; say your prayers. Something like
that. I don't even want to look it up.

I have ever since been of the view, not perhaps an exceptional insight, that
assassination works both ways. Hence, I went a little sick to read on the front
page of The New York Times the headline ''C.I.A. Seeks Looser Rules On Killings
During Coups.'' Will we never learn? How little we know. How little we influence
actual events. But how vast and menacing our image in the world can be just
because of such statements.

There is also a matter of law. Not of executive orders. But law. To be specific,
supreme law. Article VI, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution we are busily amending
today. ''Treaties . . . shall be the supreme Law of the Land.'' The issue is
intervention. Intervention in the internal affairs of another nation is a
violation of the U.N. Charter, the Charter of the Organization of American
States. It is a violation of law.

And, as President Bush said to the General Assembly on Sept. 25: ''The founders
of this historic institution believed that it was here that the nations of the
world might come to agree that law, not force, shall govern.''

Mind, there is a pretty clear distinction between intervention and merely
attempting to influence events in another nation. That is normal and hugely
desirable. By influencing one another, nations learn to get along. Much as
people do. But it is another thing to seek to coerce in situations of violence.
And worst of all is assassination. The word is Arabic, of course, but the
calling is age-old and worldwide and universally despised.

The United States is party to the four 1949 Geneva Conventions on the laws of
war. Assuming that an internal convulsion rises to the point of international
conflict - assuming that the coup to overthrow Noriega brought in Nicaragua,
which in turn involved Colombia, or whatever -then the Geneva Conventions come
into play.

At that point, individuals become responsible. The Geneva Conventions codify the
judgments made at Nuremburg. Order the murder of a prisoner - you can get
yourself hanged.

I concede that there is little prospect that the current Director of the C.I.A.
would ever issue such an order; he is a man of peace and law. But someone in
that role just might. And that someone should not exclude the possibility that
someday he might find himself on trial. Somewhere not pleasant.

I left my innocence behind in the southwest corner of the White House 26 years
ago.

It may be we just don't believe in law any more. Fair enough. But shouldn't we
have the integrity to say so? Or, rather, the nerve.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

King School Stages Battle Over Advent Of R.O.T.C.

BYLINE: By FELICIA R. LEE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 959 words


The Manhattan high school named for the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. is at
the center of an emotional dispute over whether a new Air Force Junior Reserve
Officer Training Corps program desecrates the name of the slain Nobel Peace
Prize laureate.

A group of students, teachers, parents and civic leaders wants the Board of
Education to reverse the decision that allowed the program as an elective course
at the school, on Amsterdam Avenue between 65th and 66th Streets. They say a
more appropriate course would teach Dr. King's principles of nonviolence or
promote public service.

Faculty members at the school voted 102 to 59 against the course in April, but
the Board of Education approved it, 6 to 1, in June. A storeroom at the school
is being cleared for the three-year course, which combines social and physical
science.

Course Starts in February

The course includes a history of aviation and its impact on society as well as a
study of the aerospace industry and the career opportunities it offers. Students
who successfully complete it may qualify for scholarships and for consideration
for admission to the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo.

The school's principal, Caesar Previdi, said that students can begin enrolling
in November or December, and that the course will begin in February.

Nina de Fels, a business-education teacher, is one of the faculty members who
oppose R.O.T.C. at the school. ''The question we have to ask has national
implications,'' she said. ''How do we honor Dr. King? It's shameful, it's
outrageous, it's insane that the Board of Education would even think of
instituting R.O.T.C. at our school.

''Dr. King dedicated himself to fighting racism, poverty and war,'' Ms. de Fels
said. ''Whether we like it or not, the R.O.T.C. is a military program. We cannot
pretend this is some benign extracurricular activity.''

Two seniors, Tynetta Thompson and Lumumba Marson, are leading the student
opposition to the program.

''It's a disgrace,'' Ms. Thompson said. ''We don't need something
militaristic.''

Proponents of the program, including the retired Air Force General who is vice
president of the Air Force Association chapter that lobbied for it, think
opposition to the program is misguided.

The general, Allen Gregory Harris, said the program offered an excellent
opportunity to minority youngsters who want to further their education. He said
King High School was chosen for R.O.T.C. after a series of meetings with school
officials and Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan.

''There was no opposition,'' at the time, General Harris said. ''There is a
citywide coalition of individuals who oppose R.O.T.C.,'' he added.

Politicans Take Sides

Since the school board vote in June, the strong feelings about the program have
spilled beyond the school. Representative Thomas J. Manton, Democrat of Queens,
and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato support the program. Representatives Major R.
Owens, Democrat of Brooklyn, and Ted Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, State Senator
David A. Paterson, Democrat of Manhattan, and City Councilwoman Ruth Messinger,
Democrat of Manhattan, have gone on record as opposing it.

They point out that Dr. King's name is synonymous with nonviolence, and they say
a disproportinate number of R.O.T.C programs are placed in schools with mostly
black and Hispanic students.

At King High School, 29 percent of the students are Hispanic, 65 percent black
and 5 percent Asian. Less than 1 percent of the students are white. Three other
New York City high schools - De Witt Clinton in the Bronx, Julia Richman in
Manhattan and Curtis on Staten Island - have R.O.T.C programs. The enrollments
at De Witt Clinton and Julia Richman are overwhelmingly black and Hispanic.

At the Board of Education's public meeting Wednesday night, more than a dozen
people - parents, Vietnam veterans, a minister who said he was acquainted with
the King family - spoke against the R.O.T.C. program at King. They said the
$50,000 being used for the program is sorely needed for textbooks and additional
teachers and counselors in an overcrowded school. They also said the program
sends a message to black and Hispanic youngsters that they are good only for
cannon fodder.

Hoped to Move Program

''This is a very difficult, troubling issue,'' said the Board of Education
president, Robert F. Wagner Jr. ''We had hoped last June we'd be able to
persuade the Air Force to shift this to another school.''

Mr. Wagner said Air Force officials told the board that if the program were not
placed at King, it would be moved out of New York City. He said the school board
would try again to move it to another school.

But General Harris said in an interview yesterday that if the program does not
go to King High School, ''the next contract goes to Rochester, N.Y.''

The principal, Mr. Previdi, said he would tell students and parents about the
R.O.T.C. program just as he tells them of other new electives.

''I have to believe Martin Luther King's goal was for all Americans to have
access to America,'' Mr. Previdi said. But I'm also a principal, and I
understand you have to work with staff.''

Mr. Previdi said that when he became principal three years ago, he sought
special programs for his school, and that the Air Force Junior R.O.T.C. seemed
like a good one. But when staff members voted against it, Mr. Previdi said, he
told school board officials that they did not want it.

''We all went home in June and thought the program would no longer be here,'' he
said. ''I gather there was lobbying. People must have made phone calls. In
September, the superintendent directed me to implement R.O.T.C.''

''Until I hear differently,'' the principal said, ''it's here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 21, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Changing the Color of Money Won't Stop Corruption

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 671 words


To the Editor:

Donald T. Regan suggests America's drug problem can be cured simply by changing
the color of money (Op-Ed, Sept. 18). But that idea was tried before and failed
dismally.

Our last currency conversion took place during the spring of 1970. The reasons
for changing the color of currency then were the same reasons Mr. Regan suggests
for doing it now. However, changing the color of American Military Payment
Certificates failed back in crime- , drug- and corruption-infested South Vietnam
in 1970 because the American high command didn't appreciate that the major
element in the ''evil triad'' paralyzing our war effort was neither crime nor
drugs, but corruption.

Used as cash by the American military, the payment certificates replaced the
greenback for two reasons: so as not to disrupt the South Vietnamese economy by
flooding it with highly valuated American greenbacks, and to prevent the North
Vietnamese and the last Vietcong remnants from obtaining an internationally
accepted currency to purchase more advanced weapons, support and medical
equipment.

But as senior military command and intelligence officers became aware that South
Vietnamese drug lords, black marketeers, commodity brokers and enemy arms
merchants possessed more payment certificates than American military personnel,
a secret plan was hatched to change the color of the certificates abruptly and
render impotent the entire ''evil triad'' pyramid: from the politicians and
generals at the top who sold stores of spent brass bullet casings back to the
U.S. Government, to the street urchins and barrack maids at the bottom who sold
marijuana, cocaine, hashish and heroin on our military bases.

Planning for the conversion was kept from military personnel below the rank of
division commander. Or so it was intended. As American G.I.'s awoke in the
morning and received surprise orders to report to hastily built currency
exchanges to replace their color-canceled M.P.C. bills, millions more of the new
bills were already in the hands of South Vietnamese brothels than in American
currency exchanges. Those of us who worked as liaison with the South Vietnamese
Army discovered the night before that many of the lower-ranking Vietnamese
soldiers, fronting for their generals or civilian merchants, possessed huge,
hand-sized rolls of freshly printed M.P.C.

Was the conversion a failure? The true goal, it seemed, was not to eradicate the
evil triad completely but to replace the uncooperative cartels that had become
too wealthy and powerful for the American and South Vietnamese high command to
negotiate with, with new cartels that promised to work more closely with our war
effort. At that late stage in the war, corruption was an accepted basis for a
growing, or at least surviving, South Vietnamese economy.

The new cartels, amply supplied with the brightly colored payment certificates,
helped American officials buy back tons of black-market PX goods and military
and medical equipment, thereby reducing the supplies that would otherwise have
ended up in the hands of the enemy, who were caching tons of M.P.C.-purchased
munitions along the Cambodian-Vietnamese border to prepare for invasion. Many of
the supplies American officials failed to reclaim during the weeks following the
M.P.C. conversion were recaptured during the Cambodian offensive.

Was the conversion a success? No. Drug use among G.I.'s continued to soar during
the two remaining years of American military involvement. Munitions continued to
flow into North Vietnamese caches across the border. And American law
enforcement and intelligence morale sank to deeper depths.

Corruption among both South Vietnamese and American profiteers seemed a more
potent enemy than the American high command had anticipated. Corruption here at
home would spell failure in changing the color of American money.

PHILL COLEMAN
  Redondo Beach, Calif., Oct. 2, 1989

The writer operates the Vietnam Data Resource and Electronic Library as a public
service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting Addiction: 3 Days in Phoenix House -- A special report.;
Struggle and Hope From Ashes of Drugs

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2549 words


As though part of an enormous stage set for some brooding morality play, Phoenix
House, a drug-treatment center, stands on the edge of a sinister block in the
heart of the Morris Heights section of the Bronx. Scrawled across the treatment
center's facade in graffiti are the letters C-R-A-C-K.

Just across the narrow, rubbish-strewn street, a fortified apartment building
buzzes with the business of selling and consuming crack. Skeletal figures sit on
steps and curbs sucking at fuming crack pipes.

The treatment center is sanity and order amid anarchy. Inside the modest,
five-story former apartment building run by the Phoenix House Foundation, nearly
every aspect of life is highly regimented: when residents eat, sleep, study and
awaken is mapped out and posted. The men are required to be clean shaven,
creating an almost military sameness among them. No one, including the center's
44 women, is allowed to wear elaborate jewelry.

'Bring Structure Back'

With the permission of the residents, a reporter spent three days living and
working in the drug center, participating in the house chores, group encounters,
seminars and classes and, along with newcomers, mopping, sweeping and serving
meals.

''We have to bring structure back to their lives,'' said Douglas Scott, the
center's director who 21 years ago was a heroin addict sleeping in a wheelbarrow
in Harlem. ''We want them to get rid of those negative patterns they had out
there in society.''

Drug therapy here, which takes a minimum of 18 months, is rooted in a philosophy
common to such long-term programs. Addicts are first humbled with menial jobs,
then given steadily increasing responsibilities.

At the same time, they undergo counseling to bolster their resolve to resist
drugs, said Dr. Mitchell S. Rosenthal, president of the Phoenix House
Foundation.

The treatment is drug free. Addicts are required to detoxify before entering the
program.

Henry Benjamin said he could feel himself changing for the better. A year into
the program, Mr. Benjamin, 30 years old, said his mind was clearing after more
than a year and a half of smoking crack in Harlem.

''People who use drugs always feel that they are running after the drug,'' he
said. ''You never have time to think about what to do with your life.

''After not using drugs you eventually see this is the right place to be to get
yourself together. There's nothing for me in the streets.''

Phoenix House was founded in 1967 in New York City by a small group of young
heroin addicts who pooled their welfare checks and began developing a program
built on group encounters, hard physical labor and an environment free of drugs.

Today, the Phoenix House Foundation is a private nonprofit organization that
operates six treatment centers in New York and four in California. Phoenix House
provides 1,000 beds in New York in contracts with the State Division for
Substance Abuse Services. It serves addicts as young as 14.

The program also develops drug education curriculums for public and private
schools across the United States.

Circle of Confrontation
'You Can't Do This Alone'

Seated in a circle, a dozen residents lock eyes on the flushed face of Cynthia
Terry, a street-toughened young woman raised in Harlem. Choking back her tears,
she spoke of years of neglecting her three children and of drunkenness and drug
abuse. The group's observations and questions were relentless.

''Why don't you talk to anybody?'' shouted a 21-year-old crack addict. ''You're
encapsulated.'' ''This is what I've got for you,'' screamed another. ''You can't
do this alone.''

In a broken voice, the 30-year-old Mrs. Terry told the group that she had become
reclusive after a recurrence of guilt about the death of her mother, who died a
decade ago of lupus, while Mrs. Terry was snorting cocaine.

''She was always there for me, and all I could do was go out and get high,''
Mrs. Terry said, sobbing. ''I want to start my life over. I want to be a good
mother, and this is so hard. It hurts. it hurts an awful lot.'' The group,
including Mrs. Terry, then bore down on several others who they believed had
shown recent signs of withholding their feelings - ''stuffing feelings,'' or
''encapsulating,'' in the slang of Phoenix House.

Search for Identity
'I Feel Better About Myself'

The issue of identity looms large inside this former apartment building, where
men and women live and work to escape their addictions.

Crack addicts have traded in the trappings of their former identities to look
like bank teller trainees.

''That's all image,'' explained Dennis McCabe, 22 years old, dressed in a crisp
white shirt, narrow necktie and pressed pants. ''I feel better about myself when
I look like this.''

Since July, he has been assigned to kitchen duty, where residents sweat and
gripe over steamy stoves and hoist and scour dirty pots. Mr. McCabe, who is
addicted to hard liquor and hard drugs, is charged with overseeing the kitchen
operation.

Like everyone else in the house, his work is part of his therapy. Mr. McCabe
said he used to begin his day by drinking a half pint of Absolut vodka in the
shower. He said he drank because he was alone, and he was afraid to extend
himself to people or become responsible for them. To challenge Mr. McCabe's
fears, the counselors forced him to work supervising the kitchen crew.

When new residents arrive, they are usually put to work on the service crew:
cleaning the toilets and mopping, sweeping and dusting. The experience serves in
part to humble them, in part to teach them the Phoenix House system from the
ground up.

A resident who sweeps the worn marble and wood stairwell that winds from the
basement to the fifth floor is careful not to leave a single mop string in his
wake - even though more seasoned residents often interrupt him to quiz him on
the rules and regulations that govern the life inside the house.

Sexual contact between participants in the program is not permitted, nor is
smoking in the bathrooms or entering rooms without invitation. Breaking any of
these rules could lead to loss of a high-status job, weekend leaves or even
expulsion from the program.

Cheryl Baldwin, 32, lost her temper and cursed a staff member. After three and a
half months of working at a Phoenix House induction center, where new residents
are screened and prepared for life in a drug-treatment center, she was busted
back to the service crew where she said she feels ''suffocated.'' Even though
she dislikes her new job, she still offers advice on proper behavior to less
experienced residents.

''I didn't understand what I had learned in three and a half months,'' said Ms.
Baldwin. ''Now I cry. I want to get back outside and work.''

She realizes that there are consequences to her behavior, she said.

Everyone is responsible for their area in dormitory-style sleeping quarters.
Beds are made with crisp hospital corners. Shoes are neatly lined up beneath the
bed's edge. Clothes are hung up, with the hangers all facing the same way. There
are frequent inspections, too. The entire house could be placed on a weekend ban
- meaning no one is permitted to leave - if things get sloppy.

The watchword is consistency, Mr. Scott said. ''They got away from all those
normal, real feelings of trust and honesty and now have to begin with building
up their self-esteem,'' he said. ''One way to do that is to do well and start
feeling good about yourself.''

He customarily invites groups of new residents to his office, where he offers a
slice of cake and a chance to discover that he can be their friend as well as a
howling, omnipresent task master.

The meeting is a break in a day that is a slave to routine.

Life of Regimentation
'You've Hit Rock Bottom'

Every day begins the same way.

After a 30-minute breakfast at 7 A.M., there is an hour-long meeting that
includes inspirational songs and skits written and performed by the addicts. One
humorous skit urged residents to take special care in selecting a babysitter.
The performers were two characters wearing mops on their heads and speaking in
Caribbean accents. When their fictional ''Rasta Babysitting Service'' is found
to be indifferent to the children, the room roared with laughter. Yet the point
is made when the skit's mothers reclaim their children.

The rest of the day dissolved into a blur of seminars, classes to prepare for
the general equivalency diploma, rap sessions, job assignments and more meals
and meetings. There is little free time until 9 P.M. Lights are out at 11 P.M.
The 185-word Phoenix House philosophy is recited from memory at least twice a
day.

The weekend schedule is slightly more relaxed, with rented videos available and
highly supervised trips ''out into New York,'' as the residents refer to the
world beyond the walls of Phoenix House.

Most of the residents are between the ages of 20 and 40. They come from a range
of socio-economic backgrounds but were ultimately impoverished by their various
addictions, usually crack, cocaine, heroin, PCP or liquor; sometimes, all of
them. Most are on public assistance, which helps to pay for their treatment,
Phoenix House officials said.

Fifteen percent of the residents are remanded by the criminal-justice system for
treatment. Many have lengthy criminal records, which often include armed
robbery, burglary, prositution and drug sales, residents say.

''You've lost everything when you've got to come here,'' said Yolanda Turner, a
28-year-old crack addict who after 14 months of treatment is taking a word
processing course outside the center. ''You've hit rock bottom. This place is no
resort at all.''

Falling From Grace

Eternal Vigilance And Freedom

In the lower lounge, a rough-hewn basement with chairs and the only television
in the house, Lawrence Robinson sat wearing shredded ''bum's clothes'' over his
own.

Mr. Robinson sadly studied the faces of his inquisitors - impassioned,
impatient. Each screamed for a chance to indict him.

After 15 months of accepting the regimentation of Phoenix House and drug-free
living, Mr. Robinson, a 38-year-old former New York Telephone engineer, had
''fallen.'' While in the final stages of the recovery program, crack cravings
overwhelmed him and his new discipline dissolved into a hazy inhalation of a
palmfull of crack rocks, he said.

Recently he returned to Phoenix House to try to regain his footing. On
returning, he said he was ''embarrassed and ashamed'' about what he had done.

But no blind hostility greeted him. Peer counseling, steps to understand, began
anew. For more than 30 minutes Mr. Robinson listened as a dozen fellow residents
alternately berated and befriended the man now forced to wear a torso-sized sign
announcing his lapse in judgment. ''I knew what tools to use,'' he said in a
soft-spoken defense. ''I just didn't use them.''

Some residents have been known, although rarely, to sneak out to smoke crack.
They are dealt with severely. One was required recently to sit at a table in a
hallway and talk for days to fellow residents, one at a time, about why he had
forgotten or ignored what Phoenix House had tried to teach him.

''When people leave here and get high, it's a selfish act,'' said Carmen
Irizarry, a Phoenix House counselor who two years ago was herself a heroin
addict recovering in the same institution.

In her office and in several other rooms including the main lounge, tanks of
exotic fish are prominently displayed. No one knows why fish have become so
popular at Phoenix House. But they seem appropriate since most residents say
they feel as though they live in a fish bowl. Little escapes the collective eyes
and ears of the house. Several of the residents, known by the clipboards they
carry, keep tabs on the exact locations of all residents at all times. There is
no privacy.

''If you know something, everybody else is going to know it,'' said William
McDowell, a 40-year-old Vietnam veteran, whose shrapnel injury led to morphine
addiction and then to a 25-year heroin habit. ''Once you tell one person, that
person is going to tell someone else.''

Very often what residents notice in fellow residents is brought into the group
encounters, a centerpiece of Phoenix House's drug-free treatment.

Tradition of Help

'It Takes A Long Time'

For more than 20 years, addicts have been turning to this Phoenix House and its
tradition of helping addicts help themselves to sobriety.

''We are really optimistic about this,'' said Douglas Chiappetta, director of
the Therapeutic Communities of America, a Washington-based trade group for drug
and alcohol rehabiliation programs. ''They are not just dealing with the drug
addiction, but the reason that drives that person to use drugs.''

Yet long-term residential drug programs like Phoenix House have their critics.
Residential treatment is relatively expensive, they note, annually costing about
$15,000 a person compared with methadone maintenance programs exclusively used
for heroin addiction, which cost about a fifth that amount. Additionally,
residential treatment program officials acknowledge that drop-out rates in their
programs are high, up to 60 percent.

But supporters of residential treatment claim that their graduates tend to stay
drug free.

Since crack exploded on New York City streets five years ago, the number of
crack-related drug admissions to rehabiliation programs has more than tripled,
according to a recent report by the New York office of the Federal Drug
Administration. The center on Phelan Place, like the others in the city, is
operating at capacity, its officials said.

Testifying before a Congressional committee this fall, Dr. Rosenthal said a
recent recidivism study found that ''only 5 percent of one group and 1 in
another'' had returned to drug use after five to seven years after completing
treatment.

It is still too early to know how effective drug-free residential treatment has
been in dealing with crack addiction, he said, because widespread crack use is
relatively new.

There is no substance known to counter crack's powerfully addictive hold,
experts say.

''It takes a long time,'' Dr. Rosenthal said. ''In a period of three to 10
months the fog starts to clear.''

Demands of the Effort

'What We Do: Examine'

Manny Rivera began his day in high gear. The 50-year-old former heroin addict is
one of the center's eight counselors. Intellectual, energetic and demanding, Mr.
Rivera is revving up his group.

Paraphrasing Socrates, he tells them that an unexamined life is not worth
living. ''And in a therapeutic community, that's what we do: examine.''

Borrowing from Abraham Lincoln, he tells them, ''I don't think much of a man who
doesn't know more today than he knew yesterday.''

One resident confessed that she did not want to be in the program. After seven
months, she said she had grown tired of the house rules, regulations and
procedures.

''If you saw a man lying in the middle of the street with a broken arm and leg
after being run over by a car and he didn't want to go to the hospital, what
would you say?'' Mr. Rivera asked the group.

''You would say he wants to die,'' he said, answering his own question. ''You
need to be here.''

She lowered her head and nodded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: At a Phoenix House drug-treatment center, an oasis in the drug-ridden
Morris Heights section of the Bronx, Henry Benjamin, who has been in treatment
for a year, studied a textbook on electricity in his room (NYT/Michelle V.
Agins) (pg. 1); Carmen Irizarry, a former addict who is now a counselor,
instructing residents at Phoenix House (NYT/Michelle V. Agins); Billy McDowell,
left, Mitchell Jones and Gerard Buonaiuto, Phoenix House residents, at a group
therapy session. (NYT)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New Yorkers, etc.

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 42, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


They aren't daydreams because most daydreams are so far-fetched and even
ridiculous (which doesn't mean that they aren't wonderful) that there's almost
no chance that they could ever come true. But certainly once or twice in each
lifetime, there are foolish, impractical things that we could do, and even
fleetingly consider doing, but that we back away from, usually because we're
afraid of making fools of ourselves or embarrassed for other reasons.

There is, for instance, a woman who recognizes that her singing voice is, to put
it kindly, unusual. She knows, actually, that it's unusually awful but a little
glimmer of optimism flares occasionally. Because she's a well-known personality
(in another area), she was once given the opportunity of singing at a benefit.
She was ambivalent - one part of her said, 'Yes, do it, the audience will rise
as one and acclaim a new Marlene Dietrich.' Another part said, ''Don't - you'll
look like a ninny.'' She didn't and she still thinks about it. Could she have
been another Dietrich?

Gene Hovis is a food consultant, cookbook author and frustrated singer-pianist.
There have been times when he's had an almost irresistible urge, in private
homes and public night spots, to sit down at a piano and play and sing in the
style of Bobby Short, an entertainer he admires.

''I used to tell myself that I'd knock people off their feet with my playing and
singing,'' he said. ''I could visualize them saying 'My God, I didn't know he
could do that.' I'm sorry I never did it and now I'm too inhibited.''

Almost 30 years ago, Judy Block and her beau went on a double-date with Jackie
Mason and a lady friend. More recently, within the last year, Ms. Block, the
corporate sales manager of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, attended Mr. Mason's
Broadway show and sat in the front row.

''There were times during the show when he really talked to the audience, and I
kept on wanting to say 'Do you remember me? We double-dated.' ''

She still regrets what she didn't do. ''I wish I had, but I was too embarrassed
- and he probably wouldn't have remembered,'' she said. Still . . . Maybe . . .
John Dobkin admits without a qualm that he's not the epitome of the well-dressed
man. In fact, Mr. Dobkin said, his clothes could still be referred to as
''gentlemanly tatters,'' a description coined originally some 20 years ago by
his fellow law students.

These same friends were, at the time, so concerned about Mr. Dobkin's nonchalant
appearance that they got together, collected $100, and instructed him to buy a
proper suit for interviews with prospective employers, an idea and action he
regarded as foolish and unnecessary. He gave the money to charity. The result
was that he never did change his style of dressing, said Mr. Dobkin, director of
the National Academy of Design. But he sometimes wonders what would have
happened if he had used that money.

''It might have changed my life - I might have been on Wall Street now,'' he
said, tongue in cheek. ''I might have been part of the contemporary scene.''

Around this same time, Arthur Kaminsky, a Cornell student, was en route to
Williamsburg, Va., as a special aide to his college's president at an
international education conference. One of his jobs was seating a dinner
attended by President Johnson. While organizing this, he heard of a protest
planned for the dinner by students opposed to the Vietnam war and managed to
head it off. The President was told of this, was properly impressed and turned
to a member of his entourage with instructions to ''make sure this young man
gets a job when he's out of school.''

Six months later, a call came from the White House, with a job offer. And
although President Johnson had resigned in the interim, Mr. Kaminsky turned it
down as a practical matter. He was faced with, as he put it, ''a crisis of
conscience.'' Like the students he headed off, he was opposed to the Vietnam war
and govenment policy.

Looking back, Mr. Kaminsky, an entertainment lawyer, has certain regrets. ''I've
thought about it for years,'' he said. ''Working in the White House for a time
would have been a unique experience.''

Perhaps it helps to know that it's not only commoners who have regrets. Royalty
also has its moments. Somewhat different moments, it's true, but nevertheless .
. .

A recent book by Jeannie Sakol and Caroline Latham called ''The Royals''
(Congdon & Weed) reports a remark made by the late Queen Mary to her
daughter-in-law, who is now Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother.

''One thing I never did and wish I had done,'' she said. ''Climbed over a
fence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Vietnam Veterans Ensemble in 'The Ambassador'

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 63, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 527 words


In his plays, Slawomir Mrozek mixes art and polemics. Sometimes, as in ''Tango''
and ''Emigres,'' his sense of theater is as strong as his political awareness.
This is not the case with ''The Ambassador,'' receiving its United States
premiere at the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company. With politics taking
precedence, the narrative becomes a thin thread on which to hang the author's
inquiry into the nature of dissidence and diplomacy during a time of subversion.

The beginning of the play is intriguing. The Ambassador of a country very much
like the United States is stationed in an unidentified totalitarian nation.
Through the windows of George Allison's compact set, one can see the barbed wire
surrounding the embassy, and soon we can hear the rabble outside.

The Ambassador (David Adamson) is discovered on the floor, where he appears to
be searching frantically for a hidden microphone. Gradually, it is revealed that
the Ambassador is not trying to debug his lair, but is simply looking for a lost
cufflink. An observant theatergoer would have noticed the clue - his flapping
French cuff.

The joke is a good one, and who is to say whether the cufflink itself is not
bugged. In this country, nothing is secret. The audience's interest continues
with the appearance of the host nation's Deputy Prime Minister, who is as
guileful as the Ambassador is ingenuous; he seems to know the Ambassador's moves
before they're made.

The comedy gradually lessens, almost depleting itself by intermission, although
the second act is momentarily stirred by the announcement to the Ambassador that
his Government has ''ceased to exist.'' It is one thing to be an ambassador
without portfolio, quite another to be an ambassador without a country.
Questions remain as to who will defect where.

Eventually the play becomes didactic. The work never has the wit of Mr. Mrozek's
earlier efforts - or the fierceness of Fernando Arrabal's political parables.
More agile actors would have helped, but only James Gleason, as the deputy
minister, and Anthony Chisholm, as the Ambassador's aide, come close to having
the necessary lightness of touch. Under the direction of Mac Ewing, the play and
performances are less than synergistic.

For the Veterans Ensemble (known as Vetco), ''The Ambassador'' is a step toward
diversification. In its previous nine years, this company has specialized in
plays relating to the Vietnam War. The choice of Mr. Mrozek helps to expand
Vetco's political perspective, which is to be admired even as the play
disappoints.

DEFECTION, BUT WHERE?

THE AMBASSADOR, by Slawomir Mrozek; translated by Ralph Manheim and Mr. Mrozek;
directed by Mac Ewing; lighting design, Terry Wuthrich; set design, George
Allison; costume design, Deborah Rooney; sound design, Ben Adam; production
stage manager, Anne Marie Hobson. Presented by the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble
Theater Company, Thomas Bird, artistic director. At the South Street Theater,
424 West 42d Street.

The Ambassador . . . David Adamson
Othello . . . Anthony Chisholm
Amelia . . . Sharon Ernster
The Deputy . . . James Gleason
The Man . . . Michael Manetta

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

It's Time to Accept the New Russian Image at Face Value

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 416 words


To the Editor:

I enjoy a good conspiracy theory as much as anyone. but even my credulity was
stretched to the breaking point as I read Prof. Richard Pipes's assertions that
the Soviet Union's current abandonment of its overseas allies, its new
laissez-faire attitude toward the future of Eastern Europe, and its manful
attempts to struggle with the dual challenges of glasnost and perestroika were
all part of a cunning master plan to lull the West into a false sense of
security (''The Russians Are Still Coming,'' Op-Ed, Oct. 9). This is nonsense!

The Soviet Union, under the leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev, is going through
the most profound series of changes it has experienced since the Bolshevik
Revolution in 1917. The changes now underway promise to do more to transform the
shape of the Soviet economy and society than the forced industrialization and
agricultural collectivization of Stalin's times. Why is this so? Because this
time the whole process is being done with, indeed is predicated on, the active
support and participation of the Soviet people. Seventy years late, perhaps, but
democracy has finally begun to reach the Soviet Union.

These are events which have already had a profound effect on Soviet foreign
policy. An ailing Soviet economy and its dissatisfied consumers are no longer
willing to pour economic aid into Vietnam or Cuba. A newly sensitized public was
no longer prepared to tolerate its young men dying for ungrateful foreigners in
Afghanistan. A Soviet economy which cannot deliver housing, food or reasonable
medical care to its own population can ill afford to support one of the two most
powerful and expensive military machines on the planet.

Mikhail Gorbachev took power, looked around him, and said, ''Enough.'' It is a
cry echoed by his own people and now opposed only by a shrinking band of
conservatives in the party and military bureaucracy. It is time Americans
started to take Mr. Gorbachev's ''yes'' for an answer, and believe the evidence
of our eyes, instead of creating farfetched fantasies designed to reinforce
cosy, cold war images of the Red Menace.

The Soviet Union will, I hope, be our partner in the not too distant future. It
is certainly no longer our enemy. It is time we started treating it the way
Soviet actions deserve, not the way the paranoid fantasies of a few cold
warriors desire.

DONALD M. KENDALL
  Purchase, N.Y., Oct. 13, 1989

The writer is chairman of the executive committee of Pepsico Inc.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON LANGUAGE;
Bring Back Upper Volta

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words


THE PEOPLE OF Chad had good reason to change the name of >Fort-Archambault to
>Sarh, and >Fort-Lamy to >Ndjamena: the new names are less warlike, contain no
memories of a colonial past and are easier for local residents to pronounce. I
will go along with this change in about a year, when I become sure the Chadians
mean it and everybody knows where the two cities are.

But ixnay on >Burkina Faso. That's the new name chosen by the government of
Upper Volta, which apparently tired of being asked, ''Whatever happened to Lower
Volta?'' (There never was one.) A spokesperson for that country's Mission to the
United Nations said, ''We changed the name because >Upper Volta was a colonial
name not from us but from the French Government, and because we are more than
just a location on the river Volta. >Burkina Faso means 'country of
incorruptible people.' '' That's fine for them, and the United Nations can
change all the metal place cards at the table, but it's still >Upper Volta to
me.

Safire's Law of Nation-Naming: You get only one crack at a new name in each
century. Upper Volta's organizers had their chance when the country proclaimed
its independence in 1960. When British Honduras, British Guiana and Dutch Guiana
became independent after that, they called themselves >Belize, Guyana and
>Surinam. Fine; but if they want to change the names again, they should be
required to wait.

What about >Cambodia? A bunch of genocidal Khmer Rouge came along and renamed
the country being terrorized; why do we have to go along with their preference,
>Democratic Kampuchea? We know it's no democracy; besides, the key part of the
new name is approximately the same as it was, with the spelling jerked around to
please the local dictators; why should you and I kowtow?

Accommodationists, doves, assorted linguistic roundheels and spelling reformers
will say, ''A place is named whatever the local people name it,'' so if
>Cambodia sounds like >Kampuchea in Khmer, that's the way we all must
transliterate the sounds. The New York Times, to its credit, has never adopted
>Kampuchea, although it has recently started using >Myanmar for the country most
of us know as >Burma. (If the copy editors want to lather themselves up with
Myanmar-Shave, that's their business, but I'm still traveling down that old
Burma Road.) If local preferences are to dictate, and Rangoon is now meekly
accepted as >Yangon, why don't we call Rome >Roma, as the Romans do? Or if we
are transliterating sounds, write Paris as >Paree, to match the French
pronunciation? To be consistent, Vienna should be >Veen, as citizens of what is
spelled >Wien pronounce it.

''People can call their countries and their cities anything they like,'' writes
Byron Farwell, in a column for The Blue Ridge (Va.) Leader, ''but why must we
English-speakers follow suit?'' Only Latin American, Asian and African countries
get this favored treatment; European countries and cities are not the objects of
our deference. ''For us, Norway is not >Norge, Germany is not >Deutschland,
Spain is not >Espana and certainly we do not call Finland >Suomen Tasavalta.''
(Maybe Denmark is Lower Tasavalta.) Our refusal to adopt European names and
spellings, contrasted with our acquiescence in non-European nomenclature,
suggests that we are permitting a political bias to affect our linguistic
judgment. That's a bad reason for inconsistency; it is surely patronizing and
may even be considered reverse racism. (We treat the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics as we do the Europeans. The U.S.S.R. is not the S.S.S.R. ''No one ever
calls the country >Soyuz Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik,'' Mr. Farwell
observes. Nor is it the C.C.C.P., as no one wants to get into the Cyrillic.)
When somebody wins a war, among the spoils is the name; I am prepared to accept
the name Vietnam for what was >North Vietnam and >South Vietnam, and though it
galls me, I call Saigon >Ho Chi Minh City. And when nations merge, we have no
reason for resisting a melding of names; Tanganyika and Zanzibar came up with
the sensible >Tanzania, which has a nicer ring than something like
>Zantanganbar.

Although the Sultan of >Brunei was good for a $10 million loan when Ollie North
said we needed the money, I am reluctant to go along with the addition of a
second name to the Sultan's country. An ancient name for Brunei, >Borni, was
probably used centuries ago to refer to the whole island of >Borneo; the Sultan
now wants to call his nation >Brunei Darussalam, presumably because of the
confusion with the rest of Borneo. Let's wait a generation or so; if the nation
has not been reshuffled or merged, or it has not purchased all Malaysia in a
friendly junk-bond takeover, we can see if we want to cram in the second name on
our maps.

You think this resistance to cavalier place-renaming is xenophobic? Then bring
it close to home: the highest point in North America is Mount McKinley in Alaska
(named after William McKinley when he was campaigning for the Presidency), which
some groups in that area are now lobbying to call >Denali. That means ''great
one'' and is the name by which the mountain is known locally.

I'm standing pat with Mount McKinley. From atop its 20,320-foot peak, you can
almost see from Yangon to Mandalay.

UNWORDABILITY

ROBERT PENN WARREN, the novelist and poet, died recently at the age of 84. In an
appreciation written soon afterward, Colman McCarthy of The Washington Post
recalled a telephone interview in which he had asked the Poet Laureate about a
most unfamiliar word used by Warren: >appallment.

''Speaking like a gourmet chef over a kettle happy to spoon flavorings of some
fresh-simmering vocabulary,'' McCarthy wrote, Mr. Warren had this to say about
the word he thought he had coined: '' 'If you're writing and a word is needed,
you create it. This is a word that ought to exist. I've invented several other
words. >Appallment is my latest.' ''

A search of the Oxford English Dictionary turns up >appalment, with a single >l,
first used in a French-English dictionary in 1611. But this noun is rarely used,
and is not found in any other dictionary; Warren had reached into his own mind
and come up with it on his own.

Same with >unwordable, a more specific form of >inexpressible, which Warren
used:

You dream that some
  where, somehow, you
  may embrace
The world in its fullness
  and threat, and feel, like
  Jacob, at last
The merciless grasp of un
  wordable grace
Which has no truth to tell
  of future or past.

Unlike unutterable, the word unwordable also applies to writing. The term was
first used in theology; its original application, in 1660, was to ''holiness,''
not far from Warren's use of the adjective to modify ''grace.'' In 1882, it
appeared in a travel story as ''an unwordable calm, an indescribable
tranquillity.''

Poets should stretch the language and renew its roots, reinventing or coining
words that open new vistas. Robert Penn Warren did his job.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SHE WOULD NOT BE MOVED

BYLINE: By BARBARA EHRENREICH; Barbara Ehrenreich's latest book is ''Fear of
Falling: The Inner Life of the Middle Class.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 910 words



MARY HEATON VORSE
The Life of an American Insurgent.
By Dee Garrison.
Illustrated. 377 pp. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press. $27.95.

Mention the coal miners' strike and most Americans will think you're talking
about something that happened long ago or in another country, not something that
started April 5 and is going on right now in Virginia, West Virginia, Kentucky
and seven other states. There has been little coverage, and most of it
perfunctory, of a strike in which thousands of miners and their families have
been arrested for acts of nonviolent civil disobedience. The Reagan-Bush era
contempt for labor has contributed to the general ignorance of our own miners'
struggle, but so has another factor I had not taken into account before reading
''Mary Heaton Vorse'': the decline of media interest in labor issues. She was
the greatest labor journalist of this century, and no one yet has risen to take
her place.

Mary Heaton was born in 1874 to a wealthy New England family where girls were
expected to acquire a few pleasing ''accomplishments,'' then settle promptly
into married life. Her radicalization, understandably, began with her own
attempts to claim a more adventurous destiny for herself. At the age of 22, she
left home to study art in New York City, and married a semi-Bohemian writer who
seemed to offer an egalitarian approach to love. But Bert Vorse was soon
complaining that Mary's efforts ''to make her own pin money'' by writing stories
for women's magazines often left him without ''fresh underclothing in the
mornings,'' and the marriage ended badly, leaving Mary with two young children
to support. (She was deprived of any inheritance by her disapproving family.)
The event that turned Vorse into a true Wobbly-style ''rebel girl'' - as Murray
Kempton was to eulogize her many decades later - was the Triangle Shirtwaist
Company fire of 1911. Drawn by crowds shrieking outside her Greenwich Village
apartment, she ran to the building housing the shirtwaist company, where so many
women workers were jumping from the 10th floor to escape the flames that they
buried the firemen's hoses. The women, as it turned out, had been locked into
the building by their bosses.

After this, according to her biographer, Dee Garrison, a professor of history at
Rutgers University, Vorse was ''ready to reorient her life.'' She set aside the
light pieces - ''lollypops'' was her term for them - that she had been writing,
and persuaded Harper's Weekly to let her cover the now-famous textile workers'
strike in Lawrence, Mass. It was at Lawrence that she discovered where she
belonged: ''on the side of the workers and not with the comfortable people among
whom we were born.''

Henceforth, Vorse's own story became part of the larger story of class struggle
that she so faithfully recorded. From the teens through the 1950's, she reported
on almost every major strike, finding time in between to cover the two world
wars. She was at the 1916 miners' strike in the Mesabi Range, at the 1926
textile strike in Passaic, N.J., at the bloody 1937 ''Little Steel'' strike in
Chicago, and at the massive auto workers' strike and factory takeover in Flint,
Mich., that same year. Never claiming to be an objective journalist, Vorse
always helped the strikes along - doing public relations work for the unions,
organizing newspapers for the workers, speaking at rallies. If these were not,
strictly speaking, her struggles, they were still her finest moments. Ms.
Garrison reports that when Vorse witnessed hundreds of Flint women picketing and
singing ''We Shall Not Be Moved,'' her ''joy at the sight surpassed all
imaginable limits.''

The other side of her life was less uplifting. Burdened with three children to
raise and support (one born during her brief marriage to the journalist Joe
O'Brien, which ended tragically with his early death), Vorse was one of the
first middle-class victims of the ''double day.'' The children needed attention,
strikes needed to be covered and ''lollypops'' had to be turned out regularly to
support the expanding household. Except for O'Brien, the men in Vorse's life
were little help. Her third husband, Robert Minor, a self-important Communist
Party official, announced his intention to leave her as Vorse lay recovering
from a miscarriage at age 48, plunging her into a six-year struggle with
depression and medically-induced morphine addiction. No wonder she later looked
back on her life as ''a pattern of me escaping family - swamped again - escaping
again.''

Ms. Garrison has given us a wonderfully vivid, politically nuanced account of
Vorse's life and world - from embattled union outposts to the hard-drinking,
high-spirited Bohemias of Greenwich Village and Provincetown, which Vorse shared
with such disparate luminaries as Big Bill Haywood, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn,
Josephine Herbst, John Dos Passos and Eugene O'Neill. But mostly I thank Ms.
Garrison, as I am sure other readers of my generation will, for introducing me
to Mary Heaton Vorse. In 1959, at the age of 85, Vorse traveled by bus to cover
a North Carolina textile workers' strike. On the day she died, in 1966, she was
planning her involvement in the movement against the war in Vietnam. If she had
held out for just a couple more decades, she would be in the coal fields of West
Virginia right now, writing, getting arrested, reporting on the heroism of
''ordinary'' people, and inspiring us with her own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mary Heaton Vorse with her second husband, Joe O'Brien, about 1914.

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ANYONE FOR WAR?

BYLINE: By TOM BUCKLEY; Tom Buckley covered the Vietnam War for The New York
Times from 1966 to 1968.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words



THE LONG GRAY LINE
By Rick Atkinson.
Illustrated. 592 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
$24.95.

In February 1966, the members of the graduating class at the United States
Military Academy assembled, as was customary, to choose the branch of the Army
in which they would serve. Having done so, they were invited to waive their
choice of a first assignment and volunteer for service in South Vietnam.

What happened next? Did those 579 cadets, glowing with patriotism and thirsting
for glory, step forward as one man? Maybe they will in the movie - Warner
Brothers, which had the bravest actors in Hollywood in World War II, has bought
the screen rights to ''The Long Gray Line'' - but what really happened was that
only 98 cadets answered the call. The rest, according to Rick Atkinson in his
chronicle of the West Point class of 1966, headed for graduate school as
planned, tried to get orders for someplace quieter or simply hoped for the best.

One cadet who had been having doubts about a military career ''wasn't ready to
fling himself into the war,'' as the author says (without apparent irony) and
could not bear to be parted from his sweetheart, a ballet dancer in New York. He
managed to get himself posted to a missile silo in Franklin Lakes, N.J.

This lack of elan among young men who, after all, had chosen the profession of
arms and had been steeped for four years in the spirit of Chapultepec,
Gettysburg, Chateau-Thierry and the Battle of the Bulge seems astonishing, and
all the more so since two-thirds of them, we are told, were the sons, and in
some cases the grandsons, of Army officers.

Beyond all that, even the least adventurous cadets might have decided that
volunteering was a sound career move and that the degree of risk was acceptable.
Although many people had already decided that the Vietnam War was stupid,
immoral or both, few yet thought that it was unwinnable. The prevailing opinion,
in fact, was that once the military buildup had been completed, victory would
come quickly.

For that matter, why was the Army, already short of junior officers, asking West
Pointers to volunteer for combat? My assumption was that graduating classes
routinely were being rushed to Vietnam. If a choice of assignment was permitted
in previous wars, ''The Long Gray Line'' does not tell us. In any event, there
seems to be a certain impropriety in the Army ordering tens of thousands of
draftees into action while allowing the men who had been painstakingly trained
to lead them to decide the matter for themselves. ''Never volunteer for
anything'' has always been the wisdom of enlisted men rather than officers.

The volunteers began arriving in Vietnam in late 1966. They fought bravely, and
their terse, accurate and vivid descriptions of engagements at which I was
present as a correspondent are by far the best parts of the book. Among these
were the battle for Hill 875, in which the 173d Airborne Brigade suffered heavy
casualties to no real purpose; Operation Junction City, in which tens of
thousands of troops roared fruitlessly back and forth northwest of Saigon,
looking for the enemy; and the Ninth Infantry Division's more successful
encounters with Vietcong Main Force units in the Mekong River delta.

Several of the volunteers were killed, as were, in the years that followed, many
of their classmates. In all, Mr. Atkinson notes, 30 members of the class, in the
lingo of the war, were blown away. He seems to think a death rate of a bit over
5 percent is high. Considering the length of time that American forces fought in
Vietnam and that no one has a shorter life expectancy than a small-unit
commander, I had supposed that it was much higher. In World War II, as I was
told by the academy, three West Point classes had death rates of more than 10
percent, and it was much higher still among graduates of Saint-Cyr, the French
military academy, in the first Indochina War.

The author tells us that ''more than 100'' members of the class were wounded,
''several'' of whom were permanently disabled, but he fails to state the number
who served more than a draftee's single one-year tour. Nor does he tell us
whether any members of the class might have been ''fragged'' - that is, killed
or wounded by mutinous troops, often high on drugs. From 1970 to 1973, the final
wretched years of American combat operations, fragging was an escalating peril
for aggressive officers.

One reason for these omissions may be that only about a third of ''The Long Gray
Line'' is devoted to the class at war. The first third describes, in
excruciating detail, its four years in the academy, including such familiar
juvenilia as the hazing of new cadets and the theft of the Naval Academy's goat
on the eve of the Army-Navy football game.

The final third discusses the postwar years. The problem here is that several of
the men on whom the author focuses resigned from the Army as early as 1970, as
soon as they had fulfilled their four-year service obligation or soon afterward.
Their lives since then, mainly in comfortable white-collar occupations, struck
me as not particularly interesting.

The missile silo soldier, for example, went from his post in New Jersey to the
Harvard Business School and did not arrive in Vietnam until 1969. Deciding that
duty did not require that he ''put himself in harm's way,'' he permitted a
classmate to help him get an assignment at a heavily guarded and air-conditioned
computer center. It is one of the many instances of string-pulling by the
legendary West Point Protective Association (an informal mutual-assistance
fraternity) that the author mentions in passing, with no apparent idea that such
actions in wartime might be regarded as less than honorable. After his year in
Vietnam, the soldier spent some time in the basement of the Pentagon, resigned,
tried divinity school, and ended up as a lawyer. Mr. Atkinson tells us that he
played a minor role in the building of the Vietnam Memorial, whose guiding
spirit, it should be noted, was a former enlisted man named Jan Scruggs.

In fact, the only altogether admirable figure among those whose careers are
described in detail is an Arkansan, George Crocker. He had two tours in Vietnam,
the first as a volunteer, was wounded and was decorated. Impelled by a sense of
duty, Mr. Atkinson says, he remained in the Army. By 1987, having recovered from
a serious parachuting injury, he was a full colonel, commanding a brigade of the
82d Airborne Division.

In an apparent effort to broaden the appeal of the book, Mr. Atkinson has
devoted a great deal of space to engagements, marriages, honeymoons, children,
quarrels, infidelities, divorces and remarriages. The wives, at least the first
wives, are uniformly loving, faithful and quietly courageous Donna Reed types.
The replacements, predictably, test higher for glamour.

''The Long Gray Line'' also describes several serious problems that beset the
military academy in the 1970's. The superintendent, Maj. Gen. Samuel W. Koster,
was reassigned, and later demoted, for failure to investigate the Mylai
massacre, and harangued the bewildered Corps of Cadets before his departure. In
1976 a cheating scandal exposed the cherished cadet honor code as a sham.
Further, later that year, amid much controversy, the first female cadets
arrived.

Mr. Atkinson, the son of an Army officer, was himself admitted to West Point in
1970 but decided to attend a civilian college instead. He received a Pulitzer
Prize for a series on the class of 1966 that appeared in The Kansas City Times
in 1982. However, Mr. Atkinson, now a staff writer with The Washington Post, has
lost his way in the wide open spaces between hard covers. His book is not so
much expanded as bloated - a shapeless grab bag, lacking selectivity, synthesis,
a theme or, aside from an uncritical sympathy for one and all, a point of view.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cadets information at West Point, wearng full-dress gray uniforms (From
''The Long Gray Line'')

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New &Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 943 words




OUT OF THIS WORLD, by Graham Swift. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $7.95.) As
Harry Beech, an aerial photographer, flies over the English landscape, his
daughter lies on a psychoanalyst's couch in Manhattan. Both try to figure out
how their relationship went wrong. ''Not a book the reader is likely to forget,
'Out of This World' deserves to be ranked at the forefront of contemporary
literature,'' Linda Gray Sexton said here last year.

ADAM, EVE, AND THE SERPENT, by Elaine Pagels. (Vintage, $8.95.) In her
examination of Genesis 1-3 the author of ''The Gnostic Gospels'' shows how
politics might have helped transform the cryptic Garden of Eden myth from a
celebration of freedom to a condemnation of original sin. The book ''has the
distinctive qualities so many admired in her work on the Gnostic Gospels,''
Robin Lane Fox said in The Book Review last year. ''It is very clearly written.
It has form, moral impetus and direction.''

THE DREAMS OF REASON: The Computer and the Rise of the Sciences of Complexity,
by Heinz R. Pagels. (Bantam, $9.95.) Mr. Pagels, who died in a mountaineering
accident in Colorado in 1988, writes that like the telescope and the microscope
the computer will be a tool that brings on a new scientific age. Last year our
reviewer, Brian Hayes, said this ''casual, discursive book . . . contains as
much philosophy as science, and it includes a generous measure of informal
autobiography and anecdote as well.'' In one section of the book, Mr. Pagels
writes, ''I remain an optimist and believe that the liberating capacity of our
knowledge, along with a little wisdom, will affirm the power of life over death.
I continue to believe that the distant day will come when the order of human
affairs is not entirely established by domination.''

AROUND THE DAY IN EIGHTY WORLDS, by Julio Cortazar. Translated by Thomas
Christensen. (North Point, $11.95.) The cast of characters in Julio Cortazar's
literary game includes Marcel Duchamp, Louis Armstrong and a cat named Theodor
W. Adorno. ''With this miscellany that's as challenging as an infinite exercise
in connect-the-dots, a color-by-number landscape a la Salvador Dali, the late
Argentine fabulist constructs yet another prototype of literature as schoolboy's
amusement,'' John Krich said here in 1986. ''Profundity is the grand prize and
the winner is the first player to disregard the rules altogether.''

PASSION & CUNNING: Essays on Nationalism, Terrorism and Revolution, by Conor
Cruise O'Brien. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $9.95.) When this collection of
writings was published last year our reviewer, Linda Robinson, said the book is
''a service to anyone unfamiliar with his lucid prose. Mr. O'Brien takes on the
most intractable conflicts, puncturing fashionable views with pungent comments
that sometimes make his fellow liberals uncomfortable.''

PALM LATITUDES, by Kate Braverman. (Penguin, $8.95.) In East Los Angeles, a
capital of the steamy, rotting land Kate Braverman calls the Palm Latitudes,
Francisca, Gloria and Marta feel doubly alienated because they are female as
well as Hispanic. Last year The Times's reviewer, Michiko Kakutani, said the
author ''possesses a magical, incantatory voice and the ability to loft ordinary
lives into the heightened world of myth, and in using these gifts to recount the
tales of these three women she has succeeded in creating a work of
hallucinatory, poetic power.'' Penguin has also republished Ms. Braverman's 1979
novel LITHIUM FOR MEDEA ($7.95.), which is set in the Los Angeles of the 60's.

THE INVENTION OF MEMORY: A New View of the Brain, by Israel Rosenfield. (Basic,
$9.95.) Memories are not fixed images stored in the brain, the author argues,
but imaginative reconstructions. In 1988 our reviewer, James W. Lance, said the
argument was overdrawn but that the book ''will stimulate interest in one of the
most intriguing aspects of brain function.''

THE SWIMMING-POOL LIBRARY, by Alan Hollinghurst. (Vintage, $8.95.) A young,
upper-crust British homosexual meets a like-minded older man and together they
learn that gay culture cuts through the boundaries of class. ''Like Edmund
White, Alan Hollinghurst is a polished poet of homosexual desire,'' Catherine R.
Stimpson said here last year. His novel ''tells of impurities with shimmering
elegance, of complexities with a camp-fired wit and of truths with a fiction's
solid grace.''

BROTHERS: Black and Poor - A True Story of Courage and Survival, by Sylvester
Monroe and Peter Goldman, with Vern E. Smith, Terry E. Johnson, Monroe Anderson
and Jacques Chenet. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A dozen black men who grew up on
Chicago's South Side tell about their successes, but mostly their failures to
escape from the ghetto. ''You see men of substance, who they are and how they
got to be that way,'' Phyllis Crockett said here last year. ''In 'Brothers' we
come to understand why so few make it.''

FATAL LIGHT, by Richard Currey. (Penguin, $6.95.) This story of a young West
Virginia man who becomes a medic in Vietnam is ''a spare, elegant novel that
manages to summon several layers of images, some quite beautiful, others
horrifying,'' Meg Wolitzer said in The Book Review last year.

HIS EMINENCE AND HIZZONER: A Candid Exchange, by John O'Connor and Edward I.
Koch. (Avon, $4.95.) The Mayor and the Archbishop of New York talk about gay
rights, AIDS, abortion and other subjects on which they fundamentally disagree.
This is ''a fascinating book,'' Andrew Hacker said in these pages earlier this
year. ''They have used this set of alternating essays to present their ideas in
some depth.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Elaine Pagels (Jerry Bauer)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 133 words



Additional titles of interest:

RISE AND SHINE. Written and illustrated by Fiona French. Little, Brown. $12.95.
(Ages 3 to 8) A British artist has illustrated a folk-song version of Noah and
the ark (''There's gonna be a floody, floody'') with cheerful sunny colors. The
ark is candy-striped.

THE BAND NEVER DANCES. By J. D. Landis. Harper & Row. $13.95 (Ages 12 and up)
Wedding Night is the name of the band, Judy is the drummer and the story of the
price of success is well told in this rock-and-roll novel.

AND ONE FOR ALL. By Theresa Nelson. Orchard Books. $12.95. (Ages 11 to 13) This
powerful novel is set in a New York City suburb in the late 60's. The Vietnam
War offers escape for Geraldine's beloved, rebellious older brother, Wing, who
joins the Marines. Fine letters home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing from ''Rise and Shine''

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
FICTION

BYLINE: By KIT REED

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 332 words



DEADFALL. By Patti Davis. (Crown, $17.95.) This literary plea for a hands-off
policy in Nicaragua is particularly plaintive, coming as it does from the
daughter of a President. The actress, songwriter and political activist Patti
Davis, Ronald and Nancy Reagan's daughter, took on the American presence in
Vietnam in her first novel, ''Home Front,'' which was written with Maureen
Strange Foster. This earnest, amiable new novel (her first solo flight) is about
a California painter whose life is thrown into turmoil because her film maker
husband uncovers some covert operations in Nicaragua. Engaging, aimless Darren
Laverty and her husband, Andrew, have an enviable sex life; they always sleep
tangled together (''they made love in the silvery light, the wine heavy as syrup
in their veins and their bodies still warm from the Jacuzzi''). Then, in Central
America, Andrew films scenes of violence that have apparently been prompted by
American intervention. Ms. Davis intercuts such crucial developments with more
mundane interludes, like Darren adopting a dog, visiting friends and working out
at a gym. After a second foray south, Andrew returns with evidence against the
covert forces and soon thereafter dies violently, just as Darren discovers she's
pregnant. She vows to get to the truth of just why her husband was murdered.
Meanwhile Senator Kent Janes, who will attempt an official investigation,
soldiers on in a miserably unhappy marriage while the Lavertys' reporter friend,
Sean Trudell, continues his own search for evidence. It's only a matter of time
before these nice folks get together. Behind the conspiracy are the usual
suspects, including a crazed colonel and a family member dear to Darren. ''They
got all of us, didn't they?'' Darren concludes. ''We all walked into the same
trap from different directions and for different reasons. But we've all ended up
wounded.'' In ''Deadfall,'' nobody - not even the author - emerges unscathed
from the world of politics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Crowe v. Abrams: A Private Feud Over Handling Panama Becomes Public

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1613 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


The feud pits a true believer against a four-star admiral; a six-shooter against
a 16-inch gun on a battleship.

Neither Elliott Abrams, the onetime Assistant Secretary of State who shaped the
Reagan Administration's Panama policy, nor Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., the
Chairman of the Joints Chiefs of Staff, who fought to keep American troops from
fighting in Panama, still holds his Government post.

But both have an abundance of ill will left over from the days when they vied
for control of American policy. Now their animosities have been played out in
public, complete with name-calling and jousting in the Op-Ed pages of The New
York Times and The Washington Post.

It is a display that tells a lot about the two men, but perhaps it tells even
more about the state of the art of feuding in Washington in the ideological
80's.

Gauntlet Thrown and Picked Up

''I was aware for a long time that Abrams was bad-mouthing me under the table
all over town, saying, 'Isn't it sort of weird that the J.C.S. are wimps,' and
things like that,'' Admiral Crowe said in an interview in a small office he
keeps at the Pentagon in retirement. ''I was getting a little bit tired of
Elliott. Now that I'm free to talk, I felt I should throw down the gauntlet.''

Mr. Abrams was only too willing to take it up. ''The chairman's position
consists of distortions, name-calling and leaks,'' he said in a telephone
interview from Sao Paolo, Brazil, where he was representing a client as a
private lawyer. ''Basically the position of the J.C.S. was: 'Count us out. Maybe
the State Department, the C.I.A. or the Treasury can do something, but don't
look at us. Period.' ''

Bare-knuckled battles of words are rare in a town where Government officials
generally curse their political foes in closed-door meetings or off-the-record
remarks to think tank audiences. Public discussions of who-said-what in policy
meetings would violate convention and secrecy rules and probably get the
offenders thrown out of their jobs.

Doubts on a Reagan Policy

But this month's failed coup in Panama brought more than stinging recriminations
about President Bush's handling of the crisis. It also cast doubt on the wisdom
of the Reagan policy that pushed Washington into a diplomatic cul-de-sac in
Panama, raising questions about the use of military intervention to force change
in another country's leadership.

The heart of the debate centers around whether, as Mr. Abrams argues, the
admiral's refusal to use force in Panama was responsible for keeping Gen. Manuel
Antonio Noriega in power, or, as Admiral Crowe believes, that policy goal was
never worth risking the loss of American lives and the alienation of Latin
governments.

In his Op-Ed articles in The Times and The Post this month, Mr. Abrams accused
the admiral of delay, obfuscation, gross exaggeration of the military threat
from Panama's Defense Forces, leaks of sensitive White House meetings and
contempt for the civilians who disagreed with him.

In a verbal declaration of war published as a letter to the editor of The New
York Times last week, the usually tranquil Admiral Crowe, who retired from the
military three days before the Panama coup attempt, fought back. He called Mr.
Abrams' proposals ''naiive in their formulation and reckless in their casual
commitment of our military men and women.''

Battling Out of Character

Such recklessness, he continued, ''is not unknown among young appointees who
have never served in uniform,'' adding, ''However, Mr. Abrams raised it to an
art form.''

Analysts in and out of government were stunned that two high-profile people who
held such influential postswould comment on such sensitive matters so
personally.

''It's not in the nature of either of these guys to make personal attacks, but
here they were, two players just out of the Government, and they grabbed the
opportunity to make their points,'' said Abraham D. Sofaer, the State Department
legal adviser for both the Reagan and Bush Administrations. ''And,'' he said as
an afterthought, ''this is a town that, if you play dirty, you'll get it back.''


Fighters With Different Styles

Both Mr. Abrams and Admiral Crowe are fierce intellectuals who relish a good
fight, but that's where the comparison stops.

Admiral Crowe is 64 years old, 6 feet tall, weighing nearly 200 pounds and is
rumpled even in his formal uniform with the 33 medals and decorations. A
Princeton Ph.D. in politics, he has never commanded a ship larger than a diesel
submarine in 47 years of military service, though he has served in Vietnam, the
Middle East, Western Europe and the Pacific.

His detractors say he is too political, too accommodating to the civilian
leadership and reluctant to use force unless he can win. His pet peeve is
lawyers.

A Master of the Diatribe

Mr. Abrams, 41, is well-spoken and well-tailored, a Harvard-educated
conservative lawyer from New York who has never served in the military. A master
of well-argued staccato diatribes, he was the most forceful defender of the
Reagan doctine in Central America, calling himself a ''gladiator'' for the cause
and advocating an American military invasion of Nicaragua following the assault
on Grenada in 1983.

If Admiral Crowe lopes, Mr. Abrams swaggers.

But when Admiral Crowe read Mr. Abrams' article, he took off both his stars and
his gloves. His first thought, he said in his Oklahoma twang, was, ''This
snake's hard to kill.''

''I never took on Elliott publicly before,'' he said. ''I didn't think it was
proper as Chairman, and I was never being hurt that much. But in the wake of
recent events I felt we needed a little more sanity in the public dialogue.''

Spectrum of Possibilities

Admiral Crowe likes to tell stories of how, during war games, civilians are much
quicker than military people to advocate the use of force. He said that when it
came to Panama, he argued repeatedly at White House meetings that he didn't want
to put American boys at risk unless Panamanians did the same.

He recalled attending a dinner party in Panama in which political opposition
leaders told him, '' 'I'm not going to put my sons in the streets' -that didn't
exactly grab me,'' he said.

In his defense, Mr. Abrams says, ''Nobody was proposing D-Day in Panama, but
there was a broad spectrum of overt and covert possibilities that would have
complied with all applicable laws, executive orders and regulations.''

The salvos offer a rare inside glimpse not only at the policymaking process but
also of the Reagan Administration's dissonance on Panama policy, which echoes on
today.

Admiral Crowe tried to delay imposing financial and economic sanctions in
Panama, Mr. Abrams charged. Admiral Crowe replied that he never opposed
sanctions; he only questioned whether they would achieve General Noriega's
overthrow in a matter of weeks, as he said the State Department claimed.

When the Course Is Set

The State Department never claimed that economic sanctions would be enough to
oust General Noriega, said Mr. Abrams, but Admiral Crowe remembers it
differently. ''When people are arguing for their positions in the United States
Government, it is quite common to make exaggerated statements,'' he said. ''Once
your course is adopted, it doesn't matter whether you were right or wrong.''

In his most serious charge, Mr. Abrams said that Admiral Crowe's operation
deliberately leaked and distorted sensitive proposals involving military action.
Admiral Crowe acknowledged that ''military people do leak,'' but added: ''We
consider an accusation coming from anywhere in State about leaking as sort of
ridiculous. And Elliott was world class.''

Admiral Crowe does acknowledge that Mr. Abrams is not all wrong. The decision to
conduct extensive military maneuvers and move troops as allowed by the Panama
Canal treaties has politically embarrassed General Noriega and has not affected
American servicemen. ''Elliott is correct that we didn't assert our treaty
rights as vigorously as we are today, a move that has probably paid off,'' he
said.

But the Bosses Decided It

Both men argue, accurately, that it was their bosses, not they, who made the
ultimate decisions.

''Elliott gives me too much credit for making policy,'' said the admiral, a
savvy political player who cut his teeth on Washington politics as an aide to
President Dwight D. Eisenhower in the early 1950's. ''I sat at the table, but I
felt a little bit like the back bencher. I wasn't the Secretary of Defense and I
wasn't the President.''

Mr. Abrams said: ''It's really disingenuous to say, 'Well, shucks, the President
decided.' The President decided after being poorly served by his Joint Chiefs,
after a behavior pattern by them that narrowed his choices unfairly.''

In his own defense, Mr. Abrams said that it was Secretary of State George P.
Shultz, not he, who made all the recommendations. Admiral Crowe agreed that it
was Mr. Shultz who pushed the use-of-force policy line, but added, ''Everyone
knew that Elliott was the architect of the policy.''

Both men say that their motive in going public with their differences was to set
the record straight and to set the tone of the future policy debate on Panama.
But it is doubtful the two men will have much to say to each other again.

''After Panama I don't wish to have a personal relationship with Admiral Crowe
because he and his staff went beyond the bounds of the acceptable,'' Mr. Abrams
said .  The admiral, who often says he can get along with anybody, gets less
personal. He says: ''I don't want to start a running gun battle with Elliott.
This was sort of fun. People shouldn't make too much out of it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Elliott Abrams (NYT); Adm. William J. Crowe Jr. (Paul
Conklin)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Business and the Law;
A Plan to Speed Asbestos Cases

BYLINE: By Stephen Labaton

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


INNOVATIVE plans are quietly being drawn up in Maryland to resolve thousands of
asbestos cases that have swamped that state's dockets.

On Friday, a Baltimore judge assigned to resolve the problem of 4,000 asbestos
cases overwhelming the city's courts signed an order appointing a special master
to begin a system of ''alternative dispute resolution,'' with the goal of
settling the lawsuits outside the courts. Lawyers for some asbestos defendants
and plaintiffs expressed optimism that the order by Judge Marshall A. Levin of
Baltimore City Circuit Court may go a long way toward unclogging the court
system.

In the next few weeks, the lawyers are expected to engage negotiations in the
hopes of finding a formula to compensate victims of asbestos, a widely used
fire-resistant fiber that causes lung cancer, mesothelioma and scarred lungs.
Lawyers and judges elsewhere are watching how Baltimore resolves its problems to
see if its solutions can be applied to their cases.

Like New York, California and Texas, Maryland has had little success in
controlling its unwieldy number of asbestos claims. Federal courts and most
state courts have refused to permit class actions.

The result is that the tens of thousands of cases require individual attention,
or at best, can be combined in small groups or put on a faster track before
designated judges known for their abilities for controlling cases. But at the
accelerating rate these cases are being filed, the procedures have become little
more than a stop-gap measure.

For their part, asbestos producers and carriers facing these mounting claims
have little incentive to settle cases piecemeal, since their liability under
such an approach appears unlimited. Baltimore is the jurisidiction for a large
number of asbestos cases because it is the home of a number of steel foundries
and shipyards that made wide use of asbestos products. The 85 defendants say
they do not know the true number of asbestos cases because it takes the
overwhelmed court marshals between nine months and a year to serve court papers.
An asbestos case filed today cannot get a trial date before 1997. And while
Judge Levin says he is able through ''herculean efforts'' to dispense with 200
cases annually, plaintiffs are filing new cases at the rate of 2,500 a year.

In his order, Judge Levin appointed as special master a Washington lawyer,
Kenneth R. Feinberg, who helped engineer settlements in two enormous tort cases:
the Agent Orange litigation over a defoliant used during the Vietnam war and the
A. H. Robins bankruptcy case, in which the company faced thousands of claims
over the Dalkon Shield intrauterine birth control device.

Mr. Feinberg, a partner at Kaye, Scholar, Fierman, Hays & Handler, has spent the
last few months regularly meeting with lawyers for the defendants and the lawyer
for more than 90 percent of the plaintiffs, Peter Angelos. Mr. Feinberg said he
had already sketched out the framework with Mr. Angelos and the defense lawyers.

After exchanging information about the nature of their products and the kinds of
injuries they have caused, each company, or small groups of companies, will
negotiate individual settlements with Mr. Angelos. In effect, they will set up
schedules - amounts to be paid based on the type of injury and the age of the
victim. A similar concept underlies the resolution of the Dalkon cases.

By holding negotiations between Mr. Angelos and each defendant or small group of
defendants, the companies will be in the dark about how much competitors are
paying to settle claims. But all companies will be encouraged to settle because
in so doing, they will avoid the enormous punitive damages that have accompanied
many verdicts.

Since the defendants have different resources, each will be allowed to determine
whether to pay by lump sum or by structured payments.

Future cases pose a far more onerous burden on the courts than the present ones
because asbestos-related diseases often take years to manifest themselves. Mr.
Feinberg said that as part of the settlements, the defendants and the plaintiffs
must agree to resort to mediation or nonbinding arbitration before they can go
to court in future cases.

In addition, under a triage system, the more serious cases will have a priority
over the less serious ones. Thus it will scrap the present system of first-in,
first-out, which has often resulted in asbestos victims dying long before their
cases get to trial.

Acknowledging that critical negotiations in the next few months will decide
whether the plan is acceptable, Judge Levin said he is still hopeful. ''If this
thing is to be meaningful, it will depend upon the good faith and, more than the
good faith, on the financial self-interest of all the parties,'' he said.
''There is real reason for optimism because there is a sufficiently large amount
of both.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

New Indignities for Refugees in Japan

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Oct. 23


Before a small group of Vietnamese were resettled in eastern Tokyo recently, the
Japanese authorities had to assure nearby residents that the refugee centers
would have showers. The neighbors were worried that the refugees might mingle
with them in the local public baths.

Many similar indignities and difficulties have hounded the nearly 3,000 boat
people arriving here from Vietnam and southern China since May, posing a new
challenge to Japan as it struggles to screen, train, educate and finally absorb
a new wave of foreign immigrants.

The refugee problem has rekindled the debate about how far Japan should go to
fulfill its international obligations and whether it can afford to open its
doors more widely to newcomers.

''Is it possible for us to enjoy our affluence separate from the rest of the
world?'' the newspaper Mainichi said recently. ''Could not this recent
phenomenon serve as a useful test for us Japanese in the process of integrating
our society into the international community?''

Ethnic Conflicts Among Refugees

The most serious adjustment problems have occurred at the International Refugee
Assistance Center at Shinagawa, near Tokyo Bay, where more than 1,000 boat
people are crammed into a space built for only half that number, with many
sleeping in hallways outside the center's business office.

Even worse, fighting broke out between Vietnamese and Chinese refugees at the
Shinagawa center in August, an echo of ethnic conflicts raging in the lands from
which they fled. Officials said they hoped that conditions would settle down now
that Vietnamese and Chinese had been separated.

''We should have separated these two groups from the start,'' said Toshio
Tsunozaki, director of human rights and refugees at the Foreign Ministry. ''But
we had so many coming in, we didn't have time.''

The fighting has flared between the Vietnamese and perhaps 700 Chinese who had
been living in northern Vietnam. With tensions high at the refugee camps,
Japanese officials have prevented news reporters from interviewing any of the
refugees.

But outside the Shinagawa center recently, a group of Vietnamese friends of the
refugees were complaining about the Chinese.

''The Chinese have gotten out of the center and stolen things in the
neighborhood, and then everyone blames the Vietnamese,'' said Huynh Duong Le, a
young man in his 20's. ''Every night they gather in groups to beat us up.''

Vietnamese 'Bullying' Charged

But officials at the Shinagawa center say the Vietnamese have been ''bullying''
the Chinese. ''Once the Vietnamese started feeling outnumbered, they made
trouble,'' said Shoji Onodera, director of the center.

In 1985 Japan agreed to absorb up to 10,000 boat people, and it has set up an
organization to train them and find them jobs. But about 6,200 refugees have
settled in Japan, and officials now fear the quota will be filled more quickly
than expected.

The increased influx has forced Japan to establish a new screening procedure,
and immigrants who came here seeking only jobs, and who are not political
refugees, may well be sent back to their countries.

Japanese officials said that when the influx began, public opinion had been
opposed to accepting the refugees, especially since people feared they would
take jobs held by the Japanese. Others note that Japan has long had a history of
isolation and distrust of people from other countries.

''The initial reaction to the refugees has been conservative and insular,'' Mr.
Tsunozaki said. ''But recently there has been a change of heart. The letters we
get say we should think about this calmly and accept the foreigners.''

By all accounts, the Japanese Government was caught off guard by the sudden
influx that started in May as more than two dozen boats started arriving in
southern Japan after traveling distances of up to 1,500 miles at sea.

Well-Organized Voyages

The confusion over the refugees has arisen because the voyages bringing them
appear to be highly organized and expensive, a far cry from the leaky wooden
boats that brought millions of refugees out of Indochina more than a decade ago.

The refugees appear to have come initially from Vietnam and then stopped in
parts of southern China, picking up still more Vietnamese who had fled to China
in 1978-79, and also picking up some ethnic Chinese looking for jobs.

The presence of an uncertain number of Chinese from China, as opposed to
Vietnam, has drawn considerable criticism, and the Japanese Government has been
forced to ask Beijing to repatriate them as illegal entrants, not refugees.
China has agreed in principle to do so.

In the background of the refugee problem lies the fact that Japan already has
about 100,000 illegal immigrants, many from Southeast Asia, who have come in to
obtain jobs in a country whose citizens are increasingly reluctant to perform
dirty, difficult or demeaning work.

Officials working with the immigrants say they face frequent police harassment
and widespread discrimination in obtaining housing, jobs and health care.

''The treatment of refugees raises the same problem as the treatment of illegal
aliens in Japan,'' said Teruo Kato, a spokesman for Amnet, a group providing
medical care for immigrants here. ''We have to change our attitude that civil
rights are for Japanese and not foreigners.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vietnamese and Chinese refugees in Tokyo, Japan (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Ewan MacColl Dies; Folk Singer Was 74

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 23


Ewan MacColl, who led the folk music revival in Britain and wrote the Grammy
Award-winning ballad ''The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face,'' died on Sunday in
a London hospital after heart surgery. He was 74 years old.

Mr. MacColl, a son of a Scottish ironworker and part-time folk singer, grew up
in northern England and left school at 14 to become a poet.

He roamed the slums of Manchester, worked in menial factory jobs, and embraced a
political radicalism that was later to produce songs against nuclear weapons,
apartheid and the Vietnam War.

When folk music became popular, Mr. MacColl gained celebrity. He and his third
wife, Peggy Seeger, a half-sister of the American folk singer Pete Seeger, made
many concert appearance together. Roberta Flack's recording of ''The First Time
Ever I Saw Your Face'' won a Grammy in 1972.

Surviving are his wife and five children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
AIDS Quilt and the Stories Behind Its Symbols

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 572 words


As of this past summer, the number of deaths among Americans with AIDS rose to
more than 59,000, higher than the total fatalities in the Vietnam War. Yet the
vast majority of people with AIDS remain virtually invisible on prime-time
television. There is one obvious reason. The groups most affected so far, male
homosexuals and drug users, are considered by many to be social outsiders.
Compassion is clearly at a premium. A not-so-benign neglect has been the general
rule.

Emerging from that sorry context, Home Box Office's ''Common Threads: Stories
From the Quilt,'' being presented tonight at 10, is all the more impressive as a
singularly moving and sympathetic account of people whose lives have been
profoundly altered, or cut short, by AIDS. The 75-minute documentary slams
through stereotypes to tell the stories of several individuals - a one-time
Olympic decathlon star, a former drug user, a United States Navy commander and
his lover, a boy with hemophilia, a New York writer. They and all the other
people with AIDS are referred to simply, and pointedly, as Americans. Dustin
Hoffman is the narrator. Bobby McFerrin composed the original and unobtrusively
effective score.

Directed by Rob Epstein (''The Times of Harvey Milk'') and Jeffrey Friedman -
who are also the producers along with Bill Couturie (HBO's ''Dear America:
Letters Home From Vietnam'') - ''Common Threads'' takes its five personal
profiles from the AIDS Memorial Quilt, started in 1987 by the Names Project in
San Francisco to provide a positive means of expression for those whose lives
are touched by the epidemic. The quilt is made up of 3-by-6-foot panels, each
commemorating an AIDS death. Today the 16-ton patchwork contains 10,500 panels
capable of covering 14 acres.

On one level, ''Common Threads'' is a compact yet thorough history of the AIDS
phenomenon, reaching back to 1981 news reports referring almost casually to a
new cancer appearing in gay men. The toll for that year was 335 Americans dead.
The story recounts several years of official inaction that, even more so in
retrospect, could be seen as bordering on criminal negligence. The villains
range from Ronald Reagan and his assistant Gary Bauer to Eddie Murphy with his
insensitive comedy routines about gays and AIDS. A national debate about AIDS
finally got under way in the seventh year. The heroes include Surgeon General C.
Everett Koop and Adm. James D. Watkins, who, after an investigation by a
Presidential commission that he headed, concluded that ''the system, for
whatever reason, has failed.''

The emotional core of this film, however, is the biographies. The lives of the
already dead are reconstructed through photographs and reminiscences by loved
ones. The living, several of whom have tested positive for antibodies to the
AIDS virus, speak candidly, even graphically about their experiences. Slowly,
carefully, powerfully ''Common Threads'' takes the cold statistics and gives
them very recognizable faces. Very few viewers are likely to be unmoved.

There are estimated to be more than 10 million cases of AIDS worldwide. One new
case is registered every minute. There is an AIDS-related death every 30
minutes. ''Common Threads'' offers no false comfort but its underlying message
is important: There is no longer any excuse for keeping tens of thousands of
Americans invisible on the prime-time landscape. They, too, have stories worth
telling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Singapore Chief Fears for Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Oct. 20


Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore is in an awkward position, and once
again the intricacies of Cambodian politics have put him there.

Mr. Lee has been a prime opponent of the Vietnamese-installed Government in
Cambodia, and an advocate of a Khmer Rouge role in an interim government in
Phnom Penh to oversee new elections there.

Now, after witnessing a string of modest military successes by the Cambodian
guerrillas fighting the Hanoi-backed administration, he finds himself worried
that the Government in Cambodia might suddenly collapse, allowing the Khmer
Rouge to take power.

''You might have it fall down like a pack of cards and you're left with the
Khmer Rouge, the only ones who have gone for broke and won,'' Mr. Lee said in an
hourlong interview in his hotel suite here, where he attended a summit meeting
of Commonwealth leaders.

'A Very Real Risk'

''It's a very real risk,'' he said, caused by Vietnam's ''walking away'' from
Cambodia while refusing to allow an international peacekeeping force to be put
in place there.

''We are worried,'' he said, adding that he was surprised by the ''ease'' with
which the forces of one non-Communist Cambodian faction recently took a series
of small towns in northwest Cambodia and the ''swiftness'' with which numerous
Cambodian soldiers have defected to the non-Communist opposition, which he
backs.

Although the rebel offensive, led by the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front, has bogged down, Mr. Lee sees the early advances, which did not involve
Khmer Rouge fighters, as a sign of the fragility of the Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen.

Mr. Lee, 66 years old, is regarded as among the most experienced leaders in
Asia. His views, often bluntly or irascibly expressed, have influence far beyond
Singapore. The Commonwealth summit meeting here was probably his last as Prime
Minister of Singapore, an office he has held since the beginning of
self-government in 1959. He says he will ''step aside'' at the end of 1990.

Arms for Non-Communists

Singapore is the most vocal of the countries of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, or Asean, in demanding that the Hun Sen Government, originally
imposed by force, be denied recognition. Singapore has also been instrumental in
arming the non-Communist Cambodian opposition of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and
former Prime Minister Son Sann, which are uneasily allied with the Khmer Rouge.

But the Khmer Rouge are by far the dominant military partner in the three-way
opposition coalition, and their brutal rule in Cambodia from 1975 to 1979, when
more than a million Cambodians died, has left Mr. Lee with no illusions about
them. Nevertheless, he believes that the only way to restrain the Khmer Rouge is
to allow them to take part in an interim administration leading to
internationally supervised elections in Cambodia. The Khmer Rouge will then
lose, Mr. Lee predicted, and China will no longer be able to justify supporting
them with arms.

Isolating the Khmer Rouge

Elections would probably produce a majority for a nationalist coalition of
Prince Sihanouk, Mr. Son Sann and Mr. Hun Sen, Mr. Lee said, but would do so in
a way that provides the government with legitimacy and political authority.

''In any case,'' he said, ''the perils of a free vote and continued war are less
than continued war without a free vote. And if bloodletting continues, it will
be on a different scale, for you will have thinned the Khmer Rouge down to the
hard core.'' After elections, he said, ''then Sihanouk and Son Sann and Hun Sen
can get together, all as Cambodian nationalists, deriving authority and
legitimacy from the people who voted for them, not from the Vietnamese.''

Somehow, Mr. Lee said, ''we have to legitimize the situation, and there is no
better way.'' It was also the best way, he said, for Mr. Hun Sen to escape his
obligations to Hanoi and to prove his independence. He said he had no doubt that
the Khmer Rouge would try to rig or steal elections and intimidate the populace,
and if they lost, threaten to fight. But a peacekeeping force could hold the
main towns and the roads between them, at least during the day, ''and that would
be good enough for free and fair elections.''

Concerns About Congress

Mr. Lee said he was concerned that the United States Congress is questioning
American and Asean policy. By contemplating recognition of Mr. Hun Sen because
of its aversion to the Khmer Rouge, Congress risks handing Vietnam an undeserved
victory in the midst of Hanoi's defeat, he said. He said the Reagan
Administration laid the basis for those difficulties by refusing to arm Prince
Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann in 1981 and 1982, thus keeping them separate from the
Khmer Rouge.

''If the U.S. had been persuaded to say, 'Right, China will back the Khmer
Rouge, the U.S. and Asean will back the non-Communists, and there will be a
vague understanding that we should not fight one another while the Vietnamese
are in Cambodia,' then there was an alternative,'' Mr. Lee said.

''But China co-opted both the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communists, and we pitched
in to try to give the non-Communists a boost, but without a big backer. But at
this point for U.S. Senators and Congressmen to get heated up after China has
carried the baby all these years doesn't make sense.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Edward W. Barrett, 79, Ex-Journalism Dean, Dies

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section D; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 631 words


Edward W. Barrett, a journalist, government official and public-relations
executive who was dean of the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism from 1956
to 1968, died of a ruptured aneurysm Monday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital. He
was 79 years old and lived in Greenwich.

Mr. Barrett, who had been inactive since he suffered a stroke five years ago,
was a leading figure in American journalism for more than three decades. In 1962
he founded The Columbia Journalism Review, one of the earliest national
magazines devoted to criticism of the news media.

He entered the academic world after a varied career as a journalist that
included editorial posts at Newsweek magazine; direction of overseas operations
for the Office of War Information in World War II; service as Assistant
Secretary of State for Public Affairs after the war, and counseling in public
relations as executive vice president of Hill & Knowlton Inc.

Fourth Dean of School

At Columbia University, Mr. Barrett was the fourth dean of the journalism
school, which was founded in 1912 under the will of Joseph Pulitzer. Mr.
Barrett's departure from the post in 1968 was abrupt and came a few months after
violent student demonstrations, led by opponents of the war in Vietnam, had
closed the university.

He said he was resigning because of a disagreement with policies of the
university's administration, then headed by Grayson Kirk as president. But he
also made it clear that he had ''no sympathy whatever'' for Students for a
Democratic Society, which had led the campus demonstrations.

Although widely urged to reconsider his decision to resign, Mr. Barrett remained
steadfast and refused to elaborate on his reasons for leaving.

From 1969 to 1977, he headed the Communications Institute of the Academy for
Educational Development. In 1975 he resumed a tie to Columbia when he became
publisher of the Journalism Review, a post he held until 1982.

Father Was an Editor

Mr. Barrett was born into a newspaper family in Birmingham, Ala., where his
father was editor and publisher of The Age-Herald. At Princeton University,
where he majored in public and international affairs, he was chairman of The
Daily Princetonian. He graduated in 1932 with honors.

After a short period with CBS, he joined Newsweek in 1933 as a researcher-writer
and later became the magazine's Washington correspondent and its national
affairs editor. In 1937 he joined Today, a magazine that soon merged with
Newsweek, where he became an associate editor and originated the ''Periscope''
department.

During World War II, Mr. Barrett went into Government service in 1942 with the
office of the Coordinator of Information, which later became the Office of
Stategic Services. That same year he was made chief of the overseas news and
features division of the Office of War Information, for which he established a
worldwide news and photo distributing service.

With State Department

After heading all overseas war information operations in the latter stages of
the war, Mr. Barrett rejoined Newsweek in 1946. Four years later he returned to
Government service as Assistant Secretary of State to manage the State
Department's programs in public affairs and international information. In that
post he reorganized the Voice of America radio service and tripled its size.

In 1952 Mr. Barrett set up his own public-relations firm, Edward W. Barrett
Associates. Three years later he became executive vice president of Hill &
Knowlton.

He wrote two books, ''Truth Is Our Weapon,'' published in 1953, which recounted
his World War II experiences, and ''Journalism in Action,'' published in 1963.

Mr. Barrett is survived by his wife, the former Mason Daniel, and two daughters,
Margo, of Manhattan, and Lisa, of Richmond, Vt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Edward W. Barrett

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Mary McCarthy, 77, Is Dead; Novelist, Memoirist and Critic

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2238 words


Mary McCarthy, one of America's pre-eminent women of letters, died of cancer
yesterday at New York Hospital. She was 77 years old and lived in Castine, Me.,
and Paris.

In her long and prolific career as a novelist, memoirist, journalist and critic,
Miss McCarthy earned recognition for her cool, analytic intelligence and her
exacting literary voice - a voice capable of moving from the frivolously
feminine to the willfully cerebral, from girlish insouciance to bare-knuckled
fury.

In 1984, she was awarded both the Edward MacDowell Medal for outstanding
contributions to literature and the National Medal for Literature.

'A Subversive Soul'

''If there were any real ancestor among American women for Mary McCarthy it
might be Margaret Fuller,'' the critic Elizabeth Hardwick, a friend, once
observed, referring to the 19th-century American editor, essayist, poet, teacher
and translator. ''Both women have will power, confidence and a subversive soul
sustained by exceptional energy.''

Miss McCarthy's accounts of sexual shenanigans in ''The Man in the Brooks
Brothers Shirt'' in 1941 and ''The Group'' in 1963 created something of an
uproar when they first appeared. But her notoriety in literary circles stemmed
less from the scandal quotient of her fiction than from her adversarial literary
and political stands. She had celebrated public skirmishes with Philip Rahv,
Diana Trilling and Lillian Hellman; issued vitriolic pronouncements on Watergate
and the Vietnam War, and became known for the ferocity of her book and theater
reviews.

Perverse Opinions

At their worst, those reviews pointed up Miss McCarthy's weakness for catchy
one-liners and her taste for willfully perverse opinions. Of Tennessee
Williams's ''Streetcar Named Desire'' she wrote, ''His work reeks of literary
ambition as the apartment reeks of cheap perfume,'' and of Eugene O'Neill and
''The Iceman Cometh'' she declared, ''He is probably the only man in the world
who is still laughing at the Iceman joke or pondering its implications.''

Yet at her best (as in ''The Stones of Florence'') Miss McCarthy was an erudite
cultural historian, using her familiarity with history, politics and the arts -
and the application of some plain old-fashioned common sense -to draw surprising
connections and to make her readers reconsider their preconceptions.

''A career of candor and dissent is not an easy one for a woman; the license is
jarring and the dare often forbidding,'' Ms. Hardwick said. ''Such a person
needs more than confidence and indignation. A great measure of personal
attractiveness and a high degree of romantic singularity are necessary to step
free of the mundane, the governessy, the threat of earnestness and dryness.
Moderating influences are essential.''

In the case of Miss McCarthy, she said, ''the purity of style and the liniment
of her wit, her gay summoning of the funny facts of everyday life, soften the
scandal of the action or the courage of the opinion.''

To Robert Lowell, Miss McCarthy was ''our Diana, rash to awkwardness,'' blurting
''ice clear'' sentences above the ''mundane gossip and still more mundane
virtue'' of her colleagues. To Alfred Kazin, she was the owner of ''a wholly
destructive critical mind,'' a critic with an ''unerring ability to spot the
hidden weakness or inconsistency in any literary effort and every person.'' And
to Norman Mailer, she was ''our First Lady of Letters'' -''our saint, our
umpire, our lit arbiter, our broadsword, our Barrymore (Ethel), our Dame
(dowager), our mistress (Head), our Joan of Arc.''

Heroines Were Self-Portraits

The most tireless mythologizer of her life, however, remained Miss McCarthy
herself. There were her memoirs: ''Memories of a Catholic Girlhood'' (1957), the
beautifully observed portrait of her painful youth, and the later, more
workmanlike ''How I Grew,'' published in 1987. In addition, the heroines in Miss
McCarthy's fiction form a sort of continuing portrait of the author: Meg in
''The Company She Keeps'' (1942), the clever Vassar girl, ''a princess among the
trolls''; Martha, ''the bohemian lady'' in ''A Charmed Life'' (1955), whose need
to ''tell the truth'' continually gets her into trouble; Kay, the skeptical
iconoclast in ''The Group'' (1963), and Rosamund, the esthetic mother figure in
''Birds of America'' (1971).

These novels also included sharp-edged portraits of many of Miss McCarthy's
friends and lovers: her second husband, the critic Edmund Wilson, was portrayed
as a loud, unappealing intellectual in ''A Charmed Life''; and Rahv, her
roommate and mentor as editor of The Partisan Review, turned up in ''The Oasis''
(1949).

Yet if Miss McCarthy's novels often read like thinly disguised exercises in
autobiography, they also attempted to provide an idiosyncratic chronicle of
American life - at least within her own intellectual set - as it changed over
some five decades. Sexual freedom in the 1930's, radicalism in the 40's and
50's, Vietnam and the social upheavals of the 60's, Watergate and terrorism in
the 70's - these are the larger issues that flicker in the background of the
novels.

Fiction Was Difficult

There is a certain didacticism to these books, a feeling of willed creation, and
Miss McCarthy herself acknowledged that she found it considerably more difficult
to write fiction than essays or reviews.

Each novel, she once said, had its genesis with an idea. ''Birds of America,''
which chronicled the coming of age of a teen-age ornithologist, was meant to be
''a novel about the idea of equality and its relation to nature''. ''The Groves
of Academe'' (1952), a satiric portrait of a scheming scholar and his
colleagues, was intended to address the question ''Where is the justice for an
impossible person?'' ''The Group,'' a chatty gossip sheet about the lives of
eight Vassar women, was conceived as a study of the illusory idea of social and
political progress that captivated so many young people in the 1930's.

That last novel, which brought Miss McCarthy both a popular audience and a movie
sale, enhanced her almost legendary reputation for enraging old friends and
acquaintances who thought they saw themselves as the thinly disguised and
gleefully skewered characters in her fiction.

A Painful Childhood

Throughout her career, Miss McCarthy seemed preoccupied with two themes: what
she called ''the idea of justice'' and the idea of self-reliance. Both impulses
originated in her painful childhood, and both, in a sense, led to her later
attempts to invent an identity true to her platonic conception of herself.

Mary Therese McCarthy was born on June 21, 1912, in Seattle, the daughter of Roy
Winfield McCarthy, a member of a prominent Roman Catholic family in Minneapolis,
and the former Therese Preston, whose father, a transplanted New Englander, was
one of Seattle's most successful lawyers. She had three brothers, Kevin, Preston
and Sheridan.

The early years of Miss McCarthy's life seem to have been a romantic idyll; she
would later portray them as a lovely succession of parties and holidays, with
May baskets and valentines.

''Both my parents were handsome, winning and romantic,'' she wrote. ''Their
marriage was opposed by both families, partly for religious reasons, and partly
because my father was an invalid, with an invalid's febrile vitality. He had a
bad heart, and it was prophesied, from the first, that he would die young and
leave his wife with a pack of children.''

'Dickensian Cruelty'

In fact, both he and his wife died in the great flu epidemic of 1918, and the
6-year-old Mary and her three brothers were sent to live with their great-aunt
Margaret and her husband in Minneapolis. There, they experienced what she once
called ''circumstances of almost Dickensian cruelty and squalor.'' The children
were made to stand outdoors for three hours at a time in the snow, and they were
regularly thrashed with a razor strop; Miss McCarthy recalled being beaten in
one instance for receiving a school prize, lest she become ''stuck up.''

Miss McCarthy's bitter recollection continued: ''Two blocks away, my McCarthy
grandparents, dwelling in sumptuous middle-class style, instilled in us the
contrast between wealth and penury by occasional treats and vacations; it was
thought beneficial that we should know we were orphans and fitted for a
different destiny than our well-tended cousins.

''Today, some of my relations allege my literary successes and my brother
Kevin's career as an actor as proof that the harsh formula followed in our
upbringing produced results; nevertheless, I cannot feel grateful. Nor do I
believe that artistic talent flowers necessarily from a wounding of the stem on
which it grows.''

When she was 11, Miss McCarthy was rescued from her misery in Minneapolis by her
maternal grandfather, Harold Preston, who took her to Seattle and gave her a
fine education at the Forest Ridge Convent and the Annie Wright Seminary.

Puritanism vs. Romance

As ''Memories of a Catholic Girlhood'' and ''How I Grew'' indicate, the twists
and turns of Miss McCarthy's melodramatic childhood would develop two distinct
sides to her personality: on one hand, the puritanical student who wants to win
prizes for her scholarship and dreams of becoming a nun; on the other, the
die-hard romantic who writes moody stories about suicide and prostitution and
dreams of becoming an actress. In fact, before she left for college in 1929,
Miss McCarthy took some acting classes at the Cornish Drama School in Seattle,
where she met the actor Harold Cooper Johnsrud, whom she married a week after
her graduation from Vassar. She would divorce him three years later.

By the time Miss McCarthy left Vassar in 1933, she said, she had become ''a
wayward modern girl,'' determined, in the words of her colleague William
Barrett, ''to hold her own with men - both intellectually and sexually.'' Her
finely observed collection of interconnected stories, ''The Company She Keeps,''
would chronicle - in slightly disguised fashion - many of her adventures in
these early post-college years, including the breakup of her first marriage, her
desultory love affairs and her dabbling in Trotskyite politics.

Writing of that time, Mr. Barrett described the girlishly pretty writer as ''a
Valkyrie maiden, riding her steed into the circle, amid thunder and lightning,
and out again, bearing the body of some dead hero across her saddle.''

Two influential men of letters, Rahv and Wilson, would play important roles in
the shaping of Miss McCarthy's career. Rahv, with whom she lived during the
1930's, helped her to get her first literary job - writing theater reviews for
the magazine; Wilson, whom she married in 1938, persuaded her to try writing
fiction. He put her in a room, she recalled, and told her to stay there until
she finished a story. Their tempestuous marriage produced one son, Reuel, and
ended in divorce in 1946. Later that year she married Bowden Broadwater, a
writer and teacher.

Satiric Wit

With a clinical eye and an apparently total gift for recall, Miss McCarthy used
her satiric wit to illuminate the pretensions and prejudices of her fellow
intellectuals. Much of her writing was devoted to exposing what she regarded as
the ignorance, bigotry, dishonest sentimentality and affectation that cluttered
the intellectual marketplace.

She defended Hannah Arendt and William Burroughs when it was fashionable to
assail them, and attacked J. D. Salinger, Kenneth Tynan and Arthur Miller when
others were singing their praises.

The litigious Lillian Hellman was so incensed, in 1980, by Miss McCarthy's
description of her in a television interview as a ''dishonest writer'' that she
instituted a $2.25 million defamation suit.

Hellman's death in 1984 placed the lawsuit in limbo, making Miss McCarthy feel
somewhat put out. ''I still feel disgusted by the amount of lying that didn't
stop,'' she said in an interview in 1987. ''I wanted it to go to trial, so I was
disappointed when she died.''

Busy Despite Health Problems

Miss McCarthy married James Raymond West, a former director of information for
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, in 1961. They divided
their time between an apartment in Paris and their house in Maine.

In addition to her husband and son, Miss McCarthy is survived by two stepsons,
Daniel West of Los Angeles and Jonathan West of Lodz, Poland; a stepdaughter,
Alison West of Manhattan; two brothers, Kevin, of Sherman Oaks, Calif., and
Preston, of Millsboro, Del., and two grandchildren.

In recent years, Miss McCarthy had several operations for hydrocephalus (water
on the brain), but maintained a hectic schedule, working on another volume of
memoirs, contemplating a study of Gothic architecture, teaching literature at
Bard College and learning German. She recalled telling a friend some two decades
ago that she ''never woke up in the morning without a feeling of intense
repentance and a resolve to be better.''

''I don't do that anymore - or almost never,'' she said in a recent interview.
''But I do have this idea of improvement, if not in one's powers, at least in
one's vision, in one's understanding. I suppose it's all tied up with the
American belief in progress. Not that I have that as an idea, but I certainly
have it in my personal life. I couldn't live without feeling I know more than I
did yesterday.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Mary McCarthy (pgs. A1 & B10) (Black Star/Peter Turnley,
Sylvia Salmi & Gisele Freund)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Arlington Journal;
Prosperity Threatens Refugee Of Vietnam

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., Oct. 25


Kham Dinh Do is a survivor.

In 1949, he opened a jewelry store in the northern Vietnamese port of Haiphong,
naming it Dat Hung, or ''Attaining Prosperity.'' It lived up to its name.

When the Communists took over the upper half of Vietnam in 1954, Mr. Do fled
south to Saigon, opening a second Dat Hung store there. It too lived up to its
name.

Twenty years later, just four days before the Communists seized Saigon, Mr. Do
fled once again, this time landing in this northern Virginia suburb just across
the Potomac from Washington. Today he runs a third, prospering Dat Hung, one of
the economic anchors of ''Little Saigon,'' a section of Arlington where
Vietnamese refugees have established three dozen or so shops and restaurants
over the past 15 years. Today 40,000 Vietnamese have settled in the Washington
area, the largest concentration of Indochinese refugees on the East Coast.

But Mr. Do's struggle may not be over. He may be forced to flee still again, not
from the Communists but from the wrecking ball.

It is a matter of economics. A subway station in Little Saigon, officially known
as the Clarendon section of Arlington, has begun to draw upscale developers.

Back in the days when there was no subway and only struggling Vietnamese
refugees were interested in Clarendon's run-down commercial properties, store
space could be rented for as little as $5 a square foot. Today, it goes for
upward of $25 a square foot in new buildings, and many of the old buildings are
being emptied so that they can be demolished and replaced.

A number of businesses have already been forced to move, with several going to
suburban shopping malls where other Vietnamese-operated stores are situated. The
merchants who remain say that while business is still good, the disappearance of
those stores and restaurants has cost Little Saigon some of its popularity as a
major social gathering place for the Vietnamese.

''The streets here are not as crowded with Vietnamese at night or on weekends as
they once were,'' said Emerson H. Lee, a former Saigon tax official. Mr. Lee,
who like many refugees has Anglicized his name, Le Huu Em, now works as an
accountant in Little Saigon, watching over the books of many of the section's
merchants.

''Vietnamese refugees do not tend to live in specific neighborhoods,'' he added,
''but they tend to shop and gather in certain places, like Little Saigon. In
most of these places, the Vietnamese businessmen have only small stores or
offices, so they cannot pay big rents. Here in Little Saigon, we have formed a
committee to work on the problem, and what we would like is for the local
government officials to help us persuade developers to put up some buildings
that small merchants can afford. We have been good for Arlington. We have
struggled and made success.''

Mr. Lee was attending a tax seminar in Washington when Saigon fell. Rather than
return, he found work as a bus driver and began studying accounting, finally
passing the examination and setting up his own business in 1983.

Arlington officials say they do not want development to destroy Little Saigon.
That is also the position of the Clarendon Alliance, a coalition of neighborhood
developers, residents and business people.

''We would like for the Vietnamese to stay because they have helped make the
neighborhood a place where people not only work but also live and shop,'' said
Andrea Grenadier, the group's executive director. ''We don't want just a bunch
of tall office buildings. We like the ethnic flavor. But keeping the right
balance is a little tricky. We're working at it.''

Mr. Do, bent over his jeweler's bench, says he is optimistic that the coalition
will achieve its goal and that Little Saigon will endure. But if not, he will
not despair.

''Nothing stops me, nothing,'' Mr. Do said in clear English.

''I have moved before. I can do it again. I can survive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The New Republic Tries to Stay Young at 75

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1698 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When the editors of The New Republic were making plans for a special issue to
mark their 75th anniversary, they invited Alfred Kazin, a former literary editor
and occasional critic of the publication, to write an article expressing, as one
editor put it, ''his intellectual grievances against us.''

Not many editors welcome such criticism in their pages, even from someone likely
to mix his rebukes with familial affection and touches of nostalgia - since
after all, Mr. Kazin has been writing for the magazine off and on for over 50
years.

Nonetheless, for The New Republic the invitation suggested the cheekily
open-minded journalistic personality it has been striving for as it competes in
the domain of small, serious magazines of politics and culture. The gesture was
the sort that has given the former repository of predictable leftist opinion a
new reputation among many readers for being willing to look at almost anything
afresh, including itself.

A Shift in Views

As it celebrates its third quarter-century, The New Republic might well, like
Joyce's Stephen Daedalus, examine itself in the looking glass of history and
murmur: ''Different now and yet the same.'' Founded in 1914 by a group of
self-labeled progressives whose leading lights included Herbert Croly and Walter
Lippmann, it has always been a slender volume of good writing and independent,
usually dissenting opinion.

The magazine, whose influence has ebbed and flowed, seems now to be at, or
certainly near, a new height; this probably reflects its capacity to capture an
important shift in political opinion in the country, the shift of many left
liberals from the antiwar 1960's to more centrist, often conservative positions.
The magazine's historic, older rival, The Nation, by contrast, has altered few
of its basic positions since the 1960's. The New Republic has become the journal
of conscious re-examination of the old left-liberal assumptions.

The magazine was once a place where disaffected American leftists found
virtually certain support. It had its long period of isolationism; it was
sympathetic to the Soviet revolution and late in recognizing the horrors of
Stalinism. In the 1960's and early 1970's it was not merely against the Vietnam
War but favored the third world in general and seemed to believe that America's
pursuit of its national interest was a menace to the world.

A Broader Audience

Now, the magazine appeals to a far wider band of opinion. Not everybody is
pleased. Mr. Kazin affectionately lambastes the magazine for being more clever
and trendy than wise. At the same time, the magazine has disappointed some of
its old friends who believe it has become an ineffectual hybrid, neither left
nor right, but as Richard Falk, a political scientist at Princeton, put it,
''sort of sneaky because of its unresolved ideological tension.''

''It's not only its editorial positions that I have found offensive, but the
ambiance that the magazine has established during this period,'' Professor Falk
said. ''I think it's been very destructive because it has retained the mantle of
being a liberal voice, whereas the messsage that has been articulated on the key
issues is a very reactionary one, in my judgment.''

The magazine's turn away from being an automatic organ of the liberal left has
brought other changes, even in its advertising and revenues. Circulation is
around 100,000, a small gain over the years. But business managers say their
emphasis is on readership quality - policy makers, elected officials, corporate
executives - rather than on numbers. The magazine, its editors say, is breaking
even financially. Just five years ago, it was losing money - low six-figure sums
every year. These days it attracts full-page advertisements from McDonnell
Douglas and Northrop -companies not likely to buy space in The Nation
(circulation 90,000), the publication viewed by readers disenchanted with The
New Republic as the authentic voice of the left.

''They have gotten to a point where they set the agenda, or, if not the agenda
exactly, then the intellectual fashion,'' said Owen Harries, co-editor of The
National Interest, the conservative quarterly.

Key Moment for Change

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the liberal Democrat from New York, said: ''It
is the liveliest and most provocative journal of opinion in the country today.
It alternately infuriates and inspires and through its pages is being waged the
struggle for the soul of the Democratic Party.''

Or, as Martin Peretz, the editor in chief, puts it in a kind of journalistic
credo: ''I think our readers have come to expect ruthless analysis, not
sentimentality, and, in a society that is awash with the mawkish, that's a
journalistic advantage.''

By all accounts, the key moment in the magazine's gradual transformation came
when Mr. Peretz bought it in 1974.

''The classical liberal formula had kind of run out,'' Mr. Peretz said,
describing the political mood then. Mr. Peretz had been a campus radical, a
fervent speaker at antiwar rallies. But, he recalled, by the late 1960's, his
views had begun to change. He was, he said, hearing himself say things that he
did not really believe anymore.

A Prominent Gang

Around 1976, he and a new managing editor, Michael Kinsley, still a law student
at Harvard, began to reshape the magazine, looking with fresh eyes at some of
the crusty old assumptions of the antiwar left. Three years later, Mr. Kinsley,
then 28, became one of the youngest editors of a major publication. Mr. Peretz
hired other very bright young men, many of them people he knew at Harvard.

Several of them have used the magazine as a launching pad for broader careers.
Mr. Kinsley and Morton Kondracke have achieved fame as television commentators.
Charles Krauthammer and Mr. Kinsley are the two outside essayists at Time
magazine.

''It's not a club as much as it is a gang,'' said Mr. Kinsley, describing the
magazine's people. ''We've done pretty well in creating the impression that we
are a gang, but not an exclusive gang. We're a gang that anybody can join just
by opening up an issue.''

The gang is important enough in Washington for the disagreements among its
members to be the stuff of gossip. Politically attuned Washingtonians know, for
example, that Leon Wieseltier, a former student of medieval Jewish history and
literature at Harvard, and Mr. Krauthammer, one of the magazine's essayists,
dislike each other, though the precise reasons are obscure. They have attended
editorial board meetings for years without speaking.

An Editor Returns

Hendrik Hertzberg, the new editor, has also had his disagreements. He left the
editorship of the magazine in 1985, having come to feel that editorial policy,
determined by Mr. Peretz, was not sufficiently critical of the Reagan
Administration's foreign policy. Mr. Hertzberg said he was particularly bothered
by the decision to give editorial support to the Nicaraguan contras. But
recently, when Mr. Kinsley decided to give up the editorship - he will continue
to write the lead column - Mr. Hertzberg agreed to return.

''Marty has changed,'' Mr. Hertzberg explained. ''I've changed. We're both more
relaxed. Marty has come to a kind of resting place in his political development.
While some people were sort of on the move toward the right during these last
few years, they've now arrived where they were going. And when people aren't
moving so much, it's easier to work out a modus vivendi.''

One clear stand pressed on the magazine by Mr. Peretz is its strong, unequivocal
support for Israel and a persistently anti-Arab tone, a viewpoint that has
alienated some readers.

The Specific Changes

''There are no more liberal rhapsodies about the third world,'' Mr. Hertzberg
said, mentioning one issue on which many liberals have shifted their thinking.
''Everybody agrees that the black family is in crisis,'' he added, describing
another. The New Republic, in contrast to the classical liberals of the past, is
less likely to see the existence of a permanent black underclass as a
consequence of white racism than as a consequence of the culture and behavior of
many blacks themselves.

Now, Mr. Hertzberg continued, ''even Gorbachev agrees that totalitarianism is a
lousy idea.'' His implicit allusion was to the days not so long ago when liberal
antiwar activists excused the lack of freedom in some countries on the ground
that they were fighting anti-imperialist wars or feeding their hungry.

A recent issue contained a typical editorial mixture. There was a brief
editorial note against lowering the capital gains tax, which the magazine
opposes on the classical liberal ground that it helps the rich and hurts the
poor. Less expectedly, another short editorial maintained that the Supreme Court
decision legalizing abortion, Roe v. Wade, was wrong. The state legislatures
should be responsible for abortion legislation, the editorial said, and state
legislation should allow free choice.

No More Surprises

The issue also had a few paragraphs of pure fun. Responding to Sony's purchase
of Columbia Pictures, Joe Queenan, a journalist, complained that the Japanese
were coming to dominate the American satire market. ''You have to remember,''
the article said, ''that Japanese satirists work 18 hours a day and never see
their wives and kids.''

Some say that this mix - opinion, provocation, a few doses of humor and a ''back
of the book'' cultural section that Mr. Wieseltier says is intended to keep
politics from engulfing everything else - has become a bit too familiar, that
after a decade of change, the magazine is losing its ability to surprise.

Adding his own complaint, Mr. Kazin said in his article, scheduled to appear in
November, that the magazine is too oriented toward immediate ''inside the
beltway'' issues. ''I wish I could think of TNR as moving beyond post-leftist
crowing, beyond a certain parvenu smugness, an excessive familiarity with the
inside track, the inside dope,'' Mr. Kazin wrote.

When told of the content of Mr. Kazin's article, Mr. Peretz was said to have
swallowed a bit but to have offered no objection to its publication.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Hendrik Hertzberg; Martin Peretz (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Actor, Playing Nixon, Has His Star Role at Last

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 25


Not many actors can say that a former President of the United States tried to
suppress their best performance, but Lane Smith has that distinction.

Mr. Smith portrays Richard M. Nixon in ''The Final Days,'' a television movie
based on the best-selling book by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein about the
events leading up to President Nixon's resignation in 1974. Mr. Nixon sought an
injunction to prevent ABC from broadcasting the three-hour film, but he failed,
and it is scheduled to be shown on Sunday evening at 8 o'clock Eastern standard
time, unless a fifth game is played in the World Series.

Mr. Smith probably had more riding on that legal decision than any of the film
makers, for ''The Final Days'' represents the biggest break of his career, the
role that could finally lift him out of the category of a character actor. Mr.
Smith has worked steadily in the theater, in films and on television; he has one
of those faces that people recognize even if they cannot place the name. But he
is now 53 years old, and there was no reason to expect that he would ever win
the kind of juicy starring role that eludes most character actors. ''The Final
Days'' has brought him a new status in Hollywood.

''My price has doubled since I completed the film,'' Mr. Smith said in a
telephone interview from Thailand, where he is making ''Air America,'' a feature
film about C.I.A. involvement in Laos during the Vietnam War, which stars Mel
Gibson. ''This is the one I've been waiting for for 30 years,'' he said of ''The
Final Days.''

'You've Got to Be Ready'

In contemplating his good fortune, Mr. Smith seemed philosophical. ''A great
deal of it is luck, being in the right place at the right time,'' he said. ''But
you've got to be ready to hit a home run when you finally get up to bat. I
poured everything into this performance, all that I've learned in 30 years of
acting.''

A native of Memphis, Mr. Smith spent 18 years acting on the New York stage. He
studied at the Actors Studio, played the leading role in a revival of ''One Flew
Over the Cuckoo's Nest'' and appeared in David Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross.''
His film roles include ''Places in the Heart,'' ''Prince of the City,'' ''Red
Dawn'' and ''Weeds,'' and he also acted in many television movies and
mini-series.

Although he has earned a steady living as an actor, it has been as a supporting
player rather than as a star, and he almost missed getting the plum part in
''The Final Days.'' A casting director recommended him to Stu Samuels, the
executive producer, for the Nixon role. Through a misunderstanding, Mr. Smith
was called in to read for the part of the President's counsel, J. Fred Buzhardt
(Richard Kiley plays him in the film). The director, Richard Pearce, considered
Mr. Smith wrong for the part and told Mr. Samuels.

''But I didn't want you to read him for Buzhardt, '' Mr. Samuels said. ''I
wanted you to read him for Nixon.'' The director called him back, and a week
before filming was to begin, Mr. Smith was hired.

Studied Nixon Film

To prepare, Mr. Smith studied the film ''Millhouse,'' a chronicle of Mr. Nixon's
career up to his inauguration; he tried to capture the vocal inflections and
physical mannerisms he saw. ''I wanted to get the physicality right,'' Mr. Smith
said, ''but I didn't want to fall into parody. If you do that, you're not going
to be able to move anyone.''

For the emotional dimensions of the performance, Mr. Smith explained: ''I had to
draw on my own experience. This is a story about someone who suffered a great
loss, and I went back to experiences of loss in my own life. I'm someone who has
a tendency to isolate myself, especially during painful times, so I understood
that aspect of Nixon very well.''

Mr. Smith admitted that his own attitude toward Mr. Nixon had changed by the
time he finished the film. ''I remember the night Nixon fired Haldeman and
Erlichman,'' Mr. Smith said. ''When I listened to him, I felt he was lying, and
like a lot of other people, I wanted him out. But I think it was Norman Mailer
who said that over the years he has gained the dignity of an old prizefighter.
As an actor playing the part, I had to wipe the slate clean and come from a
place of compassion.''

Objections From Bernstein

Mr. Smith has heard criticisms that the film is too sympathetic to Nixon and
does not give enough attention to the laws that were violated and the serious
constitutional issues that were involved in the Watergate crimes. ''I know Carl
Bernstein has raised that objection,'' Mr. Smith said. ''He feels we could have
highlighted the constitutional issues more pointedly. We haven't tried to hide
the crimes that Nixon committed. In one of the very first scenes he talks to
Buzhardt about the files that John Dean took from the White House and put in a
safe deposit box. And Nixon says: 'But that's no problem. We can get the
papers.' So it's pretty clear that he was breaking laws. We do show his hubris,
the feeling he had that he was untouchable. But there's no question that we
approach it more from a human angle. I hope the film is a healing experience.
Maybe it's time to put a closure to that period, to forgive and move on.''

Mr. Smith has been talking with Mr. Bernstein and with Hugh Whitemore, the
author of the teleplay, about presenting ''The Final Days'' as a theater piece
in New York. ''Then we would go into more of the background of Watergate and
actually focus on the crimes being committed,'' Mr. Smith said. ''We would also
be able to use the colorful language of the Nixon tapes, which we had to tone
down for television.''

That is only one of many projects on Mr. Smith's busy schedule. He has a
featured role in another ABC docudrama coming up this season - an account of the
Challenger shuttle disaster, in which he plays Larry Mulloy, a NASA engineer at
the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala. And he is fielding many
other offers. ''I think I'll have more choices than I've ever had before,'' Mr.
Smith said. ''When your mortgage payment is due, you have to work, no matter
what the part. For the first time in my career, I think I'll have the luxury to
do the parts I find really satisfying.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lane Smith

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
N.A.M., in Shift, Picks Economist as President

BYLINE: By Louis Uchitelle

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 488 words


Jerry J. Jasinowski became president of the National Association of
Manufacturers this week, setting a sort of precedent. Normally the association
recruits an executive of a manufacturing company to be president. Mr. Jasinowski
is the first economist named to the group's top job, and he has never even
worked in the private sector, except for odd jobs while in college.

But times have changed in manufacturing. Service companies have gained in
importance and the manufacturing association, in reaction, is drawing on
economics to argue that manufacturing should be nurtured as the biggest source
of wealth for the American economy.

''We've got to raise the decibel level about the key role of manufacturing,''
said Mr. Jasinowski, who had been the association's chief economist for nine
years. ''Without a strong manufacturing sector, there's no solving the trade or
budget deficits - and manufacturing is the chief source of new technology.''

Mr. Jasinowski, who is 50 years old and 6 feet 3 inches tall, replaced Alexander
Trowbridge, a former vice chairman of the Allied Company, who retired. But as
chief economist and executive vice president, he had already become its
most-quoted spokesman, sometimes criticizing the Federal Reserve (for high
interest rates) and leveraged buyouts (they disrupt manufacturing).

Mr. Jasinowski's installation as president on Wednesday - an event that took
place at the association's board of directors meeting in Indianapolis - was a
sweet, emotional victory for him.

He grew up in LaPorte, Ind., not far away. His widowed mother, who still lives
there, raised four children and to supplement her meager income from many jobs,
she collected welfare for the family for 10 years. She was present for the
installation, and her son introduced her during his acceptance speech, and
thanked her.

Mr. Jasinowski was the first member of his family to graduate from high school,
and he is still the only one with a college degree - from Indiana University in
1962. He had gone there for business courses, thinking this was the ticket to a
big income later, but switched to economics ''because it offered a better
framework'' for understanding the country. Economics has also paid off; his new
salary is more than $200,000 a year.

Soon after college, Mr. Jasinowski joined the Air Force as an intelligence
officer and remained in the service into the 1970's, serving for a while in
Vietnam and later teaching economics at the Air Force Academy.

Research work on Federal subsidies brought Mr. Jasinowski to the attention of
former Senator William Proxmire, and he became an economist on the Joint
Economic Committee of Congress. He played a role in drafting the
Humphrey-Hawkins full employment bill and later headed a transition team for the
incoming Carter Administration. His last job, before joining the manufacturers
association in 1980, was as an Assistant Secretary of Commerce.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jerry J. Jasinowski

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE FREEWAY DEAD: Portraits From Oakland - A special report.;
11 WHOSE LIVES ENDED AS QUAKE CRUSHED I-880

BYLINE: The following article was prepared by Robert Reinhold, Mireya Navarro
and Jonathan Rabinovitz; Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3978 words

DATELINE: OAKLAND, Oct. 28


They were brought together by chance, by fate, by an act of God, some might say:
23 men, 15 women and a little boy. Strangers caught together in a terrifying
moment as the earth's mantle shrugged, blithely shattering a fragile man-made
structure, the Nimitz Freeway in Oakland.

Few in the Bay Area had thought much about the road. It was just part of the
network of highways that knitted the region together, routinely feeding
commuters onto the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge. Suddenly on Oct. 17, a
powerful earthquake turned the routine into the extraordinary. The cars that are
as much a part of Californians' everyday lives as subways are to New Yorkers
suddenly became deathtraps.

When the rubble and dust had settled, 39 victims were extracted, lives lost to
the whims of nature. The coroner's list was like a census report on the polyglot
Bay Area: victims were Asian, black, white, Hispanic. There was a Palestinian, a
refugee from Vietnam, Midwesterners, Easterners. Most were not native to the Bay
Area: they had come for economic opportunity, for personal or political freedom,
for the climate, the beauty. Most gave only passing thought to the dangers of
earthquakes, or at least, wrote that off as a price of living in the Bay Area.

Here is how the lives of 10 people intersected and ended on the Nimitz Freeway:

Donna Marsden
Hospital Administrator, 36

Born in Torrance, Calif. . . . daughter of a Los Angeles police officer . . .
married, divorced and remarried . . . an administrator in the pathology
department at the University of California at San Francisco . . . lived in
Alameda . . . died at the age of 36.

Like most people born and reared in California, Donna Marsden had adopted a
casual attitude about earthquakes. She had taken the precaution of wrapping
rubber bands around the knobs of the china cabinet in her three-story Victorian
home in Alameda. That saved her china when the jolt hit on Oct. 17, but Mrs.
Marsden died with four others in a university van.

She boarded the blue and gray Dodge van every weekday morning, and again at 4:40
P.M. in San Francisco for the return home. That day had been no different,
except that her husband had taken her to lunch to celebrate her promotion at the
University of California at San Francisco. Later, the van traveled the upper
deck of the Nimitz Freeway at almost the same time it did every day. Had the
quake struck seconds earlier or later, Mrs. Marsden would scarcely have been
affected, apart from picking up some fallen items at home.

With her blue-green eyes and nearly floor-length hair wrapped in a large bun,
Mrs. Marsden was striking, and she was known among friends for her sarcastic
wit, keen sense of the absurd and, above all, a nurturing spirit. She kept
hundreds of plants, two dogs and two cats. A favorite charity was the Starcross
Monestery in Santa Rosa, which cares for children with AIDS.

For two years she worked in the anesthesiology department as coordinator for
resident doctors until being promoted to the pathology department the day before
the quake. Colleagues said she exuded energy and self-confidence, exhibiting a
directness bordering on bluntness. Her husband, Bruce, who designs and installs
software for the International Business Machines Corporation in Oakland, said
one of her greatest joys was fixing the Victorian house the couple bought two
years ago, and she spent hours painting and papering the walls and fixing
furniture.

They knew earthquakes were a threat, but never thought much of it. ''We grew up
out here,'' said Mr. Marsden. ''We tended to adopt a cavalier attitude. It's a
fact of life out here. Every time there was a rumble, we'd make a joke when it
quit.''

Delores Ardoin Stewart
Administrative Assistant, 48

Born in Lakes Charles, La. . . . raised by grandparents after being orphaned . .
. moved to San Francisco in 1964 to be near her sister . . . married and
divorced . . . lived in Alameda . . . an administrative records assistant in
chancellor's office at the University of California at San Francisco . . . died
at the age of 48.

Delores Ardoin Stewart, a product of Louisiana's Creole culture, loved the Bay
Area, the climate, the more tolerant attitudes about race, the San Francisco
49'ers football team and the Oakland A's baseball team -''my men,'' as she
called them. But after 25 years here, one thing still terrified her:
earthquakes. During the last quake in August, she called her brother-in-law,
Jerry Bernard, in nearby Union City, Calif., to vent her feelings.

On Oct. 17, she left the apartment she shared with her companion for the last
five years, Michael D. Reardon, at 7:05 A.M. to meet the van that took her to
the University of California at San Francisco. She had worked there for 20
years, most of that time keeping records and correspondence at the chancellor's
office.

Just as punctually, she met the van for the return to the East Bay. When the
quake hit, the van bounced off the upper deck of the freeway; in another few
seconds she would have been out of danger.

''She was scared to death of earthquakes,'' said Mr. Reardon, a clerk at the
California Department of Health Services in Berkeley. ''Her brother-in-law began
to have a feeling something was wrong because after the last one, she talked to
him for an hour and a half.''

She once attended a university meeting on earthquake preparedness, but would not
go back after the first one. ''She really had difficulties with earthquakes,''
Mr. Reardon said. ''She would really rather get on with the business of
living.''

Ms. Stewart, an energetic and statuesque black woman, came to the area in the
60's and lived in the Haight-Ashbury district. It was a heady experience for a
Louisiana farm girl, but friends said she was proud to have lived through those
times and remained imbued with its idealism. A liberal Democrat, she was
strongly committed politically, but she also had a materialistic streak.

She lived in a beautifully decorated apartment and was a considerably skilled
cook. She also had a taste for the slot machines in Reno and was an avid dart
player.

James Thomas Hansen
Businessman, 64

Born in Berkeley . . . a B-29 mechanic in the Army in World War II . . .
received a bachelor's degree in business administration at the University of
California at Berkeley . . . father of four and grandfather of five . . .
general manager of the State Shingle Company in Oakland . . . lived in Albany .
. . died at the age of 64.

Probably none of the commuters knew the Nimitz Freeway better than James Hansen.
He drove his 1985 Toyota Camry back and forth over the elevated road four times
a day, twice to and twice from work, the extra round trip to have lunch with his
wife of 36 years, Gloria. He was a punctual man, but on Oct. 17 he left work
five minutes early to go home and watch the World Series. That cost him his
life; his car was one of those caught on the lower level when the upper deck of
the two-tiered highway collapsed.

''That day the freeway wasn't crowded,'' said Mrs. Hansen. ''He hits one stop
sign and he goes on. About three short blocks or about 20 seconds more and he
would have made it through.''

Melissa E. Maxwell
Deputy District Attorney, 32

Born in San Francisco . . . a fifth-generation Californian . . . 1978 graduate
of University of California at San Diego . . . graduated from Hastings Law
School in 1983 . . . an Alameda County deputy district attorney . . . lived in
Burlingame . . . died at the age of 32.

The World Series saved the lives of hundreds of people on Oct. 17, but it was
the death sentence for Melissa E. Maxwell. Many commuters had rushed home early
or stayed at bars to watch the third game, and were not on the Nimitz Freeway
when it collapsed at 5:04 P.M.

But Ms. Maxwell had arranged to be on the freeway at precisely 5 P.M. so that
she could pick up her 7-year-old niece, Erin, at a day care center in
Burlingame. Her sister and brother-in-law had tickets to the game, and Ms.
Maxwell had agreed to watch the girl.

To remind herself to leave the prosecutor's office earlier than usual - she
generally stayed until around 6 P.M. - she had posted a note on her wall to be
on the freeway by 5.

All day Ms. Maxwell told her partner, Jim Kinnison, that they had to finish
early so that she would not keep her niece waiting. ''She was really looking
forward to it,'' Mr. Kinnison said. ''She loved her family. She was always
talking about them.''

Ms. Maxwell was one of nine children, raised in an old wooden house that
survived the great 1906 earthquake. She had a relaxed Californian attitude
toward quakes.

''I don't believe that she worried about quakes,'' her sister, Melanie Fuller of
Hawaii, said in an interview while in the Bay Area. ''She was not a fearful
person. She was very religious.''

Friends and family members described Ms. Maxwell as an imposing figure, 5 feet
10 inches tall, with fiery red hair. Her presence commanded respect, both in
court and in some of the roughest parts of Oakland.

Ms. Maxwell knew all her life that she wanted to be a lawyer, Mrs. Fuller said.
''When she was hired by the Alameda County District Attorney's office four years
ago, it was a dream come true.''

Her family recently found a note she had written and stashed in her desk: ''I
love to say that I am Melissa E. Maxwell for the People of the State of
California.''

Minutes before she got on the freeway, an inspector in her office, Bob Cox, saw
her drive by and honk. ''I was returning from a run,'' he said. ''She called
out, 'Hey, Mr. Healthy,' and then zoomed off. If she had been parked, I would
have talked with her and this wouldn't have happened.''

Petra Berumen
Housekeeper, 25

Born in Mexico . . . came to the Bay Area about nine years ago . . . mother of
Julio, 6, and Cathy, 8 . . . cleaned homes . . . lived in Richmond . . . died at
the age of 25.

Petra Berumen would do just about anything for her two children. The slight shy
Mexican woman was learning English to help them with their homework. She also
learned to drive recently so she could take them to school when it rained and to
doctors' appointments.

And so it was on Tuesday afternoon. She was driving the children home from the
orthodontist's office in Oakland in the family's red Ford, when the freeway
collapsed.

Mrs. Berumen died, along with a passenger, her good friend Yolanda Orozco. The
two Berumen children were saved, although Julio's right leg had to be amputated
so he could be removed from the wreckage in one of the more dramatic episodes of
the rescue efforts. Mrs. Orozco's body also impeded the workers.

Cathy suffered serious head injuries.

If Mrs. Berumen worried much about earthquakes, they were low on her list of
priorities as a young immigrant trying to get started in a new land. She had
married another Mexican, Pastor Berumen, a construction worker, and two months
ago the two bought their first home.

''The Berumens were kind of the American dream,'' said Catherine Syverson,
principal of the Downer Elementary School, which both children attend. ''They
came to this country, got a good job, lived in a neighborhood with nice people.
They had just bought a pretty little house, no small feat in California. They
really had it made.'' Mrs. Berumen worked three days a week cleaning houses to
supplement the family income, but apart from that her entire daily life revolved
around her children. She was active at the school.

A friend, Graciela Almonte, said: ''She was a very good mother. She took them to
school and wouldn't leave until they went into the classroom. And she always
picked them up.''

And like other mothers, she was determined to have children with nice straight
teeth. On Tuesday the the orthdontist's appointment turned out to be a date with
death.

Raymonde Beauregard-Sund
Personnel Analyst, 42

Born in Granby, Quebec . . . reared in West Warwick, R.I. . . . lived in Alameda
. . . a personnel analyst in the anesthesiology department at University of
California at San Francisco . . . died at the age of 42.

Like others in the university van pool, Raymonde Beauregarde-Sund was a daily
freeway commuter. And like most of them, she gave little thought to earthquakes.
''She never expressed any concerns about earthquakes,'' said her husband, Lieut.
Cmdr. Jim Sund of the aircraft carrier Carl Vincent. ''We took it as part of
living here.'' The two were married 21 years ago and moved to the Bay Area in
1978. She later attended San Francisco State University, where she received a
bachelor's degree in psychology in 1980 and began working at the University of
California medical center. She was liked there for her zany sense of humor and
her generosity toward colleagues.

She had adapted easily to her new home state, taking up marathon running and
gourmet cooking, and her concerns about industrial growth in Alameda led her to
campaign for ballot measures intended to limit development.

Ramzi Farid Asfour
Banker, 50

Born in Haifa, Palestine . . . married for 20 years to Lily, a sales clerk at
Emporium Capwell's . . . a son, Fareed, 18, and two daughters, Zeina, 16, and
Leina, 12 . . . vice president of private investment services for the
BankAmerica Corporation . . . lived in Novato . . . died at the age of 50.

Ramzi Farid Asfour had been telling family and friends that he wanted to quit
his job as an investment counselor and do consulting work. After an accomplished
career as a stockbroker and executive for the BankAmerica Corporation, he wanted
to devote more time to his church and to his work on behalf of fellow
Palestinians.

On Oct. 17, he was expected in Fremont to discuss investments with a potential
client. He was an hour late because of heavy traffic, and he headed back toward
San Francisco at 4:30 P.M. Barely half an hour later, his Cadillac Seville was
crushed by the crumbling upper deck of the Nimitz Freeway.

His sister-in-law, Lucy Asfour, said he seldom traveled to the East Bay. ''It's
incredible he was at that spot at that time,'' she said. ''It was really his
destiny.''

Mr. Asfour first moved to the Bay Area in 1972 and had just returned in August
1988 after spending three years working for the bank in London.

''He had connections all over the world,'' said Mrs. Asfour, who is married to
Mr. Asfour's brother, Sami. ''Anybody who knew Ramzi loved him.''

Mr. Asfour was also active in the Episcopalian Diocese of California and his
local church, St. Francis of Assissi in Novato. This year, the Anglican Bishop
of Jerusalem, Samir Kafity, a longtime friend, appointed Mr. Asfour as his
representative in the Bay Area. Episcopal church officials here said Mr. Asfour
raised funds for hospitals and schools in the occupied territories and spoke
publicly on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

''It was done in the spirit of justice for the Palestinians,'' said the Rev.
Mary Blair of St. Francis of Assisi.

''The few days before he died he was feeling especially upbeat, especially
inspired,'' she said. '''He thought that he was doing exactly what he should be
doing.''

Nobody remembered him as being concerned about earthquakes.

''He probably felt about earthquakes the way he felt about anything in life,''
said his friend and colleague, Jack Cooper, managing director of BankAmerica
investment real estate. ''Ramzi would think that it was one of God's creations,
the same as rain.''

Mr. Asfour's memorial service at St. Francis of Assisi in Novato was attended by
450 people, and his funeral Mass at Grace Cathedral in San Francisco drew 1,000.

He would have been 51 this past Monday, the day of the Mass. In her parting
words at the service, his daughter, Zeina, said, ''Happy Birthday, Dad.''

Ray L. Holmes
Structural Engineer, 50

Born in Norfolk, Va. . . . married for 22 years to Tamara . . . daughters Tracy,
19; Holly, 18, and Christy, 9 . . . a structural engineer with Vickerman Zachary
Miller in Oakland . . . lived in Mill Valley . . . died at the age of 50.

Ray L. Holmes's death amid the rubble of the Nimitz Freeway followed a career
that often involved strengthening buildings so that they would withstand
earthquakes.

One job a few years ago involved directing the seismic upgrading of two
buildings of the International Business Machines Corporation in San Jose, a
five-story 250,000-square-foot administration building and a two-story
200,000-square-foot development laboratory. I.B.M. officials said both buildings
survived the earthquake unscathed.

''He was an expert in the seismic analysis and design of structures,'' said Ed
Curran, vice president of the San Francisco company URS/John A. Blume &
Associates, where Mr. Holmes had worked on the two buildings. Mr. Curran said he
had lunch with Mr. Holmes a month ago and tried to woo him back.

Normally, Mr. Holmes worked until at least 5 P.M. But on Oct. 17 he left about
10 minutes early to watch his favorite team, the Giants, play in the World
Series on television.

He was wearing the charm he thought would bring luck to his team, which had lost
the first two games of the Series: boxer shorts emblazoned with the team logo.
At the office, he had let colleagues take a peek by pulling the boxers up an
inch above his belt.

A longtime friend and colleague, Leo Conoscente, described him as ''Mr.
Sunshine.''

''He was an extremely gentle, kind and generous man,'' he said.

Mr. Conoscente said that Mr. Holmes took earthquakes ''very seriously'' in his
work.

Personally, ''he was probably more blase about it, that there wasn't anything to
worry about.''

But ''if he took that highway, he felt it was O.K. to drive on,'' Mr. Conoscente
said.

Timothy Moss
Sales Manager, 40

Born in Ontario, Ore. . . . received a bachelor's degree from the University of
Santa Clara in 1978 and master's in business administration and economics from
Golden Gate University in 1985 . . . an administrative sales manager for Pacific
Bell . . . died at the age of 40.

A few weeks ago Timothy Moss tried to find special screws to wire his
bookshelves to a wall to keep them from falling in an earthquake.

Like many Californians, Mr. Moss understood that earthquakes are a part of life
here. But he did not expect to die in one.

On Oct. 17, Mr. Moss's gray Acura Integra was one of the last cars to enter the
freeway section that was crushed when the upper level collapsed.

''He never really had an attitude about earthquakes,'' said his brother, Tony,
in a telephone interview from Payette, Idaho. ''He liked the city so much he
didn't care about them. We would jokingly discuss them, like you do with people
from California. But who could believe that he would be in such a wrong place at
such a wrong time.''

Mr. Moss's family owns American Fine Foods Inc. in Payette, but he chose to live
in San Francisco rather than take over the family's multimillion-dollar
business.

A friend, Greg Mathews, said Mr. Moss loved the city's culture, its scenic views
and its diversity. The two shared a two-story condominium with vaulted ceilings
for two years, and they had prepared for a major earthquake by stocking supplies
like bottled water, batteries and flashlights.

''Tim sort of felt that some of this stuff was in the way, but he went along
with the program,'' Mr. Mathews said.

Mr. Moss had spent most of that Tuesday at a meeting he was not required to
attend. When it adjourned, he hurried from the building, declined an invitation
to go to a bar and rushed on to the Nimitz Freeway. He was not hurrying home to
watch the World Series; he was trying to beat the traffic.

''Apparently he was the last car to drive into the section that collapsed,''
said Bruce Oliver, Mr. Moss's supervisor. ''If he had stopped to sneeze, he
wouldn't have been there.''

Juan Daniel Luis Rubi
Installed Sunroofs, 28

Born in San Francisco . . . married for six years to Deanna, a machine operator
at a baking company . . . 8-year-old twin sons, Juan and Daniel . . . an
installer of car sunroofs . . . lived in San Francisco . . . died at the age of
28.

Juan Rubi checked in with his Daly City office at 4:45 P.M. He and a co-worker
had just picked up a 1989 Chevrolet Camaro from a client in the East Bay city of
San Leandro and were ready to head back to their place of work. Mr. Rubi was to
drive the Camaro, which was to have a sunroof installed, and his colleague was
to follow in another car.

''I'm on my way,'' Mr. Rubi said on the telephone.

Twenty minutes later, Mr. Rubi became one of the 39 victims buried in the rubble
of the Nimitz Freeway. The co-worker, in an unwitting yet life-saving decision,
stopped for gas and was spared.

In San Francisco, Mr. Rubi's family members rushed to reach one another in the
chaos after the quake. Concern focused on Mr. Rubi's mother, Juana, who was
feared trapped in a Bay Area Rapid Transit train somewhere under downtown San
Francisco.

Mrs. Rubi showed up safely at her house at 8:15 that night. But her son never
returned home.

''Nobody had worried about him,'' recalled his father, Daniel Rubi. ''He was a
survivor.''

Mr. Rubi's body was recovered three days later. A collage of pictures his
relatives put together for memorial services showed him as a family man with an
especially broad smile when holding his twin sons. Mr. Rubi's funeral Mass on
Tuesday at St. Peter's Church in San Francisco's Mission district featured a
children's choir to which the twins belonged - but they did not sing.

His father said Mr. Rubi would pitch in when the twins, putting their allowances
together and coming short, could not buy the latest video game.

''It was like they were little kids together,'' Daniel Rubi said. ''He always
found time to play and stay with his kids.''

Vinh Phu
Automobile Mechanic, 32

 Born in Vietnam . . . married for 14 years to Mary, 32 . . . three children,
Ivan, 13, Jimmy, 9, and Jenny, 6 . . . auto mechanic . . . died at the age of
32.

The family of Vin Phu, who was Chinese, fled the poverty of Vietnam in 1980 only
to be confronted with tragedy in the Bay Area less than a decade later.

Two months ago, Mr. Phu moved his family from the cramped studio apartment they
had shared in the Tenderloin district of San Francisco to a two-bedroom
single-family house in Oakland.

With the three children still attending their old schools, Mr. Phu shuttled them
back and forth across the bay as he commuted to the Show Place Garage in San
Francisco, where he had worked for seven years.

On Oct. 17, his wife, Mary, came along for the ride. A friend in San Francisco
had just given birth and Mrs. Phu wanted to spend the day with them, said a
friend, Hana Ho.

School let out at 3 P.M. and the children met their mother at her friend's. At 4
P.M., Mr. Phu left work and picked up his family. Barely an hour later, the
earthquake caught them on the upper deck of Interstate 880.

All survived but Mr. Phu. The three children, after being briefly hospitalized,
are recovering from cuts and bruises at Mrs. Ho's home in Alameda. The daughter,
Jenny, fractured her left arm. Mrs. Phu underwent hip and knee surgery Wednesday
and is listed in fair condition at Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in Oakland.

Mrs. Phu has yet to be told about her husband's death, Mrs. Ho said, but the
children know.

''They are strong and brave,'' she said. ''They're doing very well.'' But Mrs.
Ho and other friends worry about the application by Mr. Phu's parents to
immigrate to the United States from Vietnam. Mrs. Ho said the couple, after
years of waiting, were about to move here under their son's sponsorship.

''They're just waiting for a ticket,'' she said. ''We're afraid immigration will
close the case. I hope they let the grandparents come here to take care of the
children.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: After the earthquake on Oct. 17, workers marked a pillar of the Nimitz
Freeway in Oakland to show where one of 39 victims lay (Reuters) (pg. 1); part
of the Nimitz Freeway, where 39 people died after it collapsed in the earthquake
on Oct. 17 (AP); victims of the earthquake in California: Delores Ardoin
Stewart; Raymonde Beauregard-Sund; Ramzi Faride Asfour; Juan Daniel Luis rubi;
Petra Berumen; Timothy Moss (pg. 32)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conference on Black Theology Unites Scholars and Pastors

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words


Black theology, a distinctive understanding of Christianity based on the
religious experience of African Americans, was forged in the days of the Rev.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and the Vietnam War, but its proponents
believe it is no less relevant in the days of President Bush, televangelism,
Spike Lee and the crack epidemic.

And at a conference last week in Manhattan, more than 300 church leaders and
scholars agreed, urging that the message of black theology be carried beyond the
classrooms to the pews.

The conference was also meant to celebrate the 20th anniversary of a landmark
book on black theology, but the organizers were embarrassed when the author
declined to participate because of a misunderstanding.

'A Missing Link'

Organized by four New York City seminaries, the conference was intended to
provide ''a missing link'' between the academically based black theologians and
black church leaders ''in the trenches,'' said the Rev. Preston Washington,
pastor of Memorial Baptist Church in Harlem and the head of the meeting's
steering committee.

The organizers said that while black theology has been well developed
intelectually, its message still needs to be made relevant to black
congregations.

Black theology emerged in the 1960's as both a criticism of white Christianity
and a search for a black Christian identity. While the proponents of black
theology accept the traditional Christian belief in Jesus as the Redeemer, they
believe that His message to His followers today is one of freedom from
oppression. Like Latin American liberation theologians, black theologians
believe that Christianity demands engaging in the struggle for political,
economic and racial equality. Black theology also teaches that blacks, by
pressing their claims for equality, can redeem white Christianity from its sins
of racial prejudice and economic exploitation.

Scholarship and Preaching

From the opening worship service last Monday evening at Canaan Baptist Church in
Harlem, through three days of lectures and workshops at Riverside Memorial
Church on the Upper West Side, the gathering comfortably mixed scholarship with
Gospel singing and exuberant preaching.

''This is a momentous conference,'' said J. Deotis Roberts, one of the pioneers
of black theology who teaches at Eastern Baptist Seminary in Philadelphia.
''Black theologians and black pastors haven't been together meeting for many
years.''

The emergence of black theology is often dated to 1969 when ''Black Theology and
Black Power,'' a book by James H. Cone, crystalized black dissatisfaction with
the European and American theological currents then dominant.

Explanations Demanded

Last week's meeting was also supposed to mark the anniversary of Mr. Cone's
book. Mr. Cone, the Briggs Distinguished Professor of Theology at Union
Theological Seminary, was not there. Instead, he was teaching his classes only a
few hundred yards away.

Because of Mr. Cone's absence, several black theologians decided not to
participate in the conference. Some of his students handed out leaflets at the
opening service, demanding explanations from the organizers as to why he was not
a central part of the conference.

Both the organizers and Mr. Cone said that the problem began with the planning
committee's failure to consult him early in its work. Conflicts with his
teaching schedule were said to have defeated later efforts to assure his
participation, but it was clear that injured feelings were a major factor.

'We Blew This One'

The meeting was sponsored by Union Theological Seminary, New York Theological
Seminary, Auburn Theological Seminary and General Theological Seminary.

''We blew this one,'' Mr. Washington said. ''All of us are feeling a deep sense
of pain.'' He said that Mr. Cone ''was my professor, and his book opened my mind
to the possibility of being both black and Christian when I was growing up in
Harlem.

Mr. Cone's black theology reflected the Black Power movement of the late 1960s
in its determination to shake off the dominance of liberal Christian theologies
and in its impatience with the integrationist perspective of Dr. King. But black
theology also rejected the condemnation of Christianity as ''the white man's
religion'' by Malcolm X and black nationalists.

Peter Paris, who teaches social ethics at Princeton Theological Seminary,
described how black theologians used the Bible, black sermons, spirituals and
blues to develop its themes.

'A New Black Ecumenism'

More recently, Mr. Roberts said, black theology has begun to incorporate the
perspectives of black women and biblical scholars. It has produced ''a new black
ecumenism,'' he said, and made contact with third-world theologians, especially
in Africa.

Indeed, female preachers and biblical scholars played prominent roles at the
conference as did black Roman Catholics. Sister Jamie Phelps, a black nun who
teaches at the Catholic Theological Union in Chicago, said that black Catholics
''find ourselves in the margins twice - white Catholics don't take us seriously
and black Protestants don't either.'' She told the conference:

''I come to you as a black Catholic sister and theologian, your sister in
blackness, your sister in struggle, your colleague in trying to think out what
is the meaning of God in these times, times that are deadly.''

Although the mood of the conference was decidedly upbeat, neither black theology
nor the black churches escaped criticism.

A Warning of a Chasm

Bishop Ithiel Clemmons, who heads one of the eastern New York districts of the
3.7 million-member Church of God in Christ, warned of a growing ''chasm between
the black church pews and the black church pulpit.'' Black middle-class
religious and political leadership often shares a ''vacillation about right and
wrong'' that ''does not sit well'' with the working people in the pews, he said.

Reflecting the Pentecostalism of his denomination, Bishop Clemmons criticized
black theology for ''playing down the role of the Holy Spirit in the world.''

Interviewed by telephone, Mr. Cone said: ''The black church has produced
outstanding preachers ranking with any in the world, but the church hasn't
produced theologians of equal quality. Without strong theology, preaching
becomes entertainment, and there is a tendency to make church life center around
the preacher.''

Mr. Cone, who acknowledged that ''some see me as going too far in my critique,''
has denounced black churches and denominations for being authoritarian and
complacent and for excluding women from leadership. ''It's easy for the black
church to be critical of the white church, but it also has to be critical of
itself,'' he said.

Speakers at the conference did not match the sweeping denunciations of white
America found in Mr. Cone's book 20 years ago, but referring to rates of
poverty, drug abuse, violence and unemployment among blacks, they sharply
questioned the values of the society.

''In some respects,'' Mr. Roberts said, ''we've gone backwards in this decade,
and racism itself has become more insidious. If our people are to survive,'' he
added, ''it will be largely due to how well the black church carries out its
mission.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;
A Peaceful Training Ground for Army Officers

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: HIGHLAND FALLS, N.Y.


Seen from across the river in the waning color of mid-autumn, the forbidding
institution carved into the rising banks of the Hudson unquestionably has a
serious purpose. Form probably never clung closer to function.

The grounds of the United States Military Academy itself, however, offer a
different sensation, particularly on Sundays. Discipline is somewhat relaxed and
West Point - a military post, college campus and National Historical Site all in
one - welcomes some of the 2,500,000 visitors who stop by every year. Even
people of an age to have opposed all things military in their youth may be
engaged by the pageantry, the sense of tradition and community, and the sheer
prettiness of the landscape.

The easiest way to find the academy is to drive up the west side of the Hudson
to the town of Highland Falls in Orange County, about 45 miles from Manhattan.
Much more interesting, and only slightly out of the way, is to come in from the
Washington Gate in the north.

This route, which begins a few miles from the end of the Palisades Parkway,
winds through the military reservation's bivouacs and training sites and
eventually onto the vast grounds of the academy proper, passing houses, chapels,
monuments, playing fields and parade grounds. The road leads out the academy
gates into Highland Falls and, in about 500 feet, to the new Visitors Center and
museum, opened in a new location only last month.

A Walk for the Hardy

A walking tour of West Point is not for the physically faint. Driving through
the grounds first will help decide whether the day is to be a forced march or a
compromise between walking and driving.

Visitors are allowed access to the grounds from sunrise to sundown; tours and
adequate maps are provided. The barracks, classroom buildings and library are
all off-limits, but the new Visitors Center contains a mock-up of a cadet's
room, its minimalist look dictated, according to a taped message, by a set of
regulations so detailed that even the number of items a cadet may leave on the
desk is specified.

Such discipline has been a hallmark of the academy, if not since it was founded
in 1802 to provide officers for the new, less-than-professional American army,
at least since Col. Sylvanus Thayer took over in 1817 and turned the place into
a respectable engineering school. The academy's history is on display at the
museum in Olmsted Hall, next to the Visitors Center, as is the history of and
warfare and an exhibit of small and large arms.

A Museum of Battles

Instructors at West Point use the museum's reconstructions of significant
battles - for example, at Crecy in 1346, during the Hundred Years' War, when the
English infantry demonstrated its superiority over French mounted troops - to
teach strategy. It is not unusual to see a cadet in fatigues pause to study a
battle scene intently for several minutes before moving on.

The museum is crammed with so much material that it is easy to lose track of
time while pondering, say, the succession of weaponry in the small-arms gallery
or the scrupulously neutral evaluation of the Army's experience in Vietnam. A
better strategy is simply to pick up a map at the Visitors Center and head for a
central point, saving the museum for later.

A circumnavigation of The Plain, the main parade ground, is a good warm-up. The
corps of cadets, 4,400 strong, gathers here for dress parades under the stern,
fixed gazes of military icons - and West Point graduates - like George Patton,
Dwight D. Eisenhower and Douglas MacArthur.

Up the hill from the parade ground is the nondenominational Cadet Chapel, with
its stained-glass depictions of biblical warriors. Sunday services, to which
visitors are invited, begin at 10:30 A.M. in the 79-year-old Gothic chapel.

Landmarks Left and Right

A staircase behind the chapel leads to other West Point landmarks, including,
off to the left, Michie Stadium, home of West's Point's football team, the Black
Knights. Off to the right is a path - make a sharp left shortly after picking up
the trail - to Fort Putnam, the Revolutionary War-era fortification built by
Col. Thaddeus Kosciuszko. The view alone is worth the huffing and puffing it
takes to get there.

The Visitors Center (914-938-2638) and adjoining gift shop are open on Sundays
from 9 A.M. until 4:45 P.M. The museum is open from 10:30 A.M. to 4:15 P.M.
Until the end of November, buses leave from the center every 20 minutes, from
11:30 A.M. until 3:30 P.M., for a 50-minute tour. The tour costs $2 for children
11 and under, $3 for adults. Admission to the academy grounds is free. A winter
schedule goes into effect in December; call the Visitors Center.

West Point is not a culinary citadel. The Hotel Thayer on the academy grounds,
just inside the main gate, serves brunch (10 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.) and dinner (5:30
to 9:30 P.M.) on Sundays; the setting is atmospheric, but the food revolution of
the last 20 years seems to have passed the buffet table by. Highland Falls has
an assortment of pizza and hamburger restaurants, generally quite hospitable to
children who have spent the afternoon in a museum.

Getting There

To reach West Point, take the Palisades Parkway, on the New Jersey side of the
George Washington Bridge. At Exit 18, follow Route 6 west. In about three miles,
take the West Point cutoff and follow it to Route 218 north. Turn left, and
follow signs onto the academy grounds. The Short Line Bus Company offers service
from the Port Authority Bus Terminal to West Point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cadets on parade at the United States Military Academy at West Point.
Right, the entrance to the new Visitors Center, which opened last month. (The
New York Times/Mark Antman)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Art Meets Life for a Vietnamese Actress

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1698 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


It's probably fair to say that just about nothing in Kieu Chinh's life has
turned out as she expected. Ms. Chinh did not anticipate leaving her native
Hanoi when she was 14. Certainly she could not have imagined that she would
become, in the late 1960's, South Vietnam's most famous female movie star and
television talk show hostess, voted, in 1972, the most popular actress of Asia
at the Asian Film Festival. She didn't know that she would come to Los Angeles
in 1975 after the fall of Saigon and have to start over again as a bit player
who was once a big star. She had no particular reason to think that, after 15
years of what can only be described as obscure struggling in the back lots of
Hollywood, a real career would begin again to take shape.

But for Ms. Chinh, who says she lost everything twice, the abrupt surge of
interest among film makers and television producers in the Vietnam era has
opened up a new prospect. This fall, Ms. Chinh is appearing in two feature
films. In one of them, ''Welcome Home,'' she plays a Cambodian refugee separated
from her American lover, played by Kris Kristofferson. In the other, ''Vietnam,
Texas,'' directed by Robert Ginty, she plays the Vietnamese mistress of an
American soldier.

She has, meanwhile, been busy both as an actress and a consultant for television
features on her native country, including the highly successful ABC network
series ''China Beach.''

Ms. Chinh allows that even her recent roles are modest, and she forthrightly
expresses the wish that better, bigger roles might still await her. Whether she
gets them or not, there is paradox and irony aplenty in the latest turns in a
life that has been full of turns. It is paradoxical because the promise of a
better life as an actress in this country stems from a renewed fascination here
with the very experience - the American failure in Indochina - that was her
greatest personal tragedy. The most ironic element in the situation, however, is
this: even as Ms. Chinh acts in Vietnam dramas and advises directors on how to
portray her country with authentic detail, she harbors within herself a story
just as dramatic, certainly as gripping, as any likely to appear on the screen.

''The other day,'' she recalled in a recent interview at lunch in a French
bistro not far from the movie lots of downtown Burbank, ''I went for an audition
for an NBC television film on the last flight from Saigon. But that's exactly
what happened to me. In my real life, I was on the last flight from Saigon.''

Speaking in slightly French-accented English - Ms. Chinh belongs to that
generation of Vietnamese that learned French in grammar school - she makes a
statement about involvement in art that seems at times to be imitating her life.
For, after all, what she has been doing lately in front of the cameras is
playing roles devised by American film makers imagining things that she knows
from experience.

''It's easier to handle the work because I know exactly how it happened in real
life,'' she said. ''But the feeling is painful. It is painful to have to go
through it again.''

These days, Kieu Chinh (the name is pronounced Kew Chin) lives in a modest
stucco bungalow in Studio City, Calif., sharing it with her son, the youngest of
her three children and the only one still at home.

She lives among Vietnamese art and artifacts - porcelain elephants, teapots, a
small bamboo garden - as she tries to hold on to a few pieces of her former
life. At lunch at a nearby French bistro, she ran quickly through a life story
that began far from California. Two scenes at airports particularly stand out.

The first was in Hanoi in 1954. The French had just been defeated at Dien Bien
Phu; and Ms. Chinh's father had decided to go, with her and her younger brother,
to Saigon, taking advantage of a 100-day period when, in accordance with the
French-Vietnamese armistice, residents of North Vietnam were freely permitted to
go to the South, still controlled by France. Ms. Chinh had lost her mother to
illness years before. For two days the three members of her family went to the
Hanoi airport trying, and failing, to get on a flight to Saigon. On the night
before the third day, Ms. Chinh's brother crept into her room and told her he
was leaving to join the revolutionary forces. When, the next day, Ms. Chinh and
her father were about to board their plane, her father pushed her aboard and
told her that he would stay for a while to find her brother. Ms. Chinh never saw
either her brother or her father again.

''Father said he would join me in 100 days,'' she said. ''Every day I used to
listen to the Voice of France radio, which was allowed to broadcast from
Haiphong during that 100 days. But after 100 days, I never heard anything more
about my father.''

Ms. Chinh was taken in by a family that was on the same flight. She was sent to
a French-run Roman Catholic school in Saigon, eventually marrying a son of her
adoptive family. One day when she was 17, she went to a reception at the
Continental Hotel for an American movie team that had arrived in Saigon to film
''The Quiet American.'' Ms. Chinh, out of concern for the sensibilities of her
mother-in-law, did not accept an invitation to audition for a part, since it
would have involved a love scene. But she was invited later by Bui Diem, then a
film producer but later South Vietnam's ambassador to Washington, to audition
for a part as a Buddhist nun in one of the first Vietnamese films ever made.

From there, she quickly became famous, playing opposite American actors in
several Hollywood productions, including ''A Yank in Vietnam'' (1964), with
Marshall Thompson, and '' Operation C.I.A.'' (1965), starring Burt Reynolds. She
gave birth to her three children. She was host of a television talk show,
interviewing American performers who came to Saigon to entertain the troops. For
some 15 years, she was Vietnam's official emissary to the annual Asian Film
Festival. She made movies in Vietnam, Singapore, India, Thailand, South Korea
and Taiwan.

''In March 1975,'' she recalled, ''I went to Singapore to make a movie there. In
the middle of April, I started getting telegrams from my family telling me to
stay away because Saigon was going to fall any minute. But I had to go back.''

Ms. Chinh's children were already studying in Canada, but she hoped to help
friends and other family members escape from the country before the North
Vietnamese arrived. In the end, only she was able to get away, pushed aboard the
last Pan Am plane to leave Saigon by an airport official she knew. All she had
with her was a pocketbook, with some lipstick, a handkerchief, some useless
South Vietnamese piasters and a precious private telephone book.

Eventually, with the help of some of the performers she had interviewed on
Saigon television, she ended up in California, where for 10 years she played the
occasional bit part, taking the bus every day to a downtown office of the
Catholic Relief Services, where she worked as a translator helping Indochinese
refugees get settled in this country. Still, she remembers the airport
departures that brought sudden ends to her two former lives.

''One time at the Los Angeles airport,'' she said, ''I saw a father saying
goodbye to his daughter. He told her he'd see her at the end of the summer.
Right away tears came to my eyes. I don't know what happened to that father and
girl. My father said the same thing to me, and I never saw him again.''

She also remembers her first Hollywood role, a two-line part in a police film
starring Lloyd Bridges. She showed up at the set at 10 A.M., half an hour early.
At lunch, she got on the line for the caterer's wagon until she was politely
told to go elsewhere for a box lunch reserved for extras. When at 5 P.M. she was
called for her tiny part, she was so nervous, she said, that she forgot her two
short lines.

''They had to take a few takes for that scene,'' she said. ''On the way home, I
was crying like a baby. My son told me to forget it. It didn't matter if I
wasn't an actress, he said. But that's all I wanted to do.'' Two years ago,
about a decade after that precarious new beginning, she took the financial risk
of quitting her job at the Catholic Relief Services to go back into full-time
acting.

''I risked my life for freedom,'' she said of that decision. ''I had freedom,
but my goal wasn't just to have a job to have enough money to pay my bills and
survive for another day. So, I decided to quit. It was very risky because there
isn't enough work. So, I have to accept small parts here and there, but I hope
there will be better ones.''

Given her identity, Ms. Chinh is likely to get parts calling for Asian women as
the United States continues to explore its history in Vietnam. She is grateful
for the opportunities and is glad that what she calls ''my country'' no longer
evokes such embarrassing and painful memories in this country that the
collective national eye is averted.

And, at the same time, she says that she would like to see the movies portray
the Vietnamese for themselves, rather than as mere props for an American
experience. In this, she joins a growing number of Vietnamese refugees playing
parts in Vietnam war movies, glad of the chance for their careers to develop and
yet skeptical of the image of their country being forged on the screen.

''I'd like to see more stories based on the Vietnamese people, on our culture,
so the audience will see more of the civilian side of life instead of just
barbed wire, blood and bombing,'' she said. She notes that, with the exception
of ''The Killing Fields,'' Americans, perhaps quite naturally, have concentrated
on American suffering during the war, not the drama of the Vietnamese
themselves. There have, she said by way of example, been no films on the boat
people, even though there are tens of thousands of them, many still festering in
refugee camps with little prospect of a bright future.

''None of the stories made about Vietnam portray the real tragedy of the fall of
Saigon or of the war,'' she said. ''No story could ever tell the tragedy of what
happened to my country or what my people have gone through.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Kieu Chinh as a Cambodian refugee separated from her American lover in
''Welcome Home,'' starring Kris Kristofferson (pg. 15); Kieu Chinh with Robert
Ginty in ''Vietnam, Texas'' (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
'Forced March' Sees the Holocaust Through a Victim

BYLINE: By ANNETTE INSDORF; Annette Insdorf is the author of ''Indelible
Shadows: Film and the Holocaust,'' which will be published in an updated edition
by Cambridge University Press in December.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 965 words


Amid the growing number of films dealing with the Holocaust, some of the most
effective have been those that bracket the horrors of World War II with the
flashbacks of a central character. From ''The Pawnbroker'' to ''Sophie's
Choice,'' there seems to be something more ''real'' about avowedly subjective
recollections, as opposed to reconstructions that purport to show the past in an
objective way.

''Forced March,'' opening Friday at Cinema 1, goes a step further by
highlighting the difficulty of depicting inexplicable events that occurred 45
years ago. By juxtaposing the story of Miklos Radnoti - the Hungarian-Jewish
poet who was killed toward the end of World War II - with a contemporary actor's
earnest attempt to play Radnoti in the film within the film, this drama
exemplifies a self-conscious subgenre of Holocaust cinema.

''No one can show how it really was,'' the actor's father (played by Josef
Sommer), a Holocaust survivor, laments to his son Ben (Chris Sarandon), after
visiting the film set in Hungary. ''And who would want to see it?'' he adds.
''Forced March'' thus questions its own conventions even as it seeks to involve
its audience in Radnoti's story. For example, Walter (John Seitz) - the tough
director of the film within the film - yells to five extras who aren't conveying
enough fear at imminent execution, ''No matter how close we come, we're not
close enough.''

''Forced March,'' an American-Hungarian co-production directed by Rick King,
follows Ben from his easy Beverly Hills life as a popular television star to
professional and personal challenges making the film in Budapest. As he tries to
bring to life and understand his wartime character, Ben undergoes a
transformation that includes a romance with his co-star (Renee Soutendijk), a
search for his own Hungarian-Jewish roots and a need to make Radnoti more of a
resister than the poet might have been in reality. These culminate in the
grueling march - from a labor camp in Yugoslavia to Hungary - that gives the
film its title.

Mr. King - best known for his acclaimed independently produced drama of 1986,
''Hard Choices,'' and HBO's ''Vietnam Stories'' - was drawn to the project by
what he termed its ''serious examination of this real moral dilemma, which I've
never been able to understand: How could the Holocaust happen?'' Speaking by
telephone from his Santa Monica, Calif., home, the 39-year-old director added,
''I found the context compelling - a journey across time of someone in the
present being affected by someone in the past.

''The contemporary story is essential for telling Radnoti's story,'' he
continued. ''Conceptually, the best way to deal with something like the
Holocaust is to be able to get right next to it, and then go away from it -
which the contemporary and past stories allow you to do in 'Forced March.' ''

Mr. King acknowledged that ''the questions this contemporary actor was asking
were questions I'd always asked: Why didn't people fight back? How could this
happen to so many people? Radnoti answers these questions through his life and
his poetry. I didn't find answers but redefinitions - of courage and of art.''

Although ''Forced March'' was perhaps most personal for Charles Bardosh - a
Hungarian Jew who co-wrote the screenplay with Dick Atkins, the film's producer
- Mr. King described this production as ''an interesting personal voyage: I
mirrored Ben's journey in that I come from the most rigorously WASP background
you can imagine; but when I was 21, I found out that I'm one-quarter Jewish. My
father had discovered accidentally that he was half Jewish. I was in a funny
role with 'Forced March,' both insider and outsider: I'm not really Jewish, but
Jewish enough that I could have been shot during World War II.''

Mr. King could also be likened to Walter, the director within ''Forced March'' -
a man obsessed with authenticity. He recalled getting ''about five people who
had actually been in the labor camps to come and talk with us. One of the men -
who became an extra and went on the whole march with us in the film - had been
on the march with Radnoti!''

When asked if he identified with the rather belligerent Walter, Mr. King
replied, ''My style is completely different - very low key on the set, never
embarrassing people. I baby actors. They're like a kite, and I encourage them to
go as far out as they can, and then I pull them back.''

About working with Mr. Sarandon - an actor who, although nominated for an Oscar
for ''Dog Day Afternoon,'' has played less than meaty parts - Mr. King said,
''He always gave a lot. I think Chris has been frustrated by the kind of roles
he's played. He's very intelligent and wants to deal with stronger stuff.''

Mr. Sarandon concurred that ''Rick was the direct antithesis of Walter, and I
think to good purpose.'' Speaking by phone from Montreal, where he is currently
starring in a thriller called ''Whispers,'' with Victoria Tennant, he
acknowledged that the parallels between himself and his character ''were sort of
spooky: there I was, an American actor going to Hungary to play one of the
country's great heroes.

''When I first got there,'' he continued, ''I purposely avoided immersing myself
in the culture and history of the man. For instance, I avoided meeting Mrs.
Radnoti, who lives in the same apartment they lived in when he was going through
his difficult days. As the film developed, I went through a transformation
similar to Ben's.''

For Mr. King, a former history major at Stanford University, there was an
additional consequence in making ''Forced March'': ''I've always been
politically interested, but the film reawakened in me a sense of the importance
of individual political commitment - doing your own little bit as much as you
can,'' he concluded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chris Sarandon, looking up, portrays the Hungarian-Jewish poet Miklos
Radnoti (Tamas Kende)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Now, the People's Army Has Fewer Friends, More Power

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


CHINA'S favorite hat used to be the army cap. As recently as this spring, young
boys wore them everywhere and doting parents beamed their approval.

These days, most boys go bareheaded. Scarcely anyone is willing to be seen in an
army cap, and a vendor acknowledged that sales have slowed greatly since the
army's violent repression of the democracy movement in early June. ''Chinese
don't buy these caps now,'' the vendor said. ''Now I try to sell them to
Japanese visitors.''

The changing fashions point to the problems the Chinese army faces these days.
The television propaganda of recent months has not erased the memories of troops
firing on protesters. And in Beijing, which remains under martial law, the army
has been further discredited by what is perceived as an arrogance on the part of
the troops, most of whom come from the countryside and feel a certain contempt,
readily reciprocated, for city residents.

The army must deal not only with the public dislike but also with the knowledge
that even its repression was not handled well: if the army lost more than a
dozen troops and scores of vehicles when taking on unarmed civilians, what would
have happened if it had faced armed opposition? Beyond that, the army is
searching for the role it wants to play in China, according to many diplomats
and other experts on the Chinese military. They say that many elements of the
army resent being used as an instrument of repression and favor a professional
force that would be on alert at the borders rather than in the capital.

Yet if the army has rarely been so burdened with difficulties, it has rarely
been so important in recent years. Deng Xiaoping, China's 85-year-old senior
leader, is trying to arrange a transition to a circle of younger leaders headed
by Jiang Zemin, the new Communist Party chief. But Mr. Jiang is relatively weak
and is likely to face a power struggle as soon as Mr. Deng is no longer able to
protect him. At that point, the army, one of the few relatively cohesive forces
left in China, could step forward and help choose the next generation of
leadership.

''The army has seen its power grow whenever there have been periods of chaos or
uncertainty or transition, and I think that is still true today,'' said a
Western diplomat here.

If the army does gain greater influence, the generals might tend to favor
hard-liners like Prime Minister Li Peng. But that is not certain. The politics
of top officers are scarcely known, and much would depend on which general comes
out on top. It is possible that a deal would be worked out, with the military
offering support in exchange for a commitment to spare it from further budget
cuts.

The last two party chiefs, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, were doomed in part by
the reluctance of military leaders to accept them on the Central Military
Commission. The absence of such support left them particularly vulnerable when
Mr. Deng and others of his generation chafed at their unwillingness to crack
down on protesters.

Misgivings in the Ranks

This time, Mr. Deng seems to be trying to help Mr. Jiang by installing him as
either chairman or vice chairman of the military commission, an attempt to give
him a chance to consolidate his power. Beijing is full of reports about shifts
in the commission and in the army itself, changes that could shape civilian
politics.

The increasing influence over the political struggles is just what many younger
officers want least, diplomats and other analysts say.

These misgivings about its political role - and especially concerns about a role
in repression - were behind the cracks in the military monolith in May and early
June. The commander of the 38th army, General Xu, took sick leave rather than
move his troops into Beijing in late May, Chinese officials say. The commander,
the son of a famous General, Xu Haideng, had been thought absolutely reliable.
In addition, military units took up defensive positions that suggested they
feared attack from other units.

Chinese officials also say that a mutiny in Inner Mongolia in late June resulted
in the execution of about 20 officers. No further information is known about
that incident. Still, it now seems that the threat of civil war was not so great
as it seemed at the time. While some skirmishing apparently took place among
units, this may have been the unintended result of nervous troops stumbling
across one other in the darkness.

''There was never an open split,'' said a Chinese official with contacts in
middle and high levels in the army. ''The officers generally agreed with their
mission, but there was disagreement on how to do it, and many thought that it
wasn't handled very well and was unnecessarily bloody.''

Today, the worst disagreements within the army seem to have been resolved, but
conflicting ambitions still exist. One problem is that the generation of
civilian leaders after Mr. Deng has had very little military experience. Many
diplomats expect that the ascendancy of leaders without such ties will mean more
pressure on the army to cut spending, after a decade in which it already has
faced austerity and the demobilization of more than a million troops.

The army also must come to terms with its inadequacies. In 1979, China was
shocked by the punishment it took from the Vietnamese Army during a brief border
war, and that embarrassment led to efforts to modernize the military. China's
generals are said to be aware of the shortcomings and to favor continued
cooperation with the West to gain the equipment and technology they need.
Western sanctions on military aid are likely to increase the army's distaste for
political interference, diplomats say.

The military's needs are now as obvious as ever, for the crackdown against the
democracy movement was the military's first big test since the Vietnam clashes,
and few people were impressed.

Said a Western diplomat here, ''Even aside from the killing, it wasn't a
performance to be proud of.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: People's Liberation Army soldiers taking a pledge of loyalty to the
Chinese Communist Party in Tiananmen Square in Beijing in July (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 967 words



THE PLACE IN FLOWERS WHERE POLLEN RESTS, by Paul West. (Collier/Macmillan,
$9.95.) After a descent into some of the worst white America has to offer - the
Los Angeles pornography industry and the war in Vietnam - a young Hopi Indian
returns to the center of his earth in the Arizona mesas. Last year our reviewer,
Thomas R. Edwards, called this ''a rich, often astonishing meditation upon how a
particular human culture can represent a source of 'otherness' - the imagination
itself - that persists even in a world that other modes of thought and desire
have made almost uninhabitable.''

A BRIGHT SHINING LIE: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam, by Neil Sheehan.
(Vintage, $12.95.) John Paul Vann was the one officer the correspondents
covering the Vietnam War felt they could trust. But in the end he, like the war
itself, turned out to be a carefully crafted deception. ''Immensely long,
enormously ambitious, told with an emotion that bursts through its pages, this
is an impressive achievement,'' Ronald Steel said in The Book Review last year.
''If there is one book that captures the Vietnam War in the sheer Homeric scale
of its passion and folly, this book is it.'' It won both a Pulitzer Prize and a
National Book Award.

BELIEVE THEM, by Mary Robison. (Collier/Macmillan, $7.95.) In one of these short
stories, a retarded girl and her siblings briefly take control of the house
while their parents are away. Last year our reviewer, Larry McCaffery,
complimented Mary Robison on ''her fascination with the grotesque and darkly
comic, her characterizations of quirky people possessing odd tics of speech and
behavior - in short, her intuitive feel for the surrealistic dimensions of
American life that lie barely concealed under the ordinary.''

GUMSHOE: Reflections in a Private Eye, by Josiah Thompson. (Fawcett Crest,
$4.95.) In this memoir, a Kierkegaard scholar tells how he suffered an
existential crisis and changed his life by becoming a private eye.
''Surveillance reminds him of the closing section of Sartre's 'Being and
Nothingness,' '' The Times's John Gross said last year. ''References to
Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger are all in a day's work.''

STORIES IN AN ALMOST CLASSICAL MODE, by Harold Brodkey. (Vintage, $12.95.) In
some very long stories with very long sentences, Harold Brodkey writes about the
relentlessness of suffering. ''The prose, then, is a prose of painful
abundance,'' Frank Kermode said here last year. ''He recollects in a sort of
poetic fury, nothing is too strained or too bizarre.''

''WHAT DO YOU CARE WHAT OTHER PEOPLE THINK?'': Further Adventures of a Curious
Character, by Richard P. Feynman with Ralph Leighton. (Bantam, $9.95.) Last year
our reviewer, James Gleick, said this sequel to ''Surely You're Joking, Mr.
Feynman'' shows that the physicist was ''not just a bongo-playing,
skirt-chasing, joke-telling prankster, but a man, always earnest and sometimes
troubled, who thought more deeply than most about the power and the limitations
of science.'' The book includes Feynman's experiences as a member of the
commission investigating the Challenger explosion.

MASCARA, by Ariel Dorfman. (Penguin, $7.95.) A man without a face uses
photography to steal the visages of others. This novel is ''an ominous fairy
tale, a literary horror story, a post-modern version of Jekyll and Hyde,''
Robert Atwan said here last year. ''But the book is also a parable of human
identity and paranoia engendered by authoritarian politics.''

UNDER A CRUEL STAR: A Life in Prague, 1941-1968, by Heda Margolius Kovaly.
Translated by Franci Epstein and Helen Epstein with the author. (Penguin,
$8.95.) A Czechoslovak Jew tells how she escaped from Auschwitz, only to suffer
later under Stalin's crushing of the Prague Spring. ''Mrs. Kovaly experienced
the two supreme horrors of what Hannah Arendt called this terrible century,''
Anthony Lewis said in The Times in 1986. ''But her book is not just a personal
memoir of inhumanity. In telling her story - simply, without self-pity - she
illuminates some general truths of human behavior.''

HOT SIBERIAN, by Gerald A. Browne. (Avon, $4.95.) In this thriller about an
international diamond caper involving the Soviet Union, ''the plot gets more and
more complicated, the pace wilder and wilder,'' Newgate Callendar said here
earlier this year. ''The beautifully written 'Hot Siberian' will keep you
entranced.''

THE BODY IN TIME, by Kenneth Jon Rose. (Wiley, $10.95.) Ticking in rhythms as
brief as milliseconds, as long as years, the human body is a carefully
synchronized machine, as the biologist Kenneth Jon Rose explains in this book.
Last year our reviewer, Iris Poliski, said its fascinating text was studded with
arresting bits of information ''like garlic slivers plugged into a roast.''

AN AMERICAN MEMORY, by Eric Larsen. (Anchor/Doubleday, $7.95.) A young man is
driven toward madness as he tries to understand his childhood on a remote
Minnesota farm with an austere Lutheran father. '' 'An American Memory' is as
much a prose poem as a novel,'' Dinitia Smith said here last year. Eric Larsen
has written it ''in language as sparse and wind-riven as the Midwest of his
imagination.''

ECHOES OF REVOLT: The Masses, 1911-1917, edited by William L. O'Neill.
(Elephant/Ivan R. Dee, $18.95.) In its day a little magazine called The Masses
was considered so radical that in 1917 the United States Post Office refused to
allow it in the mails. In 1966 our reviewer, Peter Lyon, said that capturing its
spirit in this anthology of writing, cover art and cartoons called for ''a kind
of psychic taxidermy.'' It is ''a splendid achievement, and we are all the
luckier to have this bonny reminder of the good old, golden days of American
radicalism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Neil Sheehan (Nancy Crampton)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 12, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 919 words




HALLOWEEN CONCERT

''Pipescreams,'' nasty sounds that may inadvertently emanate from the pipes of
an organ, is the title of a free concert of Halloween-inspired music by the
Hartford chapter of the American Guild of Organists. The word is also a takeoff
on ''Pipe Dreams,'' a nationally broadcast organ music program from Minnesota
Public Radio.

Six eminent church organists will participate: John Rose of Trinity College in
Hartford, Edward Clark of the First Church of Christ Congregational in
Farmington and a faculty member of Hartt School of Music, James Barry of St.
Paul's in Fairfield, James Biery of the Cathedral of St. Joseph in Hartford,
David Spicer of the First Church of Christ in Wethersfield and Donald Funk, who
is currently unaffiliated.

John Maldonaldo, a tenor with the Connecticut Opera, will perform selections
from ''The Phantom of the Opera''; other works on the program include
Saint-Saens' ''Danse Macabre,'' excerpts from Boellman's ''Suite Gothique'' and
music by Bach. The concert begins at 7 P.M. today in Trinity Church, 120
Sigourney Street, Hartford. The phone number is 527-8133.

CEMETERY TOURS

What better way to celebrate Halloween than a trip through a cemetery or two?
William N. Hosley Jr., curator of decorative arts at the Wadsworth Atheneum and
conservation manager of the Ancient Burying Ground in Hartford, will lead one of
two tours at 1:30 P.M. today through the Riverside Cemetery in Middletown, where
the oldest markers date to 1689. The Middlesex County Historical Society is the
sponsor of the tour.

Among the buried are two brothers, 9 and 16 years old, killed by a bolt of
lightning in 1739, an 11-year-old boy who died in 1778 of a smallpox
inoculation, a man named N. W. Cutler who died at the age of 100 in 1706, and
Sarah Bacon, buried in 1689 at the age of 31 with six of her children who died
before her. A slide presentation about Connecticut River Valley burying grounds
and stonecutters will be shown following the tour.

Those who wish to attend the free programs should meet in the parking lot of St.
John's Community Center, next to the rectory of St. John's Church at the north
end of Main Street. Details are at 346-0746.

The second tour, sponsored by the Connecticut Historical Society in Hartford, is
to be led by Mr. Hosley at noon Tuesday. It is called ''Back From the Dead: A
Halloween Tour of Hartford's Ancient Burying Ground,'' which is at the corner of
Main and Gold Streets. Mr. Hosley will discuss some incidents related to the
cemetery's history, including the local witchcraft trials of 1662-63. The
meeting place is the Gold Street entrance of the cemetery, and admission is $3.
Information is at 236-5621.

FAREWELL TO ADOLESCENCE

''Late Summer Blues,'' a winner at the Jerusalem Film Festival of 1987, and an
entry in the Toronto and Montreal festivals of the same year, will be screened
at 8 P.M. Thursday at the State Cinema, 990 Hope Street in Stamford.

Presented by the United Jewish Federation of Stamford, the film follows seven
18-year-old men during the summer after final exams and before conscription into
the Israeli Army and war with Egypt. The film was praised for the sensitive,
often funny handling of a universal theme - the eve of violent manhood.
Information about the free program is at 322-6935.

MUSICAL SERPENT

The serpent, a musical instrument invented in France around 1590, has been
supplanted in professional musical circles by the tuba, but it survives in
European village churches and town bands, and in the London Serpent Trio, a
group of Englishmen who haul the snakelike, unwieldy instruments around the
world to the delight of their audiences. They will appear for a return
engagement at the Yale Collection of Musical Instruments, 15 Hillhouse Avene, at
3 o'clock this afternoon.

Christopher Monk, Alan Lumsden and Andrew van der Beck bring out the surpisingly
delicate nuances of the serpent, first used to accompany plainsong and later
moved into court orchestras and theaters. Their dry humor leverages their
performance into a theatrical as well as musical experience. Tickets cost $10,
students and the elderly $5. Call 432-0825.

VIETNAM-ERA DRAMA

Steve Metcalfe's ''Strange Snow'' is the opening production of the second season
of Stamford Theater Works, which is operating out of the Sacred Heart Academy
Center for the Performing Arts, 200 Strawberry Hill Avenue. The play - opening
Thursday with performances through Nov. 12 - was commissioned by the Manhattan
Theater Club and first presented there in 1982, before the Vietnam War and those
who fought it became a hot subject for stage and screen.

The central character is a high school football star and Vietnam veteran who
cannot dispel the guilt of his cowardly behavior as a soldier. He becomes an
alcoholic and accepts his sister's mothering without regard for her looming
spinsterhood. A visiting army buddy becomes romantically involved with the
sister, heightening and finally resolving the dilemma.

Mr. Metcalfe, a playwright who lives in Connecticut, also wrote the screenplay
for ''Jacknife'' with Robert De Niro, which is based on the play, and
''Cousins.'' Performances of ''Strange Snow'' are at 8 P.M. Tuesday to Saturday,
7 P.M. Sunday, with matinees at 4 P.M. Saturday and 2 P.M. Sunday. Tickets are
$12, $13.50 and $15. A preview performance at 8 P.M. Wednesday costs $11.
Student and elderly discounts are available. More information is at 359-4414.
$90ELEANOR CHARLES

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Philadelphia Journal;
Patrolling Mean Streets To Bestow a Blessing

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 26


Sgt. Gerald F. Weigand is driving his cruiser up one block and down another,
crisscrossing Police District 3 on a foggy Friday night in South Philadelphia.
He is drinking soda, chain-smoking Marlboros, scanning the streets.

With him is the Rev. Donato P. Silveri, a Roman Catholic who spent much of the
day blessing parishioners' homes. He is on the edge of his seat; suddenly
Sergeant Weigand may flip on his flashing roof lights, hit the gas and head into
the unknown.

''This takes me back to when I was in Vietnam,'' says Father Silveri, an Army
chaplain for 14 years who is the pastor of St. Mary Magdalene De Pazzi Church.

He is one of 352 priests, ministers and rabbis in Philadelphia's Police-Clergy
Program. Like similar programs in a quarter of the nation's 17,000 police
departments, the one here is meant to improve relations between the police and
the community by letting the clergy take part in police work.

The police need all the help they can get in Philadelphia, with its drug problem
and attendant crime. To join the program, members of the clergy undergo a two-
to three-day orientation and sign a waiver relieving the city of liability for
injury.

The clergy members ride around with officers on patrol, and that, by itself, is
believed to soften the police image in some neighborhoods. The presence of a man
or a woman in a clerical collar can help the officer resolve a domestic dispute
or street quarrel, but the clergy member takes no active role unless invited,
says the Rev. Maurice M. Hughes Sr., a police officer who coordinates the
program. He is an Episcopal priest.

The clergy are on call for emergencies like talking people out of suicide or
helping ease racial tensions, or cases that may bring police brutality charges.

Not all officers welcome the help. Some in North Philadelphia complained to
their union in the summer after an evangelist made them bow their heads, hold
hands and say a prayer at roll-call. ''It was all very wacky,'' an officer was
quoted as saying in The Inquirer.

''If I want my religious thing, I'll do it on my own,'' another said. The union,
the Fraternal Order of Police, intervened and the roll-call remarks by the
clergy member are restricted to name, title and church (or temple).

Sergeant Weigand's radio crackles with static and descriptions of suspects.
''It's a large game of tag with the drug traffickers,'' he says. ''They see us
coming a lot sooner than we see them. The more we know about the community
through Father Silveri, the more chance we have of tagging someone.''

Father Silveri waves at parishioners clustered outside an Italian restaurant; he
then crosses his wrists, pretending he is handcuffed.

''In a sense, I'm out visiting my people,'' he says. ''You can give all the
sermons you want about how people should try make this a better community, but
how can I convince my people to volunteer if I'm not willing to?''

Sergeant Weigand turns on his roof lights and makes a tow truck pull over to
check the driver's license. ''It's a good way to steal cars around here,'' he
explains as he gets out of the cruiser. The truck driver has an expired license
and gets a ticket.

The roof lights go on again. Sergeant Weigand chases down a van that has
sideswiped a parked car. He jumps out, club swinging, and in seconds has the
aggressive young driver against the side of the van. Sergeant Weigand presses
his club into the man's back and searches for weapons.

''They never know what's going to happen in something like this,'' says Father
Silveri. ''It could be drugs or anything.'' Nothing is turned up, and Sergeant
Weigand leaves the fender-bender case for another officer to write up.

''I understand why they have to retire after 20 years,'' Father Silveri says
later. ''Look at the adrenalin that goes through them. This job is a roller
coaster. But to tell you the truth, I find it relaxing. It adds a little
excitement in my life and breaks up the routine. I must have blessed 35 or 40
homes today.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On Front Line of Drug War, U.S.-Built Base Lags in Peru

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words

DATELINE: SANTA LUCIA BASE, Peru, Oct. 26


The sandbagged bunkers and lookout towers of this American-built base rise in
the heart of a broad valley with the greatest concentration of coca plants in
the world, roamed by heavily armed drug traffickers and leftist guerrillas.

It is the wildest frontier in the drug war and United States officials say there
is no more dangerous assignment for American narcotics agents.

Yet seven weeks after American agents and pilots began operating out of the
base, construction is still under way, with many security measures still to be
installed.

''To be fully operational, with everything we want to see at the base, it will
be at least another six months,'' an American official said.

Biggest Grower of Coca

Peru grows 65 percent of the world's coca, from which cocaine is extracted, and
more than half of it comes from a quiltwork of plots of pale green bushes
scattered across the roughly 3,000 square miles of the Huallaga Valley.

Anti-drug operations were suspended in the valley last February when American
pilots and Peruvian forces came under increasing gunfire. Work then began on
this base, the keystone of United States' hopes to stop the flow of cocaine at
the source.

On Sept. 5, President Bush announced a new anti-drug plan, allocating $2 billion
over five years for Peru and the two other leading cocaine-producing countries -
Bolivia, where 25 percent of the world's coca is grown, and Colombia, where 80
percent of the cocaine reaching the United States is refined.

Three days later, in what some American officials in Peru say was a coincidence,
the base went into action, with teams of Americans and Peruvians setting out in
Huey helicopters, the workhorse of the Vietnam War, to attack field laboratories
and dirt airstrips.

''The United States Government had initiated an all-out campaign to stop
narcotics,'' an American official said. ''We would have looked like fools if we
had remained shut down. Bolivia and Colombia were doing something. Peru had to
do something.''

Supplies Come by Air

The base, designed by two former Special Forces officers, looks like something
lifted out of the Vietnam of the 1960's. At an estimated final cost of $3
million, it is the United States' biggest and most expensive field installation
in the growing drug war, the launch pad and temporary home of 25 to 30 of the
130 or so Americans on anti-narcotics duty in Peru and of about 450 Peruvian
police officers and civilian eradication workers who are now relegated to
construction chores.

The surrounding roads are considered unsafe and men and supplies are shuttled in
by air, mainly from Lima, the capital, 270 miles to the southwest across the
snowcapped mountains.

Still to be added, the American official said, are a network of powerul
spotlights, more fencing and a moat along one side of the 4,500-foot gravel
runway. The runway is going to be paved with cement, and American drug agents,
pilots and mechanics, now living in tents, are to be moved away from the single
wire fence at the perimeter to prefabricated fiberglass quarters near the center
of the base.

None of the new money announced by Mr. Bush has yet reached Peru and so far the
Americans and Peruvians here have been waging a tiny campaign, with a handful of
helicopters, that officials of both countries say has had no measureable impact.


'Game of Cat and Mouse'

In seven weeks the Americans and Peruvians have destroyed about 20 laboratories
and dynamited a dozen airstrips.

The Americans and Peruvians say that there are hundreds if not thousands of
laboratories in the valley and that peasants paid by drug traffickers quickly
fill holes in the airstrips.

''This is a game of cat and mouse,'' said Maj. Jose Villar Amiel, the senior
Peruvian police officer here. ''When you destroy one thing, they build
another.''

Violence in the valley has grown in the last two years as guerrillas of the
Maoist Shinning Path have formed an alliance with the traffickers and the more
than 200,000 coca-growing farmers and their families.

Trying to win support for their drive to seize power, the guerrillas have
provided protection for the growers and negotiated higher prices for their crops
from traffickers. To help the traffickers get the raw materials they need, the
guerrillas encourage the farmers to grow more coca. They also provide security
for smugglers' planes at airfields. Collecting taxes and fees from both groups,
they raise as much as $30 million a year to finance their insurgency, American
and Peruvian official estimate.

Guerrillas Kill Officials

Although never very extensive, the eradication of coca plants had been one of
the United States' primary measures of progress in the anti-drug campaign in
Peru. Eradication, which was also suspended in February, has not been resumed
and Peruvian officials have been expressing grave reservations as the Shining
Path has become more menacing, concentrating in recent weeks on the
assassination of mayors and other officials in an effort to disrupt municipal
elections in November and voting for a President in April.

Although defenses are still being strengthened, one American official said he
felt the base, which sprawls over 100 acres along the broad, muddy Huallaga
River, was ''very secure.''

In a response to a comment by a visitor that several points in the perimeter
appeared vulnerable to attack, the official snapped, ''Any place in this country
is vulnerable.''

''I feel more secure in Santa Lucia than in Lima,'' he said. ''At the base I
don't have to worry about car bombs and kidnapping, people coming to my
apartment and shooting me up or some one throwing a stick of dynamite from a
passing car,'' he said.

More than 12,000 people have died since the Shining Path started its offensive
nine years ago. The guerrillas have attacked some lightly defended police posts
with up to 200 men. But Americans and Peruvians in charge of security here say
the guerrillas have no heavy weapons and are unlikely to attempt a frontal
asssault on the base.

The Valley From the Air

''They always look for soft targets,'' an American said. ''They're not going to
go against this base. They'd take tremendous losses. Look at what they've done
in the past: ambush, ambush, ambush. They've not going to go up against a hard
target like this.''

A flight over the valley in a helicopter gave a sense of the enormousness of the
coca crop and the difficulty of halting cocaine production.

As the helicopter skimmed the valley at several thousand feet, individual coca
plots caught the eye like lime-colored pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, interspersed
among clumps of jungle, palm groves and food crops, stretching to the horizon,
dappling hillsides and brightening steep ravines. Plumes of blue smoke rose in
the hot, humid air and mushroomed over the valley in a flat, thin haze.

An American anti-narcotics agent, armed with a stubby automatic rifle, a pistol,
a hunting knife and 400 rounds of ammunition, shouted above the clatter and roar
of the helicopter.

''Where you see fires burning,'' he said, ''that's where they're going to plant
coke.''

'Life Goes On'

The helicopter pirouetted in tight circles just above the treetops as the agent
pointed out the remains of a destroyed laboratory, flashes of a green-painted
superstructure barely visible in the jungle.

Moments later, the helicopter shot over what looked like a thin green line on
the valley floor. ''That's an airfield,'' the agent said. ''We haven't hit that
one in about three weeks. You can only do so many things.''

Back on the ground, the American agent shrugged at the suggestion of danger.

''I believe most of us think there's a chance of getting killed in the streets
of New York,'' he said. ''You don't think about it here. Life goes on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Peru (pg. A1); photo of a soldier patroling the perimeter of the
American-built Santa Lucia Base in Peru (NYT/Esly Salinas) (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 923 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-17

Soviet price increases were called for on cigarettes, beer and food delicacies.
Officials said prices will be set by the market on some other products next
year.    Page A1



Hundreds of protesters march on K.G.B. prison fortress    A16


Fewer rifts in U.S.-Soviet forum    A17



300,000 East Germans marched on Leipzig's old center in what has become a weekly
ritual. Backing a new opposition group, the crowd chanted ''Legalize New
Forum!''    A17



Bush sending advisers to Poland    A14


Suwalki journal: In Poland's hog picture, a hopeful spot    A4



Palestinians are tied to a bombing of the Pan Am Flight over Lockerbie, Scotland
in December 1988, investigators say. The authorities cite new evidence and
testimony.    A1



Jerusalem sentences Palestinian to life in deaths of 16 Jews    A8



A front-line U.S. base in the drug war sits in the Huallaga Valley of Peru,
looking like something lifted out of the Vietnam of the 1960's. From there, Huey
helicopters attack field laboratories and dirt airstrips.    A1

Ortega seems to retreat further from war threat    A11



Residents of a South African village have been beaten and detained and some of
their homes have been demolished over their resistance to joining a tribal
homeland.    A6



A plan to cut poison-gas stockpiles in the United States and Soviet Union, which
was proposed by President Bush last month, has run into political and
technological obstacles.    A13



The Indian opposition is likely to win in coming elections, says Vishwanath
Pratap Singh, the opposition leader. He said he would like to involve
disadvantaged citizens in fashioning solutions to domestic problems.    A10



Nixon tells China to shun ''backwater of oppression''    A3



News analysis: The Spanish election on Sunday signaled political stability and
gave Prime Minister Gonzalez a mandate to continue modernizing the economy in
preparation for 1992.    A3



U.N. funds sought by President again facing cuts in Congress    A12



NATIONAL    A18-25, D23

G.O.P. women for abortion rights see an opportunity, in the political turbulence
after a recent Supreme Court decision, to shift the Republican Party's position
on abortion.    A1



Washington Talk: President Bush appears to be using his kind and tough sides
strategically, cultivating an above-the-fray image while keeping the Democrats
off balance.    A20



Bush shuns Dole on gas tax    A25



A business ledger on migrant labor,discovered by officials, records sales of
wine, tobacco and drugs, showing how debt and addiction can be shackles in a new
kind of slavery.    A1



A major product-liability ruling against makers of the drug DES was backed by
the Supreme Court.    D23



The rising number of babies born in the U.S. is nearing four million annually.
Until recently, demographers thought that that level, not reached since the
1950's, was out of reach until well into the 21st century.    A18



To relieve prison overcrowding in Camp Hill, Pa., caused by destruction of
cellblocks in rioting last week, Federal prisons have agreed to accept as many
as 800 state inmates.    D23



Rules on electronic money transfers among banks being are reviewed by the
Government. Reports show that drug traffickers have laundered billions though
such systems.    D1



The quake terrified Cambodians in San Francisco, since many did not know until
recently what earthquakes were. ''We don't live on top of each other in
Cambodia,'' one man said. ''I always thought it was unsafe.''    A18



Pilot who crashed was making his first carrier landing    D23


Dodge City journal: Soviets find friends in famous cow town    A18



REGIONAL    B1-7, B9

Control of the Rockefeller Group, owner of Rockefeller Center, Radio City Music
Hall and other mid-Manhattan buildings, has been sold to the Mitsubishi Estate
Company of Tokyo, Rockefeller Group said.    A1



Uncertainty about who will vote in the New York City election for mayor next
week could affect the strategy of both campaigns and skew their vote-pulling
operations.    B1



Jackson sees daily ''crucifixion'' of Dinkins    B7


The stump speeches of Dinkins and Giuliani    B6



Jim Courter has not gotten much aid from Thomas Kean. The G.O.P. Governor
differs with Mr. Courter on many issues, including the death penalty, insurance
and abortion.    B1



Courter remains optimistic, despite poor showing in polls    B2



Residents have hired social workers to aid homeless people in the area of their
street association, from Third Avenue to Seventh Avenue and 51st Street to 55th
Street.    B1



Rejecting an insanity defense, a jury convicted a homeless man of robbing,
raping and murdering Dr. Kathryn Hinnant in the Bellevue Hospital Center on Jan.
7.    B1



Deer are threatening Fire Island by undermining its ecosystem, some biologists
say. Each deer in the herd of 400 to 600 consumes five to seven pounds of
greenery a day.    B4



A school official who tape-recorded board members to expose corruption has
remained tough through the ordeal. But he has had trouble eating and sleeping.
    B7



Reports of needle attacks on the West Side total 22    B6


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Socialist About to Win Liberal Isle in Rural Sea

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: ITHACA, N.Y.


When Benjamin Nichols is on the campaign trail in his quest to become the next
mayor here, he talks about issues rarely discussed in central New York: taxing
developers to pay for affordable housing, the possibility of rent control and
legislation that would enable gay couples to register as domestic partners.

In nearby towns, the proposals might be causes for alarm. However, in Ithaca
most people barely blink. Even the fact that Mr. Nichols, 69 years old, is a
member of the Democratic Socialists of America is taken in stride.

Ithaca, known for its scenic gorges and Cornell University, is a liberal city.
The Common Council has voted to support a freeze on nuclear activities and to
offer sanctuary to Central American refugees. George McGovern carried Ithaca in
the 1972 Presidential election, as did the Rev. Jesse Jackson in the 1988
Democratic primary.

''It's clearly an island of liberal-left feeling in a sea of conservatism,''
said the local Assemblyman, Martin Luster.

Loss by 3-Term Mayor

The chairwoman of the Tompkins County Democratic Party, Irene Stein, said the
politics had been moving to the left since the early 1970's, when growing
numbers of Cornell students settled here after graduation. Democrats first
outnumbered Republicans in 1972; the ratio is now 2 to 1. Republicans still are
in the majority in most rural areas.

In the primary in September, Mr. Nichols defeated a three-term mayor, John
Gutenberger, a moderate whose strength was in bringing groups together, but who
was attacked as being too accommodating to developers and as not being strongly
enough on the side of union workers fighting Cornell.

Mr. Nichols faces a Republican lawyer, Jean Cookingham, but his election is
almost assured in the overwhelmingly Democratic city.

Mr. Gutenberger had encouraged development, mainly in the Collegetown area, near
Cornell. Apartment complexes have been built, including one by the family of Mr.
Gutenberger's wife. Some residents said the buildings had revitalized the area.
Others complained about increasing traffic and the destruction of neighborhoods.


Chorus of Complaints

''The scale is no longer what I would call a human scale,'' said Dan Hoffman, an
alderman who ran against Mr. Gutenberger in 1987 and lost by fewer than 50
votes.

Others complained about a lack of affordable housing and the low quality of
jobs. Although Tompkins consistently has the lowest unemployment rate in the
state, many jobs are in low-paying service industries.

A coalition of groups joined to put up a candidate against Mr. Gutenberger.
Environmental groups and many unions united. Blacks, who have virtually no
representation in the city's government, worked hard to elect Mr. Nichols, as
did homosexuals.

Mr. Nichols is rooted in the American left. He was born on Staten Island in 1920
to parents who were Communist Party members, and he has spent much of his life
in politics. He helped his parents organize a union, supported the Spanish
Loyalists, protested Southern segregation, marched aganst the Vietnam War and
supported Mr. Jackson for President.

Town-Gown Relations

''He's a walking history of progressive movements in this century,'' said Al
Davidoff, president of a local of the United Automobile Workers and Mr.
Nichols's campaign coordinator.

Mr. Nichols is a World War II Army veteran. Before retiring, he was a professor
of electrical engineerng at Cornell for 40 years. In 1987, Mr. Nichols was
elected to the Common Council. He said affordable housing and new jobs would be
high on his agenda, as well as having Cornell pay for its share of services.

''Cornell and Ithaca are intertwined,'' Mr. Nichols said. ''It goes without
saying Ithaca wouldn't be anything like it is without Cornell. Cornell as an
institution does not feel quite the same way about Ithaca.''

Mr. Nichols, who called for an examination of rental housing, said he also
wanted to re-examine zoning and increase taxes on developers.

''Any candidate that promotes laws that would interfere with private property,
promotes big government and reduces freedom is not in the interest of people who
improve the economy,'' the president of the Tompkins Chamber of Commerce, Girard
Oberrender Jr., said Mr. Nichols said, however, that at heart he was a
pragmatist.

Some Democrats have formed a Democrats for Cookingham group. In general,
however, the criticism of Mr. Nichols has been muted. A few letters to the
editor in newspapers expressed concern about his politics, but some people have
said they believe governing will force Mr. Nichols to compromise.

Mr. Nichols's backers hope to empower groups that are removed from politics.
''We have a wonderful opportunity,'' Mr. Davidoff said, ''to elect someone who
is an activist, a champion, someone who doesn't say the status quo needs
tinkering with, but says, 'We need to change the priorities.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 2, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Asylum for Vietnamese Refugee

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 289 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I., Nov. 1


A Vietnamese man who escaped his homeland by riding for two days on the rudder
housing of a Cypriot tanker that docked here Monday has been granted temporary
asylum in the United States.

The Immigration and Naturalization Service will let the man, Nguyen Van Tuan, 23
years old, stay for one year, a spokesman for Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode
Island said Tuesday. Then it will decide whether to let him apply for permanent
residenc.

The immigration service found that Mr. Nguyen had a well-founded fear of
persecution if he returned to his homeland, said Carl Krueger, a lawyer from the
International Institute of Rhode Island, a private agency that handles
immigration cases.

Clutched a Rope

Mr. Nguyen was found crouching on a makeshift plywood seat on the rudder
housing, about four feet above the water, during a lifeboat drill in the South
China Sea on Aug. 30, said Jerzy Kolasinski, the captain of the tanker. The ship
had left Ho Chi Minh City two days earlier.

Captain Kolasinski said that Mr. Nguyen had clutched a rope hanging from the
ship and that he survived only because the tanker was empty, keeping the rudder
housing above sea level.

Speaking softly through a translator at a news conference Tuesday, Mr. Nguyen
said his family was being watched by the Government in Vietnam. ''He didn't know
where the vessel would go,'' said the translator, Joseph R. Le.

Mr. Nguyen said his parents and four siblings knew that he was leaving, but he
said they had not been told that he is alive. He said he would write them. For
now, he will live with Mr. Le in Woonsocket, which has a large Vietnamese
community. Mr. Le said the immigrant had already received three offers of jobs
and two of room and board.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Vietnamese refugee (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Campaign Profile;
Warily, Giuliani Learns To Embrace the Voters

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2272 words


A white-haired woman put on a scratchy recording of ''New York, New York'' at a
Brooklyn community center the other day and claimed the first dance with Rudolph
W. Giuliani, gently nudging another woman aside.

Mr. Giuliani's aides were beaming as the Republican-Liberal mayoral candidate
did a couple of spins with the woman, a television news crew following every
step.

It was the kind of image that the campaign has been trying to convey for months
with mixed results.

Mr. Giuliani and his aides have had no trouble portraying him as a hard-nosed,
law-and-order former Federal prosecutor whose battle cry is crime, crime, crime.
But presenting him as a warm, compassionate man has been a harder task.

Thumbs-Up Sign

For months Mr. Giuliani, who is 45 years old, came across as an arm's-length
candidate, shaking hands stiffly and rarely shedding his suit jacket.

It was his first bid for elective office, and he was basing it largely on the
reputation he built in five and a half years as United States Attorney in
Manhattan, as a crime fighter who captured crooks and headlines. The image gave
his campaign its initial momentum, but it did nothing to soften the public's
perception of him.

Over the last few weeks, however, he has seemed more relaxed, becoming more
generous with his smile. He has been flashing an occasional thumbs-up sign and
increasingly taking off his coat.

His campaign aides say he is shy, not cold. He can be a real cutup at parties,
they say. He has been known to sit around with friends and exchange dialogue
from ''The Godfather,'' the bloody gangster epic he confesses to have seen six
or seven times. Asked to quote a line from the movie, Mr. Giuliani said: ''Keep
the cannoli. Drop the gun.''

But his favorite movie is ''It's a Wonderful Life,'' the Christmas classic about
small-town virtues. He has seen the film at least 30 times.

Jeans and a Movie

To escape the pressures of the campaign in September, Mr. Giuliani and his wife,
Donna Hanover, a television news anchor at WPIX, put on their jeans and slipped
away to see ''When Harry Met Sally.''

''First, we had hot dogs at Nathan's,'' said Ms. Hanover, who is on maternity
leave from her job. ''It was a wonderful date. Just like the old days.''

''I really enjoy movies,'' Mr. Giuliani said in a separate interview. ''One of
the things we've been deprived of during the campaign is the opportunity to see
many movies.''

Mr. Giuliani mixed business with pleasure when he and a campaign aide attended a
late-night showing of ''Do the Right Thing,'' Spike Lee's film about racial
tension and misunderstanding.

He said he was drawn to the film by news articles suggesting that the movie's
portrayal of New York as a racially tense city could become a campaign issue.

''It did what a work of art is supposed to do,'' he said. ''It expanded your
thinking. You leave it saying you can have two people look at the same world and
see a different world.''

Mr. Giuliani's spare time is spent with his family. During the campaign he has
had to manufacture spare time. He has often taken his son, Andrew, 3 1/2, to
campaign events.

A few days before the primary in September, his three-car caravan was rushing
along a Brooklyn highway when his car pulled off the road so Andrew could play
in a park.

Mr. Giuliani was late for his next event.

Last Sunday, Mr. Giuliani had responded to press questions with an edge in his
voice, sharp as a knife.

Minutes later, Mr. Giuliani's voice turned soft and sweet as he lifted Andrew,
who was tired and crying, onto his lap and rocked him to sleep.

''You'll feel better,'' Mr. Giuliani crooned, stroking the boy's blond hair,
''as soon as you take a nap.'' A Taste for Opera, Sports and Raisin Bran Mr.
Giuliani said he likes to read biographies. Of particular interest, he said, was
''The Power Broker,'' Robert A. Caro's work about Robert Moses, the urban
planner.

He is also an opera fan. He has 150 opera recordings, and Verdi is one of his
favorite composers. Opera, he said, ''gives you a wonderful feeling, a real
sense of having captured the universe.''

He also loves to watch the football Giants on Sunday afternoons, although his
wife said she was the bigger fan.

''I'm the one who says 'The football game is about to start,' '' she said. ''I'm
the one sitting in front of the television first.''

To relax, Mr. Giuliani sometimes drives his Cadillac Seville through the Hudson
Valley, classical music filling the car.

But in crisscrossing the city during the campaign he has had to abandon many of
these pastimes.

Typically, he is too busy making a speech or shaking hands to have much time to
eat. So at the end of a long day of campaigning, often around midnight, Mr.
Giuliani has a heaping bowl of raisin bran and a Klondike ice cream bar.

''Everybody seems to think Rudy takes himself so seriously,'' Ms. Hanover said.
''He doesn't. He takes his integrity seriously. Rudy doesn't tell jokes, but
he's very funny. He can see the humor in everyday situations. He has a bemused
way of looking at the world.''

In his campaign commercials, Mr. Giuliani paints himself as a take-charge guy.
The image is not purely pre-Election Day hype. When it came to courting Ms.
Hanover, his second wife, Mr. Giuliani was a whirlwind.

''I fell pretty much immediately in love with Donna,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''It
took her a little longer, a few weeks, I think.''

Six weeks after meeting her on a blind date in Miami in 1982, Mr. Giuliani
proposed marriage at Disney World. They were married in 1984 and in addition to
Andrew, they have a baby daughter, Caroline. His first marriage, to a second
cousin, ended in divorce after 14 years. Mr. Giuliani had the marriage annulled
so he could remarry in the Roman Catholic church.

He may be a political novice, but Mr. Giuliani has had plenty of experience in
front of news cameras; his largest triumphs as United States Attorney were
announced at well-attended news conferences.

A graduate of New York University Law School, Mr. Giuliani has held high posts
in the Justice Department in both the Ford and Reagan Administrations.

As a high-ranking department official, he was the main defender of its policy of
detaining illegal Haitian immigrants. The administration maintained that the
Haitians were not political refugees, as they contended, but that they had come
to the United States only to better themselves economically. Human rights groups
criticized the detention camps, saying many internees were political refugees,
fleeing a repressive dictatorship.

In another controversial Justice Department matter, Mr. Giuliani settled a
criminal case that involved bribery charges against executives of the McDonnell
Douglas Corporation and that had been inherited from the Carter Administration.
Mr. Giuliani dropped the charges, calling them unfair.

In 1983, he was appointed the United States Attorney for the Southern District
of New York.

His office prosecuted important tax cases, including one against an
international commodities broker, Marc Rich. It was said to be the largest tax
case ever.

He also went after corrupt public officials. Two prominent Bronx Democrats,
former Representative Mario Biaggi and former Borough President Stanley M.
Friedman, were convicted in a bribery scheme.

Typically, Mr. Giuliani announced indictments to packed news conferences and
irritated some other law-enforcement officials who said he was showing off for
the cameras.

The camera also captured several setbacks that the aggressive Federal prosecutor
suffered during his tenure. The divorce-fixing prosecution of Bess Myerson for
supposedly trying to influence a State Supreme Court Justice ended in an
acquittal. Not long after that, a Federal judge ruled that the Government had
failed to prove Mr. Giuliani's charge that the Genovese crime family controlled
the main union at the Fulton Fish Market He resigned last January and soon
joined the law firm of White and Case. Then last spring, he announced he was
running for mayor. He is on an unpaid leave of absence from the law firm, which
paid him $260,000 for four months' work.

Mr. Giuliani is the Republican Party's best hope of capturing City Hall in more
than 20 years. An East Sider In Discount Suits Until he went to work for White
and Case, Mr. Giuliani earned less than $80,000 a year during most of his tenure
as United States Attorney.

He has not bought a new suit in more than a year. When he does buy suits it is
at BFO, a discount store. They are often either gray or dark blue. His ties are
typically red.

''He's not a vain person at all,'' Ms. Hanover said. ''His clothes are
functional. He's forever getting some kind of sauce on his red ties. But it's
only the red ties. We haven't figured out why.''

The Giulianis live in a two-bedroom cooperative apartment on East 86th Street, a
short walk from Gracie Mansion, the mayor's official residence.

Mr. Giuliani's 80-year-old mother lives next door, in an apartment he purchased.
Mr. Giuliani said he had hoped to knock down a wall between the two apartments
but the campaign delayed his plans.

Until the campaign, his taste in food was ''pretty basic:'' steak hamburgers
prepared medium rare, raisin bran, Klondike bars and ''all kinds of pasta.''

While campaigning, especially during the summer for the Republican primary, Mr.
Giuliani sometimes attended a half-dozen ethnic festivals in a day.

''I would end up eating four or five different kinds of food,'' he said. ''I
really enjoyed it.'' A Lifelong Love Found in a Record Bin Mr. Giuliani has been
in love with opera since he was 12 or 13 years old. One day he was searching the
record bins of a department store on Long Island for a few rock-and-roll 45's.
As he was leaving he noticed a sale bin.

The first thing he saw was a recording of ''Julius Caesar,'' by Handel. Mr.
Giuliani was enrolled in a classical music class at school, so he decided to buy
the recording but did not think he would like it much. The price was right,
though, 99 cents.

He put the record on the stereo and ''almost immediately'' he was hooked. He
eventually gave away several boxes of rock-and-roll records and replaced them
with operas and classical music.

He still has that first 99-cent record.

''Rudy knows in-depth the story lines of all the operas,'' Ms. Hanover said.
''My reservation about opera is they always have a sad ending.''

There is one popular musician he does enjoy. For the last few years, the
Giulianis have celebrated the New Year, dancing alone in their living room to
the recorded voice of Frank Sinatra, perhaps after attending a small dinner
party near their home.

As they glide by the Christmas tree, ''New York, New York,'' ''Strangers in the
Night'' and ''I Did it My Way'' float through the room.

As a teen-ager and young man, Mr. Giuliani greatly admired John F. and Robert F.
Kennedy. He worked for the Democratic Party on Long Island, where his family
moved from Brooklyn when he was 7, and was a registered Democrat for years.

One of his oldest friends, Peter J. Powers, who is now Mr. Giuliani's campaign
manager, said the young Giuliani was a passionate Democrat. The men first met at
Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School, an all-boys Catholic school in Brooklyn.

They also attended Manhattan College in the Bronx and law school at New York
University together. After law school, during the Vietnam War, Mr. Giuliani went
on to become a clerk for a Federal judge and received a military deferment.

''We always talked about politics,'' Mr. Powers said. ''He was a liberal
Democrat, and I was a conservative Republican. Man, would we fight. People used
to pass us and ask, 'How can you guys be friends after you argue like that?' ''

''It was never personal,'' he added. ''We just had a difference of opinion. I'm
a little bit more moderate. We both moved a little bit. We're a lot closer now
than we were then. I guess we had an influence on each other.''

Mr. Giuliani was enrolled as a Democrat until 1973, when he became an
independent partly out of disappointment with the direction of the party under
George S. McGovern the year before. He joined the Republican Party in 1980. At
the Age of 3, A Lesson About Life Mr. Giuliani has a bit of a temper. As United
States Attorney, he was known to be a demanding boss who was not relucant about
showing his displeasure.

''If somebody makes a mistake, it never gets me angry,'' he said. ''It only gets
me angry if it's a purposeful mistake, meaning somebody who could have done
better and didn't or keeps making the same mistake over and over again.''

''I get angry at myself,'' Mr. Giuliani sighed, ''particularly the second time.
I try to demand good performance out of myself, although not perfection. I know
you make mistakes''

Rudolph William Giuliani was born in 1944 in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn,
the only child of Helen and Harold Giuliani, who owned a bar in the
neighborhood.

When Mr. Giuliani was about 3 years old, his father, a dedicated Yankees fan,
bought his son a Yankees uniform and cap. Mr. Giuliani's mother dressed him in
the uniform and sent him out to play in Flatbush. He was pounced on by a group
of boys almost immediately. They were Dodger fans.

''They took the hat and threw it in the mud,'' Mr. Giuliani recalled. ''They
threw me in the mud, too, and probably whacked me around a little bit. I ran
upstairs and either my mother or father said, 'Well, now you're going to be a
Yankee fan.' ''

''So,'' he continued, ''I kept wearing that Yankee uniform, and I kept getting
thrown in the mud.''

He is still a Yankee fan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Rudolph W. Giuliani (NYT/Ruby Washington) (pgs. A1 & B5)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

After Sharp Debate, Senate Votes To Let North Collect His Pension

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 495 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 2


The Senate tonight agreed to a change in Federal law that would allow Oliver L.
North, a central figure in the Iran-contra affair who was a highly decorated
veteran of combat in Vietnam, to receive his Navy pension despite his conviction
for shredding Government documents.

Mr. North, a retired lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps, was convicted in
May on three counts arising from his actions as a White House national security
aide. He has been denied his pension of $23,000 a year under a 1974 law that
requires ''a person holding office under the United States'' to forfeit that
office if convicted of destroying Government documents.

In July, the General Accounting Office recommended that the Navy withhold the
pension because retired military officers are regarded as ''holding office.''
But a number of Senate Republicans have argued that this interpretation was
incorrect, and tonight the Senate voted, 78 to 17, to overturn it. The measure
now goes to the House.

Victory for Helms

It was sponsored by Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, who
originally sought to restore Mr. North's pension through a bill written for him
alone. But Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat who heads the
Judiciary Committee, argued that the Senate should make a change that would
apply to any retired officer convicted of destroying documents, not just Mr.
North. Mr. Helms accepted that change and modified his measure, winning the
support of a number of Democrats, including Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, who is
chairman of the Armed Services Committee.

In a testy debate before the vote, senators opposed to the change argued that
Mr. North had forfeited his right to the pension because of his conduct in the
Iran-contra affair. ''What I hear us saying is that we should lower the
standards for regular officers,'' said Senator Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat
who is a Vietnam veteran.

'Traitor'; 'Felon'; 'Fall Guy'

Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, called Mr. North ''a traitor to the
Constitution'' and likened him to Benedict Arnold. Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum,
Democrat of Ohio, complained that despite the effort to make it apply to retired
officers in general, the measure would always be known as ''the Ollie North
Pension Bill.''

Mr. Helms defended Mr. North, calling him ''a fellow who made some mistakes.''
Mr. Helms said Mr. North had earned his pension with brave service to his
country and had become ''the fall guy'' for higher officials in the Iran-contra
affair. ''I will go to my grave believing that he was acting with the full
knowledge of his superiors,'' he said.

Mr. Biden said that it was painful to vote for a change in the law to benefit
Mr. North, but that fairness required it. ''The soldier is not a hero; he's a
felon,'' he said. ''But even a felon deserves equal treatment under the law.''

As the debate ended, Mr. Helms waved the bill in the air and said, ''Ollie, this
one's for you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Candidates Strive to Widen Support As They Get Ready for First Debate

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1390 words


Rudolph W. Giuliani and David N. Dinkins sought yesterday to widen their appeal
to voters - Mr. Giuliani to women and Mr. Dinkins to veterans -as they prepared
for the first debate of the New York City mayoral campaign and broadcast new
television commercials.

The candidates also began gearing up to turn out their supporters in Tuesday's
election. The field operation of union members and grass-roots volunteers that
served Mr. Dinkins well in the Democratic primary will be supplemented this time
by the regular Democratic organizations. But party leaders expressed concern
that vote-pulling operations in some districts might produce as many votes for
Mr. Giuliani as for Mr. Dinkins.

Mr. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate; Mr. Dinkins, the Democratic
nominee, and Henry Hewes, a Republican running on the Right to Life Party line,
are to participate in two hour-long debates over the weekend that will be
televised live: at 7:30 P.M. tomorrow on WABC-TV, Channel 7, and at 11 A.M.
Sunday on WNBC-TV, Channel 4. Ronald S. Lauder, another Republican, is running a
nominal campaign as the Conservative Party candidate and has declined to
participate.

Assurance on Abortion Issue

Yesterday Mr. Giuliani, in a new television commercial and in an address to
1,400 women supporters, reaffirmed his support for ''a woman's right of choice''
about abortions. He pledged that as mayor he would continue to provide funds for
poor women who could not afford abortions.

In the commercial, Mr. Giuliani, the former Federal prosecutor in Manhattan,
says: ''You know my record on criminal justice. But I also have a commitment to
social justice.'' After reciting that record and making his abortion pledge, he
says, ''I want my baby daughter, Caroline, to grow up in a New York that's fair
to everyone.''

Mr. Dinkins meanwhile was endorsed by members of several veterans organizations
and had breakfast with Italian-American supporters, including Dr. Catherine La
Guardia, the granddaughter of Fiorello H. La Guardia, the Mayor whose fusion
mantle has been claimed by Mr. Giuliani. Dr. La Guardia said Mr. Giuliani had
made ''improper comparisons'' to her grandfather.

Mr. Dinkins also began broadcasting two new commercials, one of which quotes
from his newspaper endorsements. In the other, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo says of his
fellow Democrat, ''He's tough, but he's not mean.''

Endorsement by Shanker

Mr. Dinkins was endorsed yesterday by Albert Shanker, president of the American
Federation of Teachers, who headed the teachers union in New York City during
the school decentralization dispute two decades ago, in which two former Dinkins
campaign workers -Robert (Sonny) Carson and Jitu Weusi - clashed with the union.
Mr. Shanker said the candidate's ''entire public life has been devoted to the
opposition of all extremists.''

A poll released last night by The Daily News and WABC-TV was consistent with
earlier surveys that said Mr. Dinkins was maintaining a double-digit lead.

Among 413 likely voters surveyed Tuesday and Wednesday, Mr. Dinkins was favored
by 53 percent, while 39 percent were for Mr. Giuliani, 1 percent for Mr. Lauder
and 2 percent for others. Five percent said they were undecided. The poll
reports a margin of error of plus or minus 5.5 percentage points.

But both major party candidates agreed that the composition of the turnout on
Tuesday would determine the outcome. The Dinkins campaign is given the edge in a
field organization geared to turning out Democratic voters.

''We have an army, but obviously not an army that can compare with what Dinkins
can field,'' said Raymond B. Harding, the Liberal Party leader and a Giuliani
adviser.

Democrats Playing Cautious

A number of organization Democrats acknowledge, though, that most district
leaders are not used to generating votes in November elections in the heavily
Democratic city and are wary of conducting get-out-the-vote drives in other than
the progressive and predominantly black neighborhoods that constitute Mr.
Dinkins's base.

''You can't just plunge into Democratic areas,'' said Representative Thomas J.
Manton, the Queens Democratic leader. ''You have to be very careful.''

City Councilman Walter L. McCaffrey said he was mailing Dinkins leaflets to only
half of the 21,000 Democratic households in his district.

''If you don't think the district is going good for you, you do nothing at
all,'' said Assemblyman Anthony J. Genovesi, a district leader who represents a
predominantly Jewish community in Brooklyn.

Yesterday, in advance of tomorrow's debate, the two candidates nearly met at a
midtown Manhattan hotel, where Mr. Dinkins was addressing Italian-American
supporters and Mr. Giuliani was speaking to Hispanic business people.

Their debates will compete for audiences on television with ''Wheel of Fortune''
and ''Trauma of the City'' tomorrow night and with coverage of the New York City
Marathon and reruns of ''The Three Stooges'' on Sunday morning.

Warm Reception by Women

Mr. Giuliani was warmly received in the ballroom of the New York Hilton by about
1,400 women at a coalition breakfast, where he sought to put the question of his
position on abortion to rest.

''Like many Catholics and others in public life,'' he said, ''I have reconciled
my personal belief with my public responsibility.''

Mr. Giuliani cited a 1971 letter in which Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts and a Dinkins supporter, appeared to oppose legalization of
abortion on demand and a 1977 remark attributed to Mr. Jackson urging Congress
to reject public financing of abortions.

''We have all come to understand,'' Mr. Giuliani said, although his own
evolution on the issue occurred over a few recent months. Since he and Mr.
Dinkins now agree on abortion, he said, ''it's an irrelevant issue in this
campaign.''

Later Mr. Giuliani received a thunderous welcome at a combined center for the
elderly and for children in Great Kills, S.I., where he appeared with
Councilwoman Susan Molinari, the Council's minority leader and lone Republican.
He also visited a housing development in Rossville, S.I., near the site of a
planned 1,000-bed city jail.

Here Mr. Giuliani met Representative Guy V. Molinari, the Republican candidate
for Borough President, and repeated his opposition to building the jail there.
He said he was concerned about possible corruption in the selection and
acquisition of the site, but he would not say just where the jail should go. He
added that his opposition was not ''pandering to votes'' but ''an honest,
straight, gutsy decision.''

Dinkins Cool to Unity Propsal

Mr. Dinkins, after threatening Wednesday night to withdraw from the WABC debate
because of a Giuliani commercial that he deemed ''scurrilous,'' said he would
participate because ''the people ought not be penalized'' for Mr. Giuliani's
''misbehavior.''

The Democrat also reacted coolly to a proposal by William Fugazy, a Giuliani
supporter, to join Mr. Giuliani at a unity rally after the election.

''My Republican opponent is not at all behaving as though he has any interest in
unity in our city,'' Mr. Dinkins said.

At a City Hall news conference where Mr. Dinkins was endorsed by members of
several veterans organizations, speakers criticized Mr. Giuliani for not serving
in the Vietnam War and compared him to Vice President Dan Quayle, who was
accused of joining the National Guard to avoid combat duty. Mr. Dinkins
frequently mentions that he enlisted in the Marine Corps, although he did not
see combat. Mr. Giuliani received an occupational deferment while he was a law
clerk for a Federal judge.

''Most of us were not in a position to seek the sanctuary of power and influence
to avoid combat,'' said Michael Handy, a Vietnam veteran and a board member of
the Brooklyn-based Black Veterans for Social Justice.

Mr. Dinkins was warmly received at the Italian-American breakfast, where he
acknowledged the difficulty of winning Italian votes away from Mr. Giuliani, who
is an Italian-American.

As Mr. Dinkins left the breakfast meeting at the Sheraton Centre, he nearly ran
into Mr. Giuliani, who had addressed the Hispanic business group in the same
hotel. Just as the two candidates and their entourages were about to converge in
the same hallway, Mr. Giuliani left through a door.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David N. Dinkins (NYT/Chester Hingins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Grim Voices From Brazil

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 536 words


The Public Theater's documentary series Brazil Why, focusing on that country's
social conditions, begins today with Octavio Bezerra's horrifying, sincere and
very slippery vision of life among the underclass. ''An Avenue Called Brazil''
might have been even more forceful if it had been a true documentary instead of
an unlabeled mix of real-life scenes and re-enactments.

Early on, one old man says he remembers the major highway leading to Rio de
Janeiro when it was just a pasture. Today, he says, it is ''an avenue called
Brazil where life isn't worth a thing,'' and the camera assumes the bleak,
worn-down perspective shared by the avenue's people. There are scenes of
families who have been flooded out of their shacks, now crowded into tents at
relocation camps. Brothers aged 11 and 12 are interrogated by the police after
breaking into a house. Transvestite prostitutes talk about their choices of
risking AIDS or starving to death.

But the film is also laced with dramatic, violent action. It begins with a man
being hauled out of a van, chased into the woods and shot to death - a
presumably re-created scene based on the 17 violent and often drug-related
deaths that occur each day in the city. That statistic is offered by the
narrator, acting the part of a radio announcer who says, ''Good morning,
Brazil'' (with no apparent reference to Robin Williams's 'Good Morning,
Vietnam'') and goes on through the film offering background information about
the unbearable squalor, the drug deals in action, the people dancing to escape
the drudgery of their lives. Occasionally, the voice castigates the Government
in broad terms for its neglect.

This quasi-documentary approach raises more disturbing questions than the film
makers ever acknowledge. A young girl runs to her mother in tears and tells of
being raped; it's not likely the camera happened to be there at that moment. Did
the film makers ask a rape victim to re-enact that scene (adding another moral
twist to the problem)? Did they invent the scenario and ask the girl to act it
out? The film assumes such distinctions are unimportant. But the audience's
faith in the film makers is severely weakened by melodramatic touches, including
a re-enacted ''Miami Vice''-style drug war, with men shot down before our eyes.

The voices of the people of the avenue are undeniably powerful, as they describe
the horrors of living with sewage backing up into their drinking water, and tell
of buying guns for the neighborhood hoodlums, who protect them from drug lords
much more effectively than the police. ''An Avenue Called Brazil'' needlessly
deflects attention from these voices, which offer the most compelling evidence
for the film's opening assertion: ''Society sets up the crime, which the
criminal enacts.''

Drugs and Despair

AN AVENUE CALLED BRAZIL, directed and written by Octavio Bezerra; in Portuguese
with English subtitles and narration; director of photography, Miguel Rio
Branco; edited by Severino Dada; music by Bruno Nunes, Edson Maciel and Gil
Benjamim; produced by Mr. Bezerra and Uberto Molo; released by Skylight. At the
Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street. Running time: 85 minutes. This film has no
rating.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 4, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Memorial Honors the Victims of Racial Violence

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala., Nov. 1


In this city where Rosa Parks refused 34 years ago to give up her seat on a bus,
giving courage to other blacks to fight for their rights, a new memorial
commemorates the victims of the racial violence and terror of the civil rights
era.

The memorial, a sculpture of black granite and water, describes major events in
the civil rights movement, including the Montgomery bus boycott begun by Mrs.
Parks's refusal, and honors the memory of 40 men, women and children, black and
white, who were killed.

Some, like the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., who preached in a church a block
away, are world figures. Some, like Willie Edwards Jr., forced by Ku Klux
Klansmen to jump from a bridge outside Montgomery in 1957, were as little known
in death as in life. And others, like Lemuel Penn, who was shot as he drove
through Colbert, Ga., in 1964, were randomly picked by segregationist groups to
signal their resistance to change.

The names are etched on a circular table that is in front of a curving wall.
Water cascades down the wall, forming a thin film over these words of Dr. King:
''. . . Until justice rolls down like waters and righteousness like a mighty
stream.''

'A History Lesson'

The sculpture, on the grounds of the Southern Poverty Law Center, where the idea
of the memorial began, was designed by Maya Lin, the architect who created the
Vietnam War Memorial in Washington. It is to be dedicated Sunday in a ceremony
attended by more than 600 relatives of those who were killed.

''We hope that people can vicariously feel the fear that these martyrs and their
families felt,'' said Morris Dees, the head of the law center. ''Each name is a
history lesson, and we are saying, 'Don't just think of the deaths, but think of
a movement of ordinary people who just got tired of injustice.' ''

David Garrow, a historian and author of ''Bearing the Cross,'' a Pulitzer
Prize-winning biography of Dr. King, said the memorial and the research and
educational materials the center produced about the 40 victims had broadened
even his knowledge of the civil rights era.

''There is great, great value in how it democratizes the movement's history and
makes the point of remembering people beyond the leaders and staff members of
civil rights groups,'' Mr. Garrow said. Because of society's tendency to
spotlight an individual as a symbol for broader themes, he said, ''we are always
on the verge of turning the civil rights movement too much into a great man
story.''

Idea for Memorial

The law center, which offers legal services and educational programs and
monitors groups like the Ku Klux Klan, decided to build the memorial two years
ago after making a $750,000 profit on the sale of land in downtown Montgomery.

Mr. Dees said he and the center's staff researched the murders of the civil
rights era and found many killings that they suspect were connected to civil
rights activity or white reaction to it. But he said they included only the
names of the 40 they could be sure of.

In researching the deaths and getting in touch with relatives, said Joe T. Roy,
a center investigator, staff members found that some of the younger descendants
of the victims did not know how their relatives died and that over the years the
truth had been blurred or even forgotten to protect survivors from further
violence.

''Some were like rape victims who blame themselves and believe they were the
cause of what happened to them,'' Mr. Roy said. ''But when we told them about
the memorial, a lot of them could feel something positive had grown out of their
tragedy.''

'Going to Be Some Bloodshed'

That was not the case with Rosebud Lee Henson, whose late husband, the Rev.
George Lee, is the first name on the memorial. She talks of the night Mr. Lee
was killed 34 years ago as if it were yesterday. Mr. Lee, who had been
registering blacks to vote, left their Belzoni, Miss., grocery store on a short
errand but never returned. Barely a block away, he lay dying from a shotgun
blast to his face. Nobody was ever charged. A coroner's jury held that the cause
of death was unknown and suggested that the lead pellets in Mr. Lee's face were
dental fillings.

Mrs. Henson said she feels ''real good'' about the memorial because it confirms
the courage of many early activists. She recalled that her husband told her just
before he was killed, ''There's going to be some blood shed and it might be
mine.'' After he was killed, many of her friends and neighbors urged her and
others to cancel their voter registration.

''If I'd have gone down there and took my name off that book, and if there was
any such thing as the dead knowing what the living had done, my husband would
have turned over in his grave, with as much trouble as he had trying to get our
names on the book,'' she said.

Cause of Death: Unknown

Malinda Edwards O'Neil was 4 years old when her father, Willie Edwards Jr., was
killed. She said no one knew the circumstances for years, adding: ''I would ask
my mother why and how. She said she didn't know. Then I would ask her if they
would ever find out, and she would say she didn't know.''

In 1976, 19 years after her father's decomposed body was pulled from the Alabama
River, an Alabama prosecutor looking into other civil rights cases got a
confession from one of the three Klansmen who kidnapped Mr. Edwards, drove him
around most of the night and then forced him to jump from the Tyler Goodwyn
Bridge outside Montgomery. But the case was eventually dropped by a judge who
ruled that forcing a person to jump from a bridge does not necessarily lead to
his death.

Ms. O'Neil said the memorial was important because ''our children should not be
denied knowledge of the past.''

Lemuel Penn Jr. was 5 when his father, a school official in Washington and a
lieutenant colonel in the Army Reserves, was killed. The younger Mr. Penn, a
pilot for United Airlines, said he felt that his father's death and the death of
many others had opened up opportunities for millions of people.

''I'm proud of my father,'' he said. ''It's been motivating for me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Civil Rights Memorial, honoring 40 victims of the movement, being
prepared by Wally Chen and Tim Rogan for dedication tomorrow in Montgomery, Ala.
(The New York Times/Carl J. Bergquist)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 4, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Love and Loss and the Salve of Time

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words

DATELINE: CLEVELAND


In the final play of Reynolds Price's trilogy, ''New Music,'' a father reveals a
closely guarded family secret to his son. The moment is both intimate and wryly
amusing - and it is followed by other personal intimations. After almost six
hours in the company of an extended family in a small North Carolina town, we
come to recognize the characters as old friends and to feel the tautness of the
bonds of blood, marriage and acquaintanceship.

The audience at the Cleveland Play House is asked to enter this world as if it
were one of the author's novels. Like the fine writer he is, Mr. Price is not
interested in manipulating theatergoers. As a novelist, he has been compared
with Faulkner. As a dramatist, he is related to Horton Foote and Romulus Linney.
All these writers, rooted in specific rural environments, share a gift for
revealing character through atmosphere, and vice versa, and they have a natural
love for the intricacies and the lyricism of local language. In the plays, as in
his fiction, Mr. Price deals with stressful families whose energies are
marshaled by strong, individualistic women.

The trilogy is leisurely in its unfolding. Each of the three connected plays
takes place at a pivotal point in the lives of the Averys - in 1937, as Neal and
his wife, Taw, face their first marital crisis; in 1945, as they and other
townspeople try to overcome the effects of World War II, and finally in 1975,
with the death of Neal's mother and with war in Vietnam as an additional shadow
over the Avery household.

The first play, ''August Snow,'' is slight and anecdotal; in the second, ''Night
Dance,'' the story becomes more dramatic and diverges from naturalism. The
third, ''Better Days,'' is the most fully realized. It could stand on its own,
but it is nurtured by our knowledge of earlier events. Seeing the play by
itself, one would not know about the Huck-and-Tom skylarking days of Neal and
his best friend, Porter Farwell; or about the hurtful truthtelling of Neal's
embittered mother. These are two issues of increasing importance in
understanding all of the characters. In true trilogy fashion, the plays work
best when seen in sequence, as at one of the Cleveland Play House's regularly
scheduled Sunday marathons.

We hear about wars and domestic violence in harrowing - and sometimes black
comic - detail. Men are killed in battle and in flagrante. There are few sad
songs in ''New Music,'' but rather a rejuvenating sense that things will
improve, that succeeding generations will dance to new emotional rhythms. Mr.
Price is even-handed about apportioning responsibility. Even the most overtly
unsympathetic of the characters - Neal's mother - is admired after her death for
her loyalty and her common sense. Loyalty is the overweening attribute in the
play, and the most difficult to maintain.

The principal themes are love and loss and the salving effects of time. This is
not idealism but a kind of pragmatic acceptance of the fact that the weather
will eventually change, if only the characters are not overwhelmed by their
thoughts of suicide.

Even as one is warmed at Mr. Price's imaginative hearth, he maintains a
novelist's quiescence, as if to say that dialogue and action will take care of
themselves. It is not so much the literary quality of the dialogue -although as
a stylist he can use three figures of speech in a row when one would be ample.
The difficulty is in the avoidance of confrontations, so that it seems as if
characters are traveling on separate tracks. They are revealed less in collision
than in contrasting soliloquies, especially so in the case of Neal and his wife,
who habitually sidestep showdowns.

Neal is meant to be the golden boy of this small town, the object of everyone's
love and admiration. But there is little in the writing and even less in Kelly
Gwin's performance to justify such a supposition. Perhaps that is the author's
point, that Neal does not really stand out, except in the eyes of his beholders.
But it is in these areas that one wishes Mr. Price had been more forthcoming as
a playwright. In the third play, we finally receive a more complex picture of
Neal, as played in middle age by Bill Raymond. His telling portrait is that of a
man approaching the other side of the hill, and, to his astonishment, maturing
into an optimist.

Until that final play, Neal and Taw are upstaged by minor characters -their
flirtatious young landlady (Kathleen Mahony-Bennett), the landlady's crusty
father-in-law (John Carpenter) and Neal's best friend (John Hickey). Each of
these three is artfully delineated both in the writing and in the performance.
In the case of Mr. Carpenter, he is so colorful he may deserve a subsidiary play
of his own, so he could tell us more about his reprobate days and nights and
about his singing dog Dave, who could only manage to get through the first verse
of ''The Star Spangled Banner'' before breaking down in sobs.

A strength of the plays is in their shaggy humor and tall, tangential
ruminations, but the trilogy has a sense of dramatic momentum, culminating in a
poignant moment of honesty as survivors make their peace and try to face their
inextricably linked future.

This trilogy would be a daunting prospect for any theater. Josephine R. Abady
and David Esbjornson, as co-directors, have undertaken the assignment with
resourcefulness, though the plays would be improved with sharper casting and a
more inventive scenic design (and some further definition by the author). In
common with Mr. Price's novels, ''New Music'' is indigenous to its time, place
and characters, seemingly ordinary country people who rise, in what Anne Tyler
has accurately called ''startling, almost incongruous eloquence.''

Killed in Battle And in Flagrante

NEW MUSIC, a trilogy by Reynolds Price; scene design by Dan Conway; lighting
design by John Hastings; costume design by C. L. Hundley; sound design by
Jeffrey Montgomerie; production stage managers, Jean Bruns for ''August Snow''
and ''Night Dance'' and Benjamin Gutkin for ''Better Days.'' Assistant stage
manager, Morgan F. Kennedy; dramaturge, Roger T. Danforth. Presented by the
Cleveland Playhouse, Josephine R. Abady, artistic director; Dean R. Gladden,
managing director.

AUGUST SNOW and NIGHT DANCE directed by David Esbjornson.

BETTER DAYS directed by Ms. Abady. WITH: David Adkins, John Carpenter, Barbara
eda-Young, Jody Gelb, Kelly Gwin, John Hickey, James Hurdle, Susan Knight, Sonja
Lanzener, Kathleen Mahony-Bennett, Bill Raymond and Richard Thomsen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Bill Raymond in ''Better Days,'' the final play in Reynolds Price's
trilogy, ''New Music.'' (The New York Times/Jack Manning)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 325 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 5, 1989 Sunday
                         The New York Times on the Web

'Girl With Curious Hair'

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; WEB; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1159 words


With this collection of stories, David Foster Wallace, the author of the novel
''The Broom of the System,'' proves himself a dynamic writer of extraordinary
talent, one unafraid to tackle subjects large and small. Ever willing to
experiment, he lays his artistic self on the line with his incendiary use of
language, at times seeming to rip both the mundane and the unusual from their
moorings, then setting them down anew, freshly described.

Mr. Wallace is particularly interested in flux as a partial definition of human
nature, in distance as a component of love and - most important to him, perhaps
- in the obvious as well as the subtle linking of seeing and vision, masks and
the truth behind them.

Mr. Wallace is nothing if not audacious. Real-life heroes, villains, historical
figures, sports legends, television personalities - even dinosaurs - appear in
these stories alongside his fictitious characters, who themselves run the gamut
from banal to psychotic. In ''Little Expressionless Animals,'' for example, a
young woman with an incredible winning streak on the television game show
''Jeopardy!'' is finally defeated by her psychologically disturbed brother - the
whole encounter engineered when the producers become too touchy about her
ongoing lesbian love affair. In ''Lyndon,'' David Boyd, a fictitious mail clerk
who joins Lyndon Johnson's Senate staff, tells the story of his companionship
with Lady Bird and describes his own arranged marriage to a wealthy alcoholic
and his long homosexual union with a Haitian ''with diplomatic immunity.'' More
than mere storytelling, his is an attempt to probe the meaning of love and
responsibility to individual people and to his country against a background of
multiple declines: Johnson's from heart disease, Boyd's and his lover's from
AIDS, America's from Vietnam.

''Love is simply a word,'' says Mr. Wallace's fictional incarnation of Lady Bird
Johnson. ''It joins separate things. Lyndon and I, though you would disagree,
agree that we do not properly love one another anymore. Because we ceased long
ago to be enough apart for a 'love' to span any distance. Lyndon says he shall
cherish the day when love and right and wrong and responsibility, when these
words, he says, are understood by you youths of America to be nothing but
arrangements of distance.'' She goes on to explain that her husband's ''hatred
of being alone is a consequence of what his memoir will call his great
intellectual concept: the distance at which we see each other, arrange each
other, love. That love, he will say, is a federal highway, lines putting
communities, that move and exist at great distance, in touch. My husband has
stated publicly that America, too, his own America, that he loves enough to
conceal deaths for, is to be understood in terms of distance.''

In another story, the witty ''My Appearance,'' a successful television actress
agonizes over her upcoming spot on the David Letterman show, pops one
tranquilizer after another and muses (with emotionally disastrous results) over
the differences between the way things appear to be and the way they really are.
And in the title story, ''Girl With Curious Hair,'' the narrator - a successful
young corporate lawyer, the graduate of a military academy and several Ivy
League universities, the second son of an honored military family who also
happens to be a psychotic sociopath - reveals the childhood source of his
sadistic sexual compulsions while reminiscing about a Keith Jarrett concert that
he attended with a group of savagely lost punk-rocker companions.

If Mr. Wallace's characters include the transcendent as well as the maimed, his
style is similarly varied, running from prosaic to lyrical. ''I've just never
liked it,'' one of his characters says of poetry. ''It beats around bushes. Even
when I like it, it's nothing more than a really oblique way of saying the
obvious.'' To which her friend replies, ''But consider how very, very few of us
have the equipment to deal with the obvious.''

Mr. Wallace might as well be commenting on modern fiction in general here. He
himself is more than capable of dealing with the obvious. However, he is
obsessed not only with the appearance of things but with their true nature, with
objects and relationships as they really are, beneath the veils that hide them.
Interestingly enough, his ability simply to describe is superb. And it is when
he allows his observations to speak for themselves, when he does not permit
himself to become pedantic by overstating the obvious, that he is at his most
effective. When showing rather than telling, Mr. Wallace allows his characters
to function in both a symbolic and a living context. When showing rather than
telling, he is tender enough and strong enough not to shy away from love -
whether he's attempting to define it or (better yet) simply daring to expose it.

Mr. Wallace is such a bold writer that his failures can be almost as interesting
as his successes. Unfortunately, he sometimes slides into a kind of showboating,
a smug display of sheer knowledge and cleverness. And so the pieces that don't
work (''Luckily the Account Representative Knew CPR'' and a ponderous novella,
''Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way'') come off as the sort of inside
jokes that might play best in a creative writing seminar; they're meaningful and
witty, perhaps, to those who are willing to sacrifice substance to stylistic or
symbolic experimentation, but tiresome to the rest of us.

And yet, when Mr. Wallace is at his best he is undoubtedly among the very best.
The most successful fiction in ''Girl With Curious Hair'' has the quality of a
dream: powerful, fixating, explosive and mysterious. Mr. Wallace brings us, time
and again, to hidden, mythic places that are strange yet oddly familiar, larger
than life yet inexplicably known - and knowable. He is definitely interested in
what a television executive in one of the stories calls ''the capacity of facts
to transcend their internal factual limitations and become, in and of
themselves, meaning, feeling.''

This is especially true of the extraordinary story ''John Billy,'' a luminous
explosion into the realm of myth in which a bandylegged Oklahoman is transformed
by a near-fatal brush with death (and evil) into a creature of both darkness and
light, one whose damaged eyes extend like the waving ends of antennae from his
head, capable of finally seeing things. Those eyes are his undoing, for they
show him the wasted and bleeding countryside, linking him (like the Fisher King
of myth) to the death of the land.

In this daring exploration of the mythological and metaphysical context of
fiction - and thus of life itself - Mr. Wallace demonstrates his remarkable
talent. He succeeds in restoring grandeur to modern fiction, reminding us of the
ecstasy, terror, horror and beauty of which it is capable when it is released
from the television-screen-sized confines of minimalism.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Did Bigotry Block a Medal That Valor in Battle Earned?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1612 words


Army investigators will decide this month whether to recommend the Medal of
Honor for a Jewish veteran who is said to have killed more than 500 Japanese
soldiers in a single furious encounter in World War II but to have been denied
the nation's highest military decoration because of anti-Semitism.

The Army's 23-month-long review of the case of David S. Rubitsky, a 72-year-old
retired merchant seaman who lives in Milton, Wis., is remarkable not only for
the allegations of prejudice but also for the astonishing circumstances of the
incident itself: a lone soldier, armed only with a .30-caliber machine gun, a
carbine and an automatic rifle, cutting down 500 to 600 enemy troops trying to
force their way past him in the jungles of New Guinea.

Evidence From a Foe

Because there is no official record of the action by Mr. Rubitsky, nor any
mention in military archives of his encounter in December 1942 with the
Japanese, Army investigators have been faced with the nearly impossible task of
reconstructing events that occurred nearly half a century ago and half a world
away.

In 1942, Mr. Rubitsky was a communications sergeant with Company E, Second
Battalion, of the 128th Infantry in the 32d Division. Two of his former
commanders, Herbert A. Smith and J. M. Stehling, submitted affidavits saying
they recommended Mr. Rubitsky for the Medal of Honor at the time because he
saved their battalion by his heroism. They also said they believe he was denied
a decoration because a superior officer did not think the Medal of Honor should
go to a Jew.

The most compelling evidence so far attesting to Mr. Rubitsky's actions are not
the recollections of his former commanders but a handwritten message discovered
only a few months ago on the back of a yellowing photograph. The picture had
been removed, 47 years ago, from the body of a Japanese soldier.

In the message, an officer identified only as Colonel Yamamoto writes that he
has elected to commit suicide, in the traditional Japanese fashion, to atone for
the role he and other officers had in sending men into a battle in which ''600
fine Japanese soldiers died because of a solitary American soldier.''

Investigators for the Secret Service, who are experts in detecting
counterfeiting, told Senator Herbert Kohl of Wisconsin last summer that the ink
and paper were consistent with materials used in 1942. They concluded there was
no reason to believe the photograph and writing were ''anything other than
genuine.'' Senator Kohl's office has played the lead role among several
congressmen who have interceded on Mr. Rubitsky's behalf.

Wife Explains His Silence

Although he has made public appearances and given interviews in an attempt to
advance his cause, Mr. Rubitsky has recently refused to talk with reporters. His
wife, Katherine Roethe, said her husband does not want to discuss the case
publicly, with the Army so close to making a decision. ''He just doesn't want to
say anything that might jeopardize his chances,'' said Ms. Roethe.

But in an interview broadcast last month on National Public Radio, Mr. Rubitsky
gave a graphic account of the fighting, which went on all night.

The bodies of the Japanese soldiers, he said, ''were lying there, on branches,
roots, piled like cordwood, atop one another. Some were still alive. Some I just
hit in the shoulder and couldn't move, some in the legs.

''So I would just shoot them and bayonet them, shoot them and bayonet them,'' he
said. ''I was completely an insane man. To think that a human being would do
that another human being, what I did.'' Other Instances of Prejudice?  The
Army's review of Mr. Rubitsky's case comes amid growing attention by the Defense
Department to the possibility that discrimination played a role in denying the
Medal of Honor to soliders in both world wars.

The Medal of Honor is awarded for gallantry at the risk of life above and beyond
the call of duty. Of 295 awarded in World War II, none went to blacks, according
to the Defense Department. Only two were given to Jews, according to the Jewish
War Veterans of America.

Last year, the Army said it would review the records of all black World War I
and World War II heroes to determine if they were denied high honors because of
their race.

Revelation at a Reunion

Mr. Rubitsky's allies say the recommendation that he be decorated was never sent
up the military channels because of anti-Semitism. They say his deeds went
unrecorded until his former commanders learned, at a 1986 reunion of the 128th
Regiment, composed of members of the Wisconsin National Guard, that he had never
been put in for the Medal of Honor.

Until that time, Mr. Rubitsky himself had said nothing about the honor he did
not get, and only a few close relatives even knew about the bloody episode in
the jungle. Shortly after the war, he joined the Merchant Marine and traveled
around the world for more than 30 years before returning to Wisconsin.

Over the last two years, a growing roster of public officials and other groups,
such as the Anti-Defamation League, have been pressing the Army to review Mr.
Rubitsky's case. Although not all veterans groups are championing his cause, he
has received strong support from Vietnam veterans. The officials backing him
include Senator Kohl and Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, both Democrats;
Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, a Republican, and Senator Paul Simon of
Illinois, a Democrat.

At the insistence of a group of Vietnam veterans who live near Mr. Rubitsky's
home, the Vietnam Veterans of America passed a resolution at their annual
convention last summer calling on the Army to award him the Medal of Honor they
say he lost in 1942 ''due to the anti-Semitism of superior officers.'' In a
letter last month to Gen. William J. Meehan 2d, the officer in charge of the
investigation, Senator Kohl said he has concluded that Mr. Rubitsky ''earned the
Medal of honor.''

New Offenses and Old

But despite this support, the campaign has been difficult and emotionally taxing
for Mr. Rubitsky, according to friends and supporters.

Investigators for the Anti-Defamation League in Chicago said that shortly after
he decided to pursue the decoration, he told the police he had been the object
of anti-Semitic attacks and remarks, which caused him to bitterly recall
anti-Jewish taunts from his days in the Army. Mr. Rubitsky told the police a
piece of paper bearing a swastika was affixed to the door of his house in
Milton, and that someone fired a shotgun at his car, said Deborah Liebow of the
anti-defamation group.

The Army refuses to discuss details of its investigation, which has been
complicated by the deaths of key witnesses that have left some important
questions unanswered and conflicts in testimony unresolved.

Maj. Joe Padilla, an Army spokesman in Washington, said only that the case was
under review, and that a recommendation was expected before the end of November.
If Army investigators rule favorably on his behalf, their recommendation would
be passed up the chain of command, through the Secretary of the Army and on to
President Bush for disposition.

A Clear Field of Fire

The episode involving Mr. Rubitsky took place beginning on Dec. 1, 1942, in the
jungle near the village of Buna. His battalion, made up mostly of Wisconsin
National Guard troops who had been called to active duty, was under siege by the
Japanese.

According to Mr. Rubitsky and one of his officers, he was single-handedly
manning a forward machine-gun nest from which some of his frightened comrades
had just fled. The spot afforded a clear field of fire over a narrow area of
jungle through which the Japanese began their attack.

According to Mr. Rubitsky's account, the Japanese came through the jungle in
wave after wave. He said he would wait until they got 30 to 40 feet away, and
then he would open fire, alternately switching positions so the Japanese might
think he was not alone.

His company commander was Capt. J.M. Stehling, who later retired with the rank
of brigadier general. In a recent notarized statement, Mr. Stehling said that
when he returned to Sergeant Rubitsky's position after the fighting slowed, ''I
personally inspected the battle scene, and there were more than 500 Japanese
killed or wounded by the actions of Sergeant Rubitsky. His action was heroic,
and he should receive the Medal of Honor.''

'Nothing Came of It'

In an affidavit in October 1987, Mr. Stehling said he immediately recommended
Mr. Rubitsky for the honor, ''but nothing came of it, the reason being the
religion of Sergeant Rubitsky.'' In that affidavit, he pleaded that the Army
reconsider the decoration: ''Do not let religion stand in the way at this
time.''

The Army also has statements signed by Herbert A. Smith, a retired major general
who in 1942 was commanding officer of Mr. Rubitsky's battalion.

Mr. Smith, who died two months ago, said he passed the recommendation on to his
superior, Col. John W. Mott, the 32d Division's chief of staff who was
temporarily in command of three regiments that included Lieutenant Colonel
Smith's battalion.

Mr. Smith wrote: ''Colonel Mott's answer was, 'You mean a Jew for the
Congressional Medal of Honor?' '' Then, Mr. Smith recalled, Colonel Mott ''just
laughed and walked away.'' Colonel Mott is now dead. In an interview last year,
Mr. Rubitsky said he was not so much interested in the medal as he was in
justice: ''I don't want this to happen to anyone else, black, white, Jewish or
otherwise. You all bleed the same if you're wounded. Dig up a black man, a white
man or a Jew after a couple of years and their bones look the same.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: David S. Rubitsky, who some say was denied the Medal of Honor for
killing 500 Japanese soldiers in World War II because he is Jewish (NYT/Tom
Capp); map of New Guinea in 1942 indicating Buna (NYT) (pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reston, Retiring at 80, Still Looks Up the Road

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1418 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


James Reston, who retired from The New York Times on Friday, his 80th birthday,
said in a farewell interview that President Bush should do more, at this
potentially pivotal moment, ''to help along'' the political and economic
evolution in the Soviet Union.

''In politics as in love, there's a time when you have to kiss the girl,'' Mr.
Reston declared. ''I think that this is one of those times in history, and we're
holding back. I feel in my guts that it's wrong - that this is a moment when we
should do more than be prudent and cautious.''

In the interview, on Oct. 25, before the announcement of the December summit
meeting betweeen President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet
Union, Mr. Reston argued that the current cascade of change in Eastern Europe
''can't be turned around,'' in part because of television and other
communications technologies.

''In the days of Goebbels, they could enslave a people,'' he said. ''They could
fill them full of such lies and such deceptions. But then along came these new
instruments, and they vault over boundaries and Iron Curtains. People begin to
see that our standard of living is totally different. They see by television
that tyranny is not inevitable but intolerable.''

Times Publisher's Comment

He described as ''one of the great pleasures of my life'' what he views as
journalism's major role in the eclipse of both Fascism and Communism.

At his own insistence, Mr. Reston left the staff of The Times without ceremony,
public or private. The paper's top executive, Arthur O. Sulzberger -whose
father, Arthur H. Sulzberger, Mr. Reston served as an assistant during World War
II - issued this comment: ''During my more than 25 years as publisher of The New
York Times, I've learned to rely on Scotty's vision and friendship, as my family
has done for 50 years. The clock may run, but I still know his phone number.''

It was on Aug. 2, 1987, that Mr. Reston's last regularly scheduled column
appeared on The Times's Op-Ed page. In that column, under the heading ''A
Personal Message,'' he wrote, ''So I'm not moving out but just moving over out
of the way to write when I please.''

Mr. Reston said in the Oct. 25 interview that the two greatest political
triumphs in his professional lifetime were the common defense system developed
by the West after the war and the improvement in the lot of American blacks
since 1960.

''I don't think there's anything in the history of the world to compare with the
commitments this country has taken in defense of freedom,'' said Mr. Reston, who
joined The Times's London bureau on Sept. 1, 1939, the day World War II began
with Nazi Germany's invasion of Poland.

American System Prevailed

The real heroes of the American story, the Scottish-born journalist asserted,
are the men who met in Philadelphia to write the Constitution because the
document they produced promoted what he termed ''the triumph of the moderates.''
Although the isolationists dominated foreign policy debate for a time and ''the
people who in later years wanted to do everything everywhere'' briefly had their
way in Vietnam, he said, in the long run the American system worked against
them.

That was lucky, he added, because ''outside of Roosevelt, if you run through the
series of Presidents from Roosevelt to George Bush, this is not a group of
distinguished men.''

Reflecting on the domestic scene, which he also covered over more than four
decades in Washington, Mr. Reston gave credit to Lyndon B. Johnson for the
extension of human rights and voting rights to the nation's black population.
Black people, Mr. Reston acknowledged, ''are quite properly not satisfied, and
certainly the bigotry goes on,'' but he credited Mr. Johnson with ''a great,
great achievement.''

In political economics, too, he thinks the United States has moderate instincts,
not extreme ones.

''Hoover went too far with the market economy, and it pulled back,'' he said.
''Roosevelt had to come in. The welfare state began to go too far, and they
pulled it back. We have gone through it again, with Reagan, and you are
beginning to see the swing, again, back to a more reasonable thing.''

Reagan, Bush and the Quake

But Mr. Reston conceded that Ronald Reagan ''could be elected today,'' despite
what he described as ''the damned disgrace'' of Mr. Reagan's and Mr. Bush's
economic policies. He added:

''If George Bush, the morning after the California disaster, had said - 'It took
an earthquake to wake me up. I should never have said what I did, because I
couldn't know what was going to happen. We've got good information in
Washington, but we haven't got that pipeline to the Lord. We're going to raise
taxes' - the country would have raised its arms in applause.''

Mr. Reston said he had no doubt that Franklin D. Roosevelt had been the greatest
President he had known, although he said that Roosevelt had done a ''terrible
thing'' by creating ''a politburo in the White House for the conduct of foreign
policy.''

Mr. Reston named Jean Monnet, the French visionary who conceived the European
Community, as the greatest man he had ever known, as well as the person who had
most deeply influenced his own thinking.

''Monnet proved that if you don't demand credit for things, you can push them
through,'' Mr. Reston said. ''In this town, everybody wants credit for
everything. Monnet also saw one of the central things in my lifetime - that it's
only partly true that progress is made by competition. It's also made by
cooperation, and the Japanese are teaching us that now. Government and labor and
management and the academics work together on the thing, and you can make more
progress.''

Acheson Was 'the Key Man'

Among American statesmen in the postwar era, he chose Dean Acheson as ''the key
man'' who ''came to the fork in the road'' and knew that the United Nations
would not be enough to restrain Stalin's Soviet Union.

At a time when Harry S. Truman ''was disarming the country like mad,'' Mr.
Reston asserted, Mr. Acheson, as Secretary of State, saw the need for greater
assistance to Europe and conceived programs that came to bear other people's
names - the Marshall Plan for economic aid and the Truman Doctrine in Greece and
Turkey.

But he had no comparable praise for Mr. Acheson's successor, John Foster Dulles,
saying: ''He began to think about massive retaliation, and the Allies said, you
know, ''What is this massive retaliation? It's extinction without
representation.' ''

Mr. Reston made it clear that he shares his generation's implicit belief in
progress and in the central role of great men. But he argued, in pungent
language, that President Truman should have taken John J. McCloy's advice and
dropped the atomic bomb on a remote part of Japan before using it on major
cities, in the hope of inducing surrender without mass destruction. Without
Pearl Harbor . . .  He argued, in addition, that without Pearl Harbor, the
United States would not have entered World War II in time to save Britain, and
that King George VI and Winston Churchill would have been forced to flee to
Canada.

''I think this country would have let the British fall,'' he said. ''I think it
would have stood aside and let Hitler dominate all of Europe. We were bombed
into the war. I'm not at all sentimental about that.''

Mr. Reston said the journalist he admired most was Walter Lippmann even though
Mr. Lippmann ignored his own advice to reporters to maintain their
''detachment.''

His generation of reporters, Mr. Reston said, mostly started as sportswriters,
as he did, with poor educations, ''knowing nothing of the world, knowing nothing
of the complications of modern economics or of the law.'' But radio and
television forced newspapers ''to deal with causes and consequences of the
news,'' and that in turn required hiring specialists and giving them latitude.

The Modern U.S. Newspaper

When he came to Washington, he said, The Times bureau sent its copy to New York
by Morse code and half the staff was paid ''space rates'' - a set amount per
word - instead of a salary. Women were not wanted, he said, nor were people who
wrote analysis.

In his view, Mr. Reston said, the modern American newspaper is ''by far the best
it has ever been.'' But he said that reporters ''yelling'' at each other on
television - he mentioned John McLaughlin and Robert Novak -''are defining what
a journalist is in the public view, in a very damaging way to us; they're
hurting us badly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: James Reston, who retired from The New York Times on Friday, his 80th
birthday, in his Washington office (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VOTES IN CONGRESS;
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 331 words



SENATE

North Pension: Vote to change Federal law that would allow Oliver L. North, a
central figure in the Iran-contra affair who was a highly decorated Vietnam
combat veteran, to receive his pension despite his conviction for shredding
Government documents. Approved 78 to 17, Nov. 2.

Connecticut
Dodd (D)                    N
Lieberman (D)               Y

New Jersey
Bradley (D)                 A
Lautenberg (D)              N

New York
D'Amato (R)                 Y
Moynihan (D)                Y


HOUSE

Minimum Wage: Vote on passage of a bill to increase the minimum wage to $4.25 an
hour by 1991 and to create a $3.35 training wage for workers under 20 years old.
Approved 382 to 37, Nov. 1.

Connecticut
 1. Kennelly (D)            Y
 2. Gejdenson (D)           Y
 3. Morrison (D)            Y
 4. Shays (R)               Y
 5. Rowland (R)             Y
 6. Johnson (R)             Y

New Jersey
 1. Florio (D)
A

 2. Hughes (D)              Y
 3. Pallone (D)             Y
 4. Smith (R)               Y
 5. Roukema (R)             Y
 6. Dwyer (D)               Y
 7. Rinaldo (R)             Y
 8. Roe (D)                 Y
 9. Torricelli (D)          Y
10. Payne (D)               Y
11. Gallo (R)               Y
12. Courter (R)             A
13. Saxton (R)              Y
14. Guarini (D)             Y

New York
 1. Hochbrueckner(D)        Y
 2. Downey (D)              Y
 3. Mrazek (D)              Y
 4. Lent (R)                Y
 5. McGrath (R)             Y
 6. Flake (D)               Y
 7. Ackerman (D)            Y
 8. Scheuer (D)             Y
 9. Manton (D)              Y
10. Schumer (D)             Y
11. Towns (D)               Y
12. Owens (D)               Y
13. Solarz (D)              Y
14. Molinari (R)            Y
15. Green (R)               Y
16. Rangel (D)              Y
17. Weiss (D)               Y
18. Garcia (D)              A
19. Engel (D)               Y
20. Lowey (D)               Y
21. Fish (R)                Y
22. Gilman (R)              Y
23. McNulty (D)             Y
24. Solomon (R)             Y
25. Boehlert (R)            Y
26. Martin (R)              Y
27. Walsh (R)               Y
28. McHugh (D)              Y
29. Horton (R)              Y
30. Slaughter (D)           Y
31. Paxon (R)               N
32. LaFalce (D)             Y
33. Nowak (D)               Y
34. Houghton (R)            Y


KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Howard Rusk, 88, Dies; Medical Pioneer

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 52, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1581 words


Dr. Howard A. Rusk, who became a pioneer in the rehabilitation of the physically
disabled in the United States and many other countries after finding new ways to
help badly wounded airmen in World War II, died of a stroke yesterday at the
Mary Manning Walsh Home in Manhattan, which he entered three months ago. He was
88 years old.

A genial, strapping Missourian, he developed many rehabilitation techniques that
became part of standard medical practice throughout the world. He is considered
the originator of what came to be known as rehabilitation medicine.

''Dr. Rusk was really the father of comprehensive rehabilition,'' Dr. Frederic
J. Kottke, emeritus professor in the department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation at the University of Minnesota Medical School, said yesterday,
''He was the first to recognize, from a professional standpoint, the need to
restore people to a high quality of life.''

For five decades, Dr. Rusk's passionate concern was, as he put it in a 1982
interview, ''what happens to severely disabled people after the stitches are out
and the fever is down.'' Then, he said, the crucial task was to ''take them back
into the best lives they can live with what they have left.''

That positive attitude brought hope to vast numbers of the disabled people
around the world and earned him the grateful nickname ''Dr. Live-Again.''
Founded Institute at N.Y.U. Dr. Rusk propounded many of his ideas on
rehabilitation and other medical topics as a columnist of The New York Times,
which he joined as a part-time associate editor. They appeared weekly from 1946
to 1969.

After devising rehabilitation programs for the Army Air Force during the war,
Dr. Rusk founded the Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation at New
York University, using more than $1 million donated in 1948 by Bernard Baruch.

Widely known simply as the Rusk Institute, it is now named the Howard A. Rusk
Institute of Rehabiitation Medicine. It works with disabled in-patients, sending
a high percentage on to school or gainful work and carries on many related
activities with both in-patients and out-patients. Dr. Rusk served as its
director until 1978, when he became a distinguished university professor of New
York University.

He also served as president of the World Rehabilitation Fund from 1955, when he
founded it, until 1982, when he was succeeded by his son Howard A. Rusk Jr., who
still holds the post. Dr. Rusk was chairman from that time on. Through the fund,
the institute has drawn up programs for professionals in 150 countries and has
trained more than 6,000 doctors, psychologists and other specialists in advanced
rehabilitation techniques. In addition, as a direct result of the fund's
efforts, more than four million people have been fitted with artificial limbs
and braces.

Dr. Rusk also founded the world's first comprehensive medical-training program
in rehabilitation: the Department of Rehabilitation at New York University's
medical school. He headed the department from 1946 to 1980.

Treatment of 'Whole Person'

Through his medical work, writing, teaching, speaking, fund raising and informal
salesmanship, Dr. Rusk did much to win widespread acceptance of his view that
treatment should be for the disabled patient as a ''whole person'' - not merely
for his or her specific afflictions - and that the patient should be made ready
to play a role in the general community.

He also advised nine presidents and founded a Rehabilitation Institute at
Bellevue Hospital.

Over the years, he was variously a consultant on rehabilitation to the Veterans
Administration, the United Nations Secretariat, and the New York City Department
of Hospitals, a member of the city's Board of Hospitalsand president of the
International Society for the Welfare of Cripples.

Broken Bodies and Spirits

Dr. Rusk's wartime work with the disabled was spurred by the anguish he felt, as
the officer in charge of the Army Air Force Convalescent Training Program, when,
as he later recalled, ''wounded boys from the battlefield began being packed
into hospitals by the planeload.''

''Suddenly we were faced with men with broken bodies and, all too often, broken
spirit,'' he wrote in his 1972 autobiography, ''A World to Care For.''

Spurred by what he saw, he worked out a program of retraining, reconditioning
and psychological readjustment, and it came into widespread use during the war.
Its aim was to reduce patients' convalescence time and to prepare many of them
to return to military duty effectively.

Howard Archibald Rusk was born April 9, 1901 in Brookfield, Mo. the son of
Michael Yost Rusk, and Augusta Eastin Shipp Rusk.

He graduated from Brookfield High School and earned a bachelor's degree from the
University of Missouri and an M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania's medical
school in 1925, after only two years of study instead of the usual four.

From 1926 to 1942, Dr. Rusk practiced as a specialist in internal medicine in
St. Louis. He also became associate chief of staff at St. Luke's Hospital in St.
Louis and joined the medical school faculty of Washington University in that
city.

After the war, Dr. Rusk began his decades as a columnist for The Times at the
invitation of its then publisher, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, the father of its
present publisher, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger.

Mr. Rusk wrote in his autobiography that the elder Mr. Sulzberger was ''a
sensitive man and especially concerned about rehabilitation problems because he
was having a most difficult and painful time himself with arthritis of the
hands.''

''He could endure pain,'' Dr. Rusk went on, ''but he was very much bothered by a
recurring dream in which he was a pianist. His hands would suddenly become
disabled, and he could no longer play the piano and earn a living. He developed
as a result of this dream a great empathy for those whose handicaps might
deprive them of their means of livelihood, and he was therefore always eager to
help us fulfill our aims.''

And so, on a part-time basis, Dr. Rusk began writing his column, initially under
the heading ''Rehabilitation'' in a part of the Sunday newspaper set aside for
''News of the Veteran.'' He had the title of associate editor of The Times until
1964, when he became a contributing editor. He remained a regular weekly
columnist until 1969 and continued to be a contributing editor, and to write for
The Times, on into the 1970's.

Treated Famous Patients

Over the years, Dr. Rusk had his share of famous patients. They included Joseph
P. Kennedy, the father of President John F. Kennedy; Roy Campanella, the
baseball player; Vincent Lopez, the bandleader; and Supreme Court Justice
William O. Douglas.

Dr. Rusk's columns, which were sprinkled with anecdotes about his patients,
covered many subjects, ranging from the dangers of self-medication to the issue
of the extent of napalm wounds in South Vietnam's civilian populace.

In March 1967, after touring South Vietnamese hospitals, Dr. Rusk wrote, ''The
picture that has been painted by some of large numbers of children burned by
napalm in Vietnam is grossly exaggerated.''

He was sent to Vietnam by President Lyndon B. Johnson with the assignment of
coordinating relief program. He headed a group of physicians that toured
hospitals in the country and concluded that napalm had caused only a negligible
number of civilian casualties. Most burn cases, the commission reported, had
been caused by the improper use of gasoline for cooking or illumination.

Aided the Elderly

Outside the realm of rehabilitation, Dr. Rusk was an early advocate of enlarging
public-health programs for the country's growing numbers of elderly people,
including programs for those affected by senility.

He was also, from 1962 to 1967, a trustee of the University of Pennsylvania, and
he served a term as president of the International Society for the
Rehabilitation of the Disabled.

In addition to his 1972 autobiography, the books which he wrote or co-authored
were ''New Hope for the Handicapped'' (1949), ''Living with a Disability''
(1953), and three works that appeared in 1958: ''Rehabilitation Medicine,''
''Cardiovascular Rehabilitation'' and ''Rehabilitation of the Cardiovascular
Patient.''

Dr. Rusk had honorary degrees from the University of Missouri and a score of
other institutions in this country and abroad. He won three Albert Lasker Awards
- one for work in the public health field, two for services for the physically
disabled - the Distinguished Service Medal, the French Legion of Honor and
numerous other decorations and awards.

The Howard A. Rusk Respiratory Center at Goldwater Memorial Hospital on
Roosevelt Island was named in his honor, and so was a professorship at N.Y.U.,
the Howard A. Rusk Chair in Rehabilitation Research.

In 1926 he married Gladys Houx. She died in 1980.

Dr. Rusk, who formerly made his home in the Kips Bay section of Manhattan, is
survived by a daughter, Martha Sutphen of Manhattan, who teaches English at
Julia Richmman High School in Manhattan, and two sons, Howard A. Jr., of
Scarsdale, N.Y., and Dr. John M., of Philadelphia, who is director of the
department of psychiatry at the Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Hospital; 12 grandchildren, and
six great-grandchildren.

A memorial service will be announced at a later date. Memorial gifts may be sent
to the World Rehabilitation Fund or the Howard A. Rusk Institute of
Rehabilitation Medicine, 400 East 34th Street, New York, N.Y., 10016.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Dr. Howard Rusk (NYT, 1984)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Henry V Returns As a Monarch For This Era

BYLINE: By BENEDICT NIGHTINGALE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2189 words

DATELINE: LONDON


The American producer Joseph Papp still likes to recall the day when, as a
theater student recently discharged from the wartime Navy, he and his friends
first saw Laurence Olivier's movie version of ''Henry V.'' They charged en masse
down Hollywood Boulevard shouting, ''God for Harry, England and St. George!,''
infecting the afternoon strollers with their exhilaration.

But that's not the way some similarly representative group of young bloods is
likely to react to Kenneth Branagh's new film of Shakespeare's play. More
probably, they'll totter out of the theater muttering about Vietnam or darkly
reciting verses from Wilfred Owen or some other of the World War I poets. If
they echo any of Henry's lines from the play, they'll surely be the ones about
the shrill-shrieking daughters of Harfleur being deflowered, reverend heads
dashed against castle walls, and ''naked infants spitted upon pikes whiles mad
mothers with their howls confused do break the clouds.''

If so, Mr. Branagh won't be complaining. True, he sees the play as a ''good
yarn'' and Henry himself as more, much more, than a murderous chauvinist.
Indeed, a long conversation with Prince Charles convinced him that the
15th-century king had something in common with the 20th-century king-to-be,
whose reputation in Britain is for almost painful conscientiousness.
Nevertheless, Mr. Branagh's aim has been to present a hero and a story for the
late 80's, not the mid-40's. He may have implicitly invited comparisons with the
late Lord Olivier simply because he, too, has directed the film as well as taken
the leading role. But it will be the differences, not the similarities, that
Americans are certain to notice when ''Henry V'' receives its New York premiere
at the Paris Theater on Wednesday.

''Actually, I think one of the reasons that ''Henry V'' is performed rather
rarely even on stage is the impression made by Olivier's film,'' says Mr.
Branagh. ''At a time of crisis it couldn't fail to take on the patriotic,
nationalistic color required then, and we still think of it that way. I feel
it's a more complex play, and a darker one, reflecting what really happened in
France. All the eyewitnesses of Agincourt and Harfleur tell a story much more
gritty and bloody than even we have described, with dysentery rife and an
incredible stench and sensational brutality. French bodies piled six feet high,
with most of them dying of suffocation in the crush, and wild Irishmen ripping
off their clothes and running into battle naked in the filth. Terrible,
unbelievable.''

Logically enough, Mr. Branagh decided to substitute rain and mud for the grass
and sunshine of the earlier film. He also restored lines that Olivier had cut,
reputedly at the suggestion of Winston Churchill. Henry's threats to the
Governor of Harfleur, to ''spit'' those naked infants among other things, are in
the new film, as is the plot against his life by his boyhood friend Scroop,
something that struck the wartime British as too frank an acknowledgment of
internal treachery to include.

And the hanging of the King's old drinking companion Bardolph, condemned for
robbing a French church, is graphically portrayed instead of occurring behind
the scenes, as it does in Shakespeare's play; an unmissable opportunity, decided
Mr. Branagh, to show in close-up the pain and loneliness of a young leader
required to make bold, tough decisions.

Mr. Branagh himself has yet to order anyone executed; but he has already proved
to be a bold, decisive and extraordinarily precocious leader of men. Indeed, at
the age of 28, Mr. Branagh can look upon accomplishments that are in some ways
more impressive than those of the young Olivier, who was 36 when he came to film
the Battle of Agincourt.

Mr. Branagh has played major roles on major stages, among them Henry V for the
Royal Shakespeare Company. He's been seen on screens large and small, notably in
the BBC-TV mini-series based on Olivia Manning's ''Fortunes of War.'' He's even
published an autobiography, called ''Beginnings.'' And back in 1987 he launched
his own stage company, Renaissance Theater, with a play about disaffected
Belfast youth, ''Public Enemy.'' Its producer, author and star were all the same
person: the 26-year-old Kenneth Branagh.

By then he was somewhat predictably being dubbed ''Renaissance man'' by the
British press; but, as he's the first to insist, it was a dramatist with a more
literal claim to that title who proved to be the company's making. Mr. Branagh
ignored the professional directors and proceeded to return Shakespeare to the
actors, touring Britain in Derek Jacobi's production of ''Hamlet,'' Judi Dench's
''Much Ado About Nothing'' and Geraldine McEwan's ''As You Like It.''

The critics in and out of London were impressed, but Mr. Branagh himself was by
no means satisfied. Through Renaissance he had got to know major actors who,
like himself, were dedicated to a company style he describes as ''delivering the
text in as realistic a way as possible without denying its complexity, its
richness and the dramatic poetry that makes the hair stand up on the back of
your head.'' Why not ask some of them to join him in reaching an even broader
audience than the ones they'd managed to attract on their trips out of the
metropolis? Why not temporarily redirect Renaissance's resources to the making
of a film, a big popular film, ''Henry V'' itself?

He had never taken a lesson in directing films, still less directed one; but
that didn't prevent him asking Paul Scofield, Ian Holm, Mr. Jacobi and Miss
Dench, among others, to play supporting roles. ''I just sat across a table with
them and said, 'I know it must seem a bit stupid to try this, but here's my
general approach, what about it?' And not one of them laughed in my face. They
all said yes instantly.''

Nor did Mr. Branagh's inexperience deter several companies from London's
financial center and assorted other ''angels'' from coming up with the $7
million he and his associates expected the film to cost. What's more, the money
remained firm, and sufficient, in defiance of the warnings of no less an
authority than the well-known producer David Puttnam. ''He felt it was too
little and wouldn't hold up,'' recalls Mr. Branagh. ''His great line was that
the film would collapse either two weeks before or two weeks after principal
photography began. We drank a few glasses of Champagne at the end of that second
week, I can tell you.''

Mr. Branagh's own fascination with ''Henry V'' began while he was still a
student at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts. ''My sense of it as an adolescent
had been through a couple of half-remembered viewings of Sir Laurence's film,
and I remember knights in shining armor, and gold colors, a kind of Camelot
thing,'' he says. ''But when I looked at it for audition pieces it seemed much
more muscular and brooding, not an extravaganza at all.

''It wasn't straightforwardly antiwar; it was more ambiguous than that; it
really made you think about the subject. The war seemed to be inevitable and
regrettable and ugly and sad and exciting, intoxicating and seductive. There's
tremendous adrenaline, tremendous bonding, tremendous camaraderie, as well as
incompetence and horror and muck. And yet it was all for nothing, as the Chorus
tells us right at the end.'' The play struck Mr. Branagh as extraordinary in its
blend of the epic and the personal: a tense tale about a campaign all too likely
to fail, but also a case study of the pains and perils of leadership. Even in
his student days, he had found Henry himself troubling, and the experience of
playing the part, onstage and now on film, has left him almost more perplexed by
its contradictions.

Here was a dangerous, even ruthless man nevertheless determined to lead a
responsible and honorable life; a potential killer well aware that, if he
misused his power, he risked eternal damnation; angry inside, ''a pressure
cooker with the lid waiting to blow off,'' yet genuinely charming and
compassionate; insecure, perhaps paranoid, and always aware of being watched and
judged by those around him, yet strong, determined and, by the play's end, far
more confident and assured.

''There's more self-questioning, more of Hamlet here than people recognize,''
says Mr. Branagh. ''And also more development. Henry is a very young man
struggling to maturity and learning slowly and painfully that he'll always be
alone, that he has to live in isolation. He must forget Falstaff and Bardolph
and his old cronies; he must forget his friend Scroop; he must forget having a
close relationship with anyone; he must even forget getting to know the common
man - he tries that on the eve of the battle, and it doesn't work. It's a
tremendously complex part, and I wanted to render every complexity I could.''

When he first tackled the role, Mr. Branagh did the research expected of a
contemporary actor. He read Clausewitz on war, for instance, and medieval
historians on Henry. Less conventionally, he managed to organize an invitation
to Kensington Palace. There, Prince Charles told him, among other things, of the
occasion at Cambridge University when he followed the example of Henry before
Agincourt and tried to mingle incognito with the townspeople and his fellow
students.

His discovery was that any such action was doomed to frustration and failure,
either because his disguise worked and prevented him talking candidly or because
his disguise failed and people wouldn't talk candidly themselves. Prince Charles
also spoke of feelings of solitude and his need to sustain some kind of belief
in God.

The impression he gave Mr. Branagh was of a decisive yet vulnerable man, someone
who could be hurt by gossip columnists and critics alike, yet strong enough to
tolerate them. ''It was invaluable for me to see the melancholy that exists in
him,'' he said. ''Also the sense of responsibility, the feeling of having to set
an example. Even when the eyes smile there's a sort of gravitas.''

When filming began, Mr. Branagh didn't attempt to conceal his rawness as a
director. He simply described his mental vision to the technicians and trusted
them to cope with the mysteries of lenses, and so on. There were embarrassing
moments, such as forgetting to say ''action'' the first time the camera turned;
but shooting proceeded smoothly and quickly enough for Mr. Branagh to make a
last-minute decision. That was to clarify the story, and emphasize Henry's
growing isolation, by inserting flashbacks to the wild days with Falstaff and
his drinking friends.

Some of these eventually fell victim to Mr. Branagh's determination to keep the
film down to a commercial length, as did the famous episode in which the
Welshman Fluellen forces the braggart Pistol to eat a leek; but most survived.
The audience even gets Falstaff's famous line, ''We have heard the chimes at
midnight,'' cheekily wrenched from its original context and delivered to Prince
Henry in London instead of Justice Shallow in Gloucestershire.

If Mr. Branagh hadn't played Henry before, the task of simultaneously directing
and performing would obviously have been much harder, perhaps impossible. As it
was, he felt confident enough to rehearse each of his scenes with a stand-in,
then come from behind the camera for a final run-through, and rely on the
assistant director to handle the actual shooting. ''I couldn't go into a corner
for half an hour to get into the mood,'' he said. ''I had to believe the part
was in my blood, trust my technique, and let the words come out spontaneously.''

Mr. Branagh's old professor at R.A.D.A., Hugh Cruttwell, was always on hand as a
sort of quality control, and Mr. Branagh himself checked the rushes each night
and ordered the reshooting of several scenes in which he felt his performance
had been nervous, awkward or otherwise unsatisfactory.

The British critics have mostly approved the results, though a few attacked Mr.
Branagh as an arrogant upstart who was presuming to venture where Olivier had
definitively trod 45 years before. ''The greatest act of hubris since Prometheus
absconded with the rights to divine fire,'' declared one indignant reviewer.

''I thought that a bit excessive,'' says Mr. Branagh. ''After all, I didn't burn
all the copies of Olivier's film. It's still there. And I never regarded myself
as being in direct competition with him. I suppose I've been inspired by his
effrontery, his wonderful temerity, but in our acting styles we belong to
different worlds.''

The experience of directing Shakespeare on screen has left Mr. Branagh keen to
try it again, with ''Much Ado About Nothing'' and ''Hamlet'' as possible
candidates for new Renaissance films. Meanwhile, it's back to the stage and,
before long, off to America. Mr. Branagh's productions both of ''King Lear'' and
of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' with himself taking the supporting roles of
Edgar and Peter Quince, respectively, are scheduled for Chicago next May and
perhaps New York in June. After that, who knows? ''I like to keep busy; I don't
want to limit myself; I hope to keep my horizons open,'' says Mr. Branagh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Director and star: Kenneth Branagh in ''Henry V'' (Sophie Baker) (pg.
17); Kenneth Branagh as Henry and Brian Blessed as Exeter (Sophie Baker) (pg.
18)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
This Song Team Seeks Places In the Heart

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2433 words


Several years ago, when the lyricist and director Richard Maltby Jr. taught a
class in musical theater at New York University, he held a session that he
called ''Dealing With Sondheim.''

''Any young lyricist who loves the contemporary theater loves Sondheim but is
stuck in a sense, because no matter what you try, Sondheim's probably done it
first,'' he recalled recently. ''You either sound like Steve, or you sound like
you're trying to avoid sounding like Steve. I told them that I once had a
central moment while I was working on a song that was so elaborately rhymed that
you couldn't even hear the sense it was making, and that I realized I was trying
to out-Steve Steve. I also realized that the one thing I am that he isn't is
that I'm me and that the thing you should always go for is that emotional
center.''

Mr. Maltby was sitting with his creative partner of more than 30 years, the
composer David Shire, in a cramped dressing room upstairs at the Cherry Lane
Theater. It houses the team's new revue, ''Closer Than Ever,'' which opens
tomorrow evening.

With their mixture of wit and wistfulness, Mr. Maltby and Mr. Shire's urbane,
epigrammatic songs are probably closer in spirit to those of Mr. Sondheim -
especially the Sondheim of ''Company'' and ''Merrily We Roll Along'' - than
anyone else's. Yet they also have their own distinct voice that musically is
more pop-oriented than Sondheim's and lyrically sounds closer to everyday
conversation. It has taken Mr. Maltby and Mr. Shire nearly 20 years to find and
polish that voice.

When they first came to New York in the early 60's, fresh out of Yale, to write
shows, Mr. Sondheim gave encouragement and advice, and Mr. Shire even worked as
a second rehearsal pianist on ''Anyone Can Whistle.'' Later, Mr. Maltby, who,
like Mr. Sondheim, is a puzzles fanatic, took over the New York magazine puzzle
from Mr. Sondheim. He now collaborates on a monthly puzzle for Harper's
Magazine.

If songwriting expresses a collaborative emotional center for Mr. Maltby and Mr.
Shire, it is also a rigorous analytical exercise not unlike making a puzzle.

''I don't write my lyrics alone,'' Mr. Maltby emphasized. ''They are full of
ideas, phrases, couplets and sometimes whole stanzas that are David's. Though
they're usually on a track I've set out, I often need him to shake it or send it
off in another direction. I don't just sit down and write a lyric. It evolves
over a period of time through slogging and slogging and slogging. That's the
reason I can direct my own lyrics and why when the lyric is finished I have no
memory of writing it - none whatsoever.''

Mr. Maltby, who is still best known for having conceived, directed and written
lyrics for the Fats Waller musical ''Ain't Misbehavin','' is suddenly someone
everyone wants on his team. He was recently co-lyricist with Alain Boublil and
the composer Claude-Michel Shonberg (the creative team of ''Les Miserables'') on
the new musical ''Miss Saigon,'' which opened in London in mid-September and is
a blockbuster hit comparable to ''Phantom of the Opera.'' With the composer
Charles Strouse and book writer-director Arthur Laurents, Mr. Maltby has
collaborated on the nearly completed show ''Nick and Nora,'' an adaptation of
''The Thin Man'' that is slated to open on Broadway a year from now.

Mr. Shire is also busy. The composer, who earns 90 percent of his income writing
film scores, has forthcoming Hollywood assignments. He has written scores for 40
films, including ''The Conversation,'' ''All the President's Men'' and ''2010,''
and he collaborated with Norman Gimbel on the Oscar-winning song ''It Goes Like
It Goes'' for ''Norma Rae.'' Lately he has been hard at work on a show based on
Joseph Heller's comic novel ''God Knows'' and tentatively titled ''Live at the
Palace,'' with collaborators Barry Harman (music) and Joseph Stein (book). Mr.
Shire's double life keeps him on the West Coast more than half the time, and he
and Mr. Maltby, who lives in New York, do a lot of their polishing by speaker
phone.

Though all these projects might endanger their collaboration, both men insist
that their work together forms the creative center of their lives. Inevitably,
however, there is a certain competitiveness.

''Good-natured teasing is as far it goes,'' Mr. Shire insisted. ''Basically, we
both feel that anything that is good for one of our careers is good for both.''

The revue ''Closer Than Ever'' may not be the largest project on either plate,
but it is the one closest to both their hearts, for its songs are the outgrowth
of strong feelings about what theater songs ought to be.

''I find that, generally speaking, people are more interesting in real life than
when they're stage characters,'' Mr. Maltby said. ''I would like see songs that
are at least as complex as my friends.''

The show, which he is co-directing with Steven Scott Smith, his assistant of
five years, was originally called ''Next Time, Now!'' This past summer, at the
Williamstown Theater Festival, it was retitled, reshaped and expanded into an
hour-and-40-minute evening. The show features four actor-singers performing
Maltby-and- Shire theater songs, most of them composed in the 1980's, that
examine people's personal changes over more than two decades. Especially in the
more serious ballads, the characters' reflections on their choices and changing
personal values carry a bittersweet sting.

The woman who narrates the song ''Life Story'' tells of divorcing an immature
husband who goes off to live in an ashram while she becomes a freelance writer,
follows a feminist philosophy and singlehandedly raises a son whom she sends to
college. ''At a well-toned 39/ I find that getting work is harder,'' she
confesses, and she admits to resenting younger women who ''got their jobs from
the fights I won.'' She also begins to long for the husband she shed and who
later married ''some bimbo and moved to New Rochelle.''

A male counterpart of the woman narrating ''Life Story'' is the settled
44-year-old husband, who sings the wistful ''One of the Good Guys.'' Though
happily married, with children in college, he still lies awake at night worrying
that he has missed out on the erotic adventures he has denied himself for the
sake of stability and marital bliss. ''And although I know that my life is
blessed/ I am teased by thoughts that it's second best,'' he acknowledges.

If narrators as self-aware and smart as those of ''Life Story'' and ''One of the
Good Guys'' sound more real than most characters one encounters in theater
songs, it's because many of the lyrics are factually based on real people. Both
the freelance writer and the faithful husband were inspired by the personal
confessions of old and close friends of the team, who collected these and other
stories in what Mr. Maltby named ''the urban file.''

Some of the material in the file found its way into ''Urban Blight,'' a
collection of songs and playlets that was produced by Manhattan Theater Club two
years ago. Of the new show's 25 songs, 16 are recent, and 5 are revised versions
of songs dropped from the team's 1983 Broadway musical ''Baby.'' Four are from
the distant past, the oldest having been written for their 1961 Off Broadway
show, ''The Sap of Life.''

Mr. Maltby and Mr. Shire share some striking similarities. Both are 52 and the
sons of orchestra leaders who are now seriously ailing. Both graduated in the
class of '59 at Yale, where they met as freshmen and wrote two shows. Both are
married for the second time.

It took nearly 20 years for the pair to gain significant recognition as
songwriters with the 1977 Off Broadway revue ''Starting Here, Starting Now.''
Consisting mostly of songs written for shows that had either gone unproduced or
closed out of town, ''Starting Here, Starting Now'' has had more than 400
productions worldwide. After that show, Mr. Maltby and Mr. Shire waited six more
years for their first Broadway musical, ''Baby,'' to be produced. Since its
modestly profitable seven-month run on Broadway, ''Baby'' has had 250
productions around the world.

''The best thing about 'Starting Here, Starting Now' was that it came after the
shakiest period in our collaboration when we were in the most danger of going
our separate ways forever,'' Mr. Shire recalled. ''Suddenly we realized that the
best work we did was with each other and that there was no reason to write off
the songs we had written together just because they were in shows that hadn't
worked.''

It was during this shaky period that Mr. Maltby put together ''Ain't Misbehavin'
'' as a cabaret piece at the Manhattan Theater Club. The show moved to Broadway
in 1978. At the same time, Mr. Shire, who had begun writing television and film
scores for Universal in the late 60's, was establishing himself in Hollywood.

Since then, Mr. Maltby's other major directorial credits have included the
Broadway production of Andrew Lloyd Webber's ''Song and Dance,'' and the
Philadelphia Drama Guild productions of ''Long Day's Journey Into Night'' and
''The Glass Menagerie'' - both starring Geraldine Fitzgerald - not to mention
his and Mr. Shire's own Broadway show, ''Baby.''

Although Mr. Maltby takes directing very seriously, he said that he still feels
that the role of writer is more important, though often less enjoyable, than
that of director.

''When you're just the lyricist for a show, you're usually off in a hotel room
or in some apartment working while everybody else is having the fun,'' he said.
''I think I became a director so I could get out of the hotel room. But in the
last couple of years, it has occurred to me directing wasn't really where I
lived. In writing, you're leaving something behind.''

Mr. Maltby said that he found ''Miss Saigon,'' for which he adapted Mr.
Boublil's French libretto into English, to be a typically frustrating hotel-room
experience. But the project also seemed too interesting to turn down. The
musical is essentially the story of ''Madame Butterfly'' moved up to 1975 and
set against the fall of Saigon, when American troops abandoned the South
Vietnamese capital in a dramatic airlift.

''The fall of Saigon is a tremendous metaphor for the collapse of a part of the
American dream that Vietnam represented,'' Mr. Maltby said. ''It was the dream
of America as a white knight going out and saving other people. When the project
was offered to me I thought, how you can have an idea like that come along and
not participate in it?

''To me, one of the touching things about it is that the tradition of taking
great historic themes and working them into the musical theater is so American.
Yet here's a show that deals with American history but was made in England. I
think that some in the American theater community may have a hard time dealing
with that fact.''

''The assignment didn't call for lyric writing in the standard sense,'' he said.
''Since there's no spoken dialogue, it was basically playwriting to music.''

Mr. Maltby, unlike many other American theater songwriters, does not disparage
the revolution in musical theater that has turned more and more shows into
all-sung extravaganzas.

''That revolution has basically to do with stage energy and the discovery that
switching from singing to dialogue is a slowing down of that energy,'' he said.
''When Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice started out, the one thing they didn't
want was to sit through those dreary book scenes, and so they wrote something
that didn't have them. Sondheim these days writes shows that have very little
dialogue. It's only now that 'Sweeney Todd,' which has almost no dialogue, and
which was originally seen as a strange musical, is being recognized as the form-
breaker that it really was. I think that most people are continuing to write
this way.''

Mr. Maltby and Mr. Shire jokingly call ''Closer Than Ever'' a ''bookless book
musical,'' for it, too, has no dialogue, only songs. But if ''Closer Than Ever''
is very up to date in its form, it carries forward the commitment that they both
made at the begining of the decade to reach into their personal experience for
the feelings that they expressed in ''Baby.''

'' 'Baby' happened because I was riding in a car with Francis Ford Coppola, who
happens to love musicals, and I said, 'Gee, Richard and I are looking for
something to write about that isn't the same old thing,'' Mr. Shire recalled.
''Francis said, 'Why don't you write about something you know? What's the most
emotional thing that happened to you in the last five years?' And without
thinking, I said, 'Being present at the birth of my son.' And that's how 'Baby'
began. From then on, we started using material that came from our own lives.''



LYRICS OF LOVE AND ITS COMPLEXITIES

'I DON'T REMEMBER CHRISTMAS'

I was standing in the bedroom
When it suddenly came clear
That at last I don't remember
That at one time you were here
All that stuff that used to haunt me
Like your robe behind the door
For the first time I don't notice
That they're not here any more

- from ''Starting Here, Starting Now''
by Richard Maltby Jr. and David Shire



'LIFE STORY'

It was a liberated marriage
We shared the household chores, of course
We understood each other's feelings
Right down to the day of our sensible divorce
I didn't ask him for a penny
I'd had my ''liberated'' training
So off he went with his hair of bronze
To find a life like Kahlil Gibran's
I got my rest from the drugs he did
He got his quest, I got the kid
And oh I'm not complaining

- from ''Closer Than Ever''
by Richard Maltby Jr. and David Shire)



 'THE STORY GOES ON'

And all these things I feel and more,
My mother's mother felt, and hers before
A chain of life begun upon the shore of some dark sea
Has reached to me
And now I can see the chain extending
My child is next in a line that has no ending.
And here am I full of life that her child will feel
When I'm long gone
And thus it is the story goes on

- from ''Baby''
 by Richard Maltby Jr. and David Shire)

(''Christmas'') c 1977 Fiddleback Publications Co. Inc. and Revelation Music
Publications Corp. A Tommy Valando publication; (''Life Story'') c 1989
Fiddleback Music Publications Co. Inc. and Progeny Music and Revelation Music
Publications Corp. and Long Pond Music. A Tommy Valando publication; (''Story
Goes On'') c 1984 Fiddleback Music Publications Co. Inc. and Progeny Music and
Revelation Music Publications Corp. and Long Pond Music. A Tommy Valando
publication.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sally Mayes, Lynn Wintersteller, Richard Muenz and Brent Barrett in
''Closer Than Ever,'' a revue by the lyricist Richard Maltby Jr., front left,
and the composer David Shire (Martha Swope) (pg. 5); Liz Calloway in ''Baby''
(Martha Swope) (pg. 45)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Touchstone Has A Recognizable Touch

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 950 words


''The Bear,'' as it might have been made by Touchstone Pictures: Bart, the
2,000-pound grizzly, would not star. Bart is high-priced and makes a lot of
demands - e.g., six whole chickens and a lot of fruit punch every day - so his
more accommodating understudy, Doc, might be a better idea. The British
Columbian scenery, which was actually filmed in the Bavarian Alps, need not be
quite as authentic; it could be augmented by studio-built sets. Jean-Jacques
Annaud, the French director who devoted vast amounts of expensive effort to this
project, is far too much of a perfectionist. Perhaps Leonard Nimoy would be
available.

Here is the Touchstone method in a nutshell: do it efficiently, and hold the
frills. If the best talent isn't feasible, then the second-best will be just
fine. And remember that every film is designed to be watched by an audience,
e.g. a group of disparate individuals with a collective wish to be entertained.
That last point may be obvious, but it's often overlooked. And it's something
that Touchstone, much more assiduously than other studios, is anxious to keep in
mind.

''It's the only time I've ever had a three-hour meeting that took an hour and a
half,'' says one film maker about a discussion of a prospective Touchstone
project. This studio's executives are known for having unusually definite ideas
about what they want and for being outstandingly unsentimental about moving on
to a second or third choice if they can't see eye to eye with their preferred
candidate. The result: the most sharply defined studio imprint in Hollywood. The
problem: elsewhere in the industry, studio imprints have pretty much gone the
way of the saber-toothed tiger.

Directorial self-expression is hardly what it was in the mid-1970's, but there's
still something distinctly unfashionable about the regimentation of Touchstone's
approach. It suggests a definite ceiling on the heights to which film makers can
soar. That's the bad news, but here's the good: there's also a floor. If a lot
of Touchstone releases don't aspire to being more than good, solid B-level
entertainment, they usually live up to that limited goal. Sometimes they do even
better.

Although Touchstone has made dramas as diverse as ''The Color of Money'' and
''The Good Mother'' - the latter directed by Mr. Nimoy, starring Diane Keaton,
and a classic example of what can go wrong when the personnel are so clearly ill
suited to the project - the studio's style is most closely identified with
comedy. In comedies, for all the originality of ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit'' and
''Good Morning, Vietnam,'' Touchstone has mostly generated a cookie-cutter
feeling without resorting to actual sequels and has demonstrated that
derivativeness isn't necessarily a flaw.

The four films in which Bette Midler has played shrews - ''Down and Out in
Beverly Hills,'' ''Ruthless People,'' ''Outrageous Fortune'' and ''Big
Business'' - have all been very funny, with a mechanical quality that actually
helps to keep them on track. In remaking French comedy hits - ''Three Men and a
Baby'' and the less amusing ''Three Fugitives'' - the studio has also repeated
itself with reasonably good results. Only when the material is too transparently
silly - e.g. ''Adventures in Babysitting'' or ''Heartbreak Hotel'' - does the
essential unimaginativeness of Touchstone humor become grating. Even here,
though, the stock quality of the material guarantees some degree of consistency.
No Touchstone release ever goes off the deep end or forgets where it was going
in the first place.

''Gross Anatomy'' and ''An Innocent Man,'' two Touchstone films that are
currently among the top 10 box-office successes, are fairly representative. They
demonstrate both the strengths and weaknesses of the studio's tactics. The
latter, the prison drama starring the Touchstone contract player Tom Selleck
(Miss Midler and Goldie Hawn are similarly connected to the studio), marks yet
another not-quite-successful attempt to crack the action genre. (Of these, the
wilderness adventure ''Shoot to Kill,'' with Sidney Poitier and Tom Berenger, is
the studio's best to date). Everything about ''An Innocent Man'' has a canned,
slightly off-base feeling, and yet in its own way the film is sturdy.

The director, Peter Yates, is seasoned; Touchstone doesn't lend itself to
on-the-job training. The star, a handsome, strapping and very mild-mannered
actor, manages to overplay the early nice-guy scenes and underplay the later
ones, in which his character is supposed to turn tough. The rest of the roles -
the corrupt, sadistic cop, the sweet and patient wife - are played by actors who
meet the proper specifications but don't have much color of their own. Generic,
not-quite-right casting is one of the studio's typical economies.

''An Innocent Man'' is so pat that it will probably play nicely on home video,
where formulaic touches aren't nearly as annoying as they are on the big screen,
and where audiences appreciate solid, workmanlike film making that isn't dull.
The same is even more true for ''Gross Anatomy,'' a medical-school comedy that's
much livelier but has a similar lack of individual personality. That ''Gross
Anatomy'' telegraphs everything that's going to happen doesn't even make the
laughs unfunny or the action unenjoyable. If anything, its standard touches are
even reassuring.

Matthew Modine's flirty, mischievous performance in ''Gross Anatomy'' is one of
Touchstone's little dividends. Mr. Modine wasn't the right man for this job,
playing a prankster who refuses to take himself or his studies seriously. A
studio more willing to burn money would have hired Tom Cruise in a flash. But
sometimes there's a better way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Daphne Zuniga and Matthew Modine, shaking hands, in ''Gross Anatomy''
(Richard Cartwright)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Philanthropy for the 21st Century

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2032 words


The fourth-generation Rockefellers are confronted with their own mortality. As
most of these heirs to one of the nation's wealthiest dynasties step deeper into
middle age, they are searching for a meaningful way to leave their imprint.

In the last several years, some of the 22 fourth-generation members of the
family, who range in age from 22 to 61 and call themselves ''the cousins,'' have
started to take a more active role in the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, the
family's main vehicle for philanthropy. They have also moved to coordinate their
own personal philanthropy and moved environmental causes to the top of their
agenda.

''We decided the only way we could retain our identity as a family was through
shared social purpose expressed through philanthropy,'' said Steven C.
Rockefeller, one of the cousins.

The unrelated move by the Rockefeller Group last week to sell an interest in
some of its choicest assets will ensure that future generations of the family
have wealth if they choose to carry on the deep tradition of philanthropy
established by their forebears. The sale of such showcase properties as
Rockefeller Center and the Radio City Music Hall represents a forward-looking
strategy. In diversifying the family's assets held in trust, which had become
dominated by real estate, the Rockefeller trustees are ensuring that future
Rockefellers will have resources in the 21st Century and beyond. On Monday, the
company and David Rockefeller Sr., chairman of the Rockefeller Group, announced
that it had sold a 51 percent stake in the company to Mitsubishi Estate Company
of Tokyo.

While some of the younger Rockefeller cousins had been rumored to be interested
in cashing out their interests in the company, Mr. Rockefeller insisted ''there
are no payouts.'' The $846 million in proceeds from the sale revert to
unbreakable family trusts established by John D. Rockefeller Jr. in 1934. The
proceeds, he said, are unlikely to be distributed during the lifetimes of any of
the cousins.

But they could in time provide increased income from the trusts for their
children and their children's children. These future generations will carry on a
philanthropic-mindedness that has been a part of the family since John D.
Rockefeller founded the dynasty. Using his fortunes from the Standard Oil
Company, in 1913 he created the Rockefeller Foundation, one of the country's 10
wealthiest philanthropies, with assets of $2 billion today. He leaves a legacy
of great institutions including the University of Chicago, the Rockefeller
University and the Rockefeller Foundation.

Shaping the youngest generation in the family's philanthropic mission starts at
a tender age. For example, Alida Rockefeller Messinger, 40, says she was only 5
years old when her late father, John D. Rockefeller, 3rd, began talking to her
about giving.

''My father and mother's greatest fear was that their four children might take
their wealth for granted and grow up spoiled and arrogant,'' she said. ''They
wanted us to learn early that with wealth comes responsibility.''

In fact, the cousins, who include physicians, lawyers, educators and
environmentalists, will leave their children a strong history of philanthropy.
Although the cousins' inheritance has not been quantified and extends through a
network of more than 100 financial trusts, their combined annual personal
contributions to philanthropic causes are said to total in the tens of millions.
They contribute to the schools where they have studied, the communities in which
they live and a range of highly individualized interests in the arts, sciences,
health, in civil rights causes and now, increasingly in environmental movements,
on both the global and local levels.

Still, the cousins have grown up in the formidable shadow of their fathers and
uncles. John D. Rockefeller Jr.'s six children, the third generation of
Rockefellers, formed the Rockefeller Brothers Fund in 1949, which has since been
the main vehicle for the family's charitable activities.

These scions, the so-called ''Brothers Generation,'' include John D. Rockefeller
3d, who is known worldwide for his support of population control and as a patron
of Asian culture; Laurance Rockefeller, a venture capitalist and
conservationist; David Sr., the former chairman of Chase Manhattan, and civic
leader; Winthrop, a former Governor of Arkansas, and Nelson, the United States
vice president and former New York Governor.

Only Laurance, 79, and David, 75, survive. The others, including Abby, the only
Rockefeller sister, died during the 1970's.

The cousins have fewer resources than the brothers. But they have established
several individual foundations with their trust money.

And since the mid-80's, they have begun to exert greater influence over the
affairs of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund. In 1985, Laurance resigned his seat on
the board, giving the cousins 8 of 9 family seats on the fund's 17-member board.
And two years ago, David Rockefeller, Jr., a board member and a leader among the
cousins, succeeded his father as chairman of the fund's board.

David Jr. has played a pivotal role in reorganizing and strengthening the family
institutions. And with his talents for conciliating differences, he is trying
reunite the cousins, who have never been a cohesive group and many of whom have
an almost obsessive insistence on privacy. At the urgings of his father, and to
insure a smooth transition, David Jr. invited the other cousins as well as
outside experts to help shape an agenda for the fund.

Their suggestions helped form the foundation of ''A strategy for the 80's,'' an
agenda adopted by the fund in 1983. The agenda is built on a ''one world''
theme, pushing the fund further into environmental programs. While the fund was
an early contributor to research on greenhouse gases and global warming, today
it invests fully 40 percent of its money in programs to protect the world's
water, forests, land and air resources.

The recent sale of Rockefeller Center to Mitsubishi is in keeping with that
spirit of ''one world.'' David Jr. said Thursday that it was ''a reminder of how
small the global village has become and the importance of close partnerships
among the world's peoples and nations.''

Alluding to the new relationship between the Rockefeller and Mitsubishi
interests, he added: ''The closer we operate in business, culture or the
environment, the more secure and healthier we will be.''

The cousins' recent shift comes years after soul-searching. Most are now in
their 40's and 50's, and came of age during the turbulent 60's, a time of campus
demonstrations against the Vietnam war and clamoring for social change. Some of
them marched, joined anti-war groups and supported nuclear disarmament efforts.

It was a period of alienation and confusion, and a number of them, troubled by
the times and their own family identity, sought psychiatric help. Steven, 53,
recalls the period as painful. Now a professor of religion at Middlebury College
in Vermont, he has embraced Zen-Buddhism, which he said ''opened him up'' but
has not closed him off to Christianity.

Some changed their names to disassociate themselves from the family. Sandra
Rockefeller, Abby's daughter, dropped the family name and still lives privately
in Cambridge, Mass.

Still, a few have high profiles. The most visible cousin is John D. Rockefeller
4th, the 52-year-old senator and former governor of West Virginia.

And most have given to their favorite causes privately. Many of the cousins are
active in environmental issues. Abby M. O'Neill, the oldest of the cousins, is
vice-chairman of the board of the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation. Preserving
the Virginia landmark city has been an interest of the Rockefeller family since
the 1920's.

Abby Rockefeller, David Sr.'s daughter, shocked some family members when she set
up business in Cambridge to market a Swedish composting toilet - a concept that
is beginning to catch on.

Winthrop Paul Rockefeller, Jr., 41, who is said to have inherited at least $550
million as his father's sole heir, is believed to be the richest cousin. An
outdoorsman, his wide-ranging interests include serving on the boards of the
Nature Conservancy, Ducks Unlimited, which seeks to protect migrating waterfowl,
and the Bill Foundation, which is concerned with preserving migrating species
like marlin and sailfish. He is chief executive officer of Winrock Farms, which
raises livestock and crops.

The health of the environment is also a major concern of Larry Rockefeller, an
attorney, and his wife, Wendy Gordan Rockefeller, an expert in toxicology. Both
are on the staff of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental
group that campaigned successfully to remove the ripening agent, Alar, from the
market. Wendy is also a co-chairperson with Meryl Streep of Mothers and Others
for Pesticide Limits, a public education campaign that called attention to the
dangers of the Alar, which is sprayed on apples.

Social causes also a favorite cause among the cousins. David Jr.'s private
philanthropic interests focus on strengthening American public education. He is
chairman of Recruiting New Teachers, an organization in Cambridge that elicited
almost 250,000 responses to a campaign by the Advertising Council seeking
pre-college instructors.

Two years ago, Dr. Lucy Waletzky, a Washington psychiatrist and co-founder of
the Medical Illness Counseling Center, created ''DateABLE,'' in Chevy Chase,
Md., a service that helps people who live in isolation with and without physical
disabilities to meet and make social contacts. ''It's a dating service with 200
members and chapters now in San Antonio and Cleveland,'' she said.

Alida Rockefeller supports a radio station owned and operated by the Oglala
Indians on the Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota. Neva R. Goodwin, an
economist, serves on the board of the College of the Atlantic, a small
institution in Bar Harbor, Me., which gives only one degree - in human ecology.

In the cousins group, where women outnumber men, Laura R. Chasin has taken the
lead in carving out an interest in ''reproductive responsibility,'' the name she
gives a bundle of concerns including contraceptive research and pro-choice and
civil rights issues. ''I'm prepared to spend the next 20 years learning what I
have to know,'' she said after calling together an informal meeting of experts
this summer to outline a possible philanthropic role in these causes.

Although their interests remain wide-ranging, the cousins are developing new
cohesion in their private philanthropic efforts. Two years ago, they formed a
Family Philanthropy Committee. Headed by Steven Rockefeller, the group meets
every two months toidentify areas of mutual interest and collaboration. Three
generations sit on the 10-member committee: David Rockefeller Sr., seven members
of the fourth generation and two from the fifth.

In addition, the cousins appointed Ira S. Hirschfield to head another committee
to more closely coordinate the philanthropic endeavors of the individidual
family members, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and the Rockefeller Family Fund, a
smaller philanthropy, with $34 million in assets, createdin 1967 to serve as a
training ground for the young family members.

The arrangement was made in part because of the dovetailing interests of the
cousins and the foundations. For instance, because of an initiative by Larry
Rockefeller, the Rockefeller Family Fund was prompted to support the
Conservation Law Foundation, which using litigation, has pressured utilities to
develop energy-conservation practices.

That the cousins are impelled to continue their great-grandfather's legacy was
underscored when the family and guests convened to honor the patriarch's 150th
birthday last weekend at his 2,700-acre Pocantico Hills estate, with a sweeping
view of the Hudson.

As David Rockefeller Jr. reflected the accomplishments of that ''legendary
man,'' he asked the group to ponder several thoughts. ''What is the current
plight of man?'' he asked the group. ''What is the condition of our planetary
nest? And what is philanthropy doing to respond to these conditions?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Rodman Rockefeller, Nelson's son (NYT/Star Black); David Rockefeller
and his son, David Jr. (NYT/Sarah Krulwich); Winthrop Rockefeller shortly before
his death in 1973 and his son, Paul Winthrop (UPI); diagram showing the daughter
and five sons of John D. Rockfeller Jr., as well as their spouses and their
children. (NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

No Laughing Matter

BYLINE: By Bill Carter; Bill Carter covers television for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 50, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3935 words


MICHAEL J. FUCHS WAITS FOR HIS personal chef, Paul, to remove the dessert
plates, then leans back in his chair and smiles with the barely suppressed
eagerness of a man about to bat with the bases loaded.

''I'm in the thick of it!'' he says. ''I can't remember a time when I've been so
energized. Between the merger, the Paramount thing, the lawsuit, the new
channel, I'm hanging out of three or four windows at once. I mean, I'm really
out there. This is exciting.''

For Fuchs, 43, the chairman and chief executive officer of Home Box Office, the
pay-television giant of the cable television industry, 1989 has been
contentiously compelling: HBO's parent company, Time Inc., stared down the
threat of a hostile takeover from Paramount after the announcement of Time's
merger with Warner Communications. Time and HBO were targeted in a $2.4 billion
lawsuit alleging anticompetitive practices, filed by Viacom Inc., owner of
Showtime and the Movie Channel, HBO's two main pay-television competitors. And
HBO faced a head-to-head challenge from another Viacom subsidiary, MTV Networks,
to establish the first all-comedy channel in cable television.

Last month, Tele-Communications Inc., the largest cable operator in the country,
joined forces with Viacom when it bought a 50 percent interest in Showtime. The
next day, Fuchs responded to the challenge and called TCI's move ''openly
aggressive and hostile.'' The cable industry is now bracing for a war between
the two reigning powers in cable, Time Warner and TCI-Viacom. HBO's Comedy
Channel goes on the air Nov. l5 and Fuchs has termed the event critical for
HBO's long-term future.

With all that going on, Fuchs has had more opportunity to climb between the
ropes than Michael Tyson.

Tyson happens to work for Fuchs, who has paid the boxer $26.5 million over the
past two years to fight for HBO. ''When people get in the ring with Tyson, you
can see that look in their eyes,'' Fuchs says. ''I like to see that look.''

Fuchs himself is not nearly as imposing physically as the heavyweight champion.
He is average height, olive-skinned, intelligently handsome. He dresses
stylishly and adventurously. His dark hair has thinned to a point where those
who no longer work for him use the term ''balding.'' Still, he is proud of his
street-tough image, which the Time board called on during the struggle with
Paramount. ''If I said it once in those meetings,'' says Fuchs, ''I said it 27
times: Screw 'em. I think a little of that tone was helpful.''

Fuchs's willingness to mix it up with the corporate Hollywood pugs may prove to
be his greatest asset in traversing the unpredictable new boardroom terrain at
Time Inc. The Warner merger, accomplished in battle, has raised questions about
the pecking order of the conquering generals. Some Time executives feel that the
Warner chairman, Steven J. Ross, may emerge with more power than they bargained
for. But Fuchs's informal style and aggressive personality seem suited to the
turbulent entertainment-based company. Indeed, having a hand in running a studio
is one item Fuchs has said he would like to add to his corporate resume.

THAT RESUME HAS TO THIS point been dominated by HBO.

Fuchs is HBO's spiritual leader, its front man, its chief programmer and the
definer of its image. Much of what HBO has been, is now, and will be (in the
near future anyway) comes down to Michael Fuchs. HBO's future has become a
preoccupation, not only for Fuchs but for much of the cable industry. From its
start in 1972 as an outlet for uncut, uncensored movies, HBO grew exponentially
for more than a decade, fed by the continuing expansion of the cable business.
By 1978, it had become the powerhouse programming channel in cable television.
Most new cable systems made HBO their centerpiece - and main selling point. New
cable subscribers often signed up solely to get HBO. But by the mid-1980's, the
rest of cable began to catch up.

Now ''the power of HBO has definitely waned,'' says Larry Gerbrandt, vice
president and senior analyst for Paul Kagan Associates, a consulting firm for
the cable industry. ''I still don't think the average cable operator could
really think of life without HBO.'' But subscriber growth for HBO has flattened
out. Gerbrandt sees the service as more ''vulnerable'' than at any time in its
history.

If the company is at a crossroads, so is the man behind the wheel. Fuchs
acknowledges that pay television -that is, premium or pay channels such as HBO,
Showtime, The Disney Channel, which cost an additional fee - ''is no longer
growing by leaps and bounds.'' The future of HBO, he says, must include
expansion into basic cable. Channels such as CNN, ESPN, TBS SuperStation and
A&E, which are included in each month's basic service, represent the fastest
growing segment of the television industry.

Slow to develop a basic cable channel, HBO has already missed out on ''the
slam-dunk era when you could get circulation for any decent idea because the
cable systems were dying for programming,'' Fuchs says. ''We should have been
smart enough'' to get into basic earlier, he acknowledges. But ''at the time
when basic was starting to boom. . .HBO was going through the most difficult
period we ever had around here,'' he recalls. He calls the period ''the
tunnel.''

It was 1984, and a reeling Time Inc. had just moved Fuchs into the CEO position.
HBO - along with just about everyone else in the entertainment business - had
miscalculated the impact of the exploding market for video-cassette recorders.
It suddenly found itself no longer the first after-market for movies - or the
only place viewers at home could see uncut films. Subscriber growth, projected
at about 2 million for that year, was near zero. Fuchs was one of the few who
had talked about the looming threat of the VCR, according to another executive
who was there. But Time's top management, not entirely comfortable with what it
saw as his ''maverick'' style (he'd been passed over for the chairmanship the
year before for this reason), wasn't listening.

''We had our backs up against the wall,'' Fuchs says. Personally, ''that period
was like a constant migraine.''

HBO emerged from the tunnel intact, redirecting its service toward monthly
volume and original productions and away from major movie titles. The business
stabilized and moved ahead.

IN 1987, HBO LAUNCHED another new pay service, Festival, with movies aimed at
family viewers. It failed a year later.

The failure of Festival, added to the miscalculation about the VCR and HBO's
missed opportunity to get in on the ground floor in basic cable, has increased
the pressure on HBO to succeed with the launching of The Comedy Channel.

HBO's longstanding competitor, Viacom, will launch its comedy channel, ''HA,''
in April. Antagonism between the two companies was bitter even before Viacom
filed its antitrust suit against HBO last summer. Because so many Viacom
executives once worked for HBO, the rivalry has the elements of a blood feud.

''This is the most dramatic story in this business,'' Fuchs says. Seven months
after the announcement of The Comedy Channel, and less than two weeks before the
Nov. l5 launch date, it is still far from certain which comedy channel the most
important cable operators are going to put on their wires. HBO's channel will
have its premiere with about 13 million subscribers, a respectable total. But
most of the key cable systems have yet to commit to either HBO or Viacom.

HBO plans an all comedy-clip format (ironically, much in the style of MTV),
superior in concept, Fuchs believes, to the ''HA'' channel's plan for regular
half-hour series and full-length movies.

Fuchs contends HBO's reputation for quality programming and expertise in comedy
should be crucial deciding factors for the cable systems. ''Comedy is a sacred
trust at HBO,'' he says, noting that Robin Williams, Billy Crystal and Roseanne
Barr, among many other comics, all have had prominent exposure on HBO.

But, as he says, ''it always comes down to the deal.'' Deals with major cable
operators now often include offers of equity in the channel in exchange for
space on their systems. Viacom offered equity in ''HA'' from the start. Fuchs
had announced that HBO would not share equity in its new channel. But that stand
has become increasingly difficult to maintain and Fuchs is now reconsidering his
position.

Viacom may have made a key strategic move last month in the deal with TCI. TCI
controls 20 percent of the nation's cable subscribers, making its president and
CEO, John Malone, the industry's power-broker.

The stakes were raised even higher two weeks ago when Fuchs decided to take on
Malone. He told a cable investors' conference: ''If Malone were in the airline
business, he'd be acquiring all the air in the world.'' After the conference, he
met with Malone for an hourlong discussion that he described as ''very heated.''
Malone's decision to shore up Showtime was widely interpreted as evidence of his
desire to check the power of Time Warner.

Time executives have suggested they may take legal action to challenge the
Showtime purchase, and are likely to use the sale in a countersuit against
Viacom.

Fuchs is not chagrined by the developments. The battle has been stimulating.
''It gets the juices running,'' he says. ''I would say we have to win this
fight. Personally I have to win it.''

MICHAEL FUCHS takes most of his company's battles personally. The threads of
tangled personal relationships and broken friendships run in and out of the
history of Fuchs's 13 years at the company. Among the most tangled is his
relationship with Frank J. Biondi Jr., former chairman and CEO of HBO and now
the president and CEO of Viacom.

''The most difficult thing that's happened is this thing between Frank and me,''
Fuchs says, his face displaying something deeper than anger: anguish. It is late
on an evening in April, and Fuchs is still in his office, letting out his
emotions. ''You're in business together, you travel together, you play tennis
together. But, I mean, things change. This isn't camp.''

Fuchs is still absorbing the news of the suit filed by Viacom, which charges
monopolistic practices and anticompetitive manipulation of the marketplace, and
asks for treble damages.

It is an assault against his company. Fuchs would take it personally even if it
didn't involve Biondi, his former colleague, tennis partner, closest friend.

''There was a brotherly knit there at one time,'' says Seth G. Abraham, HBO's
senior vice president of program operations and a longtime colleague of both
men. ''There's no question about it.''

Now Frank Biondi has sued his daughter's godfather for $2.4 billion.

The suit is a business decision, Biondi claims, one company taking steps to
compete more successfully with another. ''If Michael wants to take it personally
I can't do anything about it,'' Biondi says. ''It's not like a godfather is
really a significant relationship. How often do you see your godfather?''

Henry S. Schleiff, who was a senior vice president at HBO before moving to
Viacom and is a close friend of both men, says, ''Their relationship is a
miniseries.''

In 1978, Fuchs hired Biondi as HBO's director of co-productions. Quickly,
''Michael and Frank were inseparable,'' according to an executive who worked
with both. Their skills were compatible and complementary, with Biondi supplying
the managerial and financial expertise to balance Fuchs's fiery creativity.

They traveled the world together, played in tennis tournaments together, moved
up the corporate hierarchy at HBO and Time Inc. together. Their positions
remained essentially equal although Fuchs was always, in his own mind anyway,
''the older brother.''

The relationship changed irrevocably in 1983 when Biondi jumped over Fuchs to
become chairman and CEO of HBO, leaving Fuchs as president and chief operating
officer. Far worse, in Fuchs's eyes, was that Biondi changed too. ''Frank
changed entirely in the way he treated Michael,'' Abraham says. ''All of a
sudden it was: You work for me.''

Biondi thought it was Fuchs who had changed. ''I always assumed our friendship
was based on more than our working relationship,'' he says. ''My idea of
friendship is not conditioned on one being dominant and the other being the
follower.''

Fuchs never had to take the painful step of leaving the company because Biondi
left first - not willingly. The downturn in business after the VCR explosion led
Biondi into a bitter conflict with Nicholas J. Nicholas Jr., Time Inc.'s
president. Biondi left the company only eight months after being named CEO.
Fuchs has had the job ever since.

Periodic attempts by some colleagues, notably Henry Schleiff, to reconcile Fuchs
and Biondi have not succeeded. ''My hobby has been trying to bring them back
together,'' Schleiff says. ''After the suit, I think I'm going back to stamp
collecting.''

FUCHS AND HIS COM-pany are often linked by metaphor. ''HBO is his wife and his
life,'' is Seth Abraham's regular line.

Fuchs hates the marriage metaphor. ''I am not married to this company,'' he
says, preferring to explain his bachelor status as purely a matter of choice.
''I expect to be married,'' he says. During the remodeling of his apartment two
years ago, while he was engaged to the actress Brooke Adams, he planned a
separate wing ''for the nursery and the nanny.'' Since then, his social life has
included a range of companionship, from an heiress to an anchorwoman to a
schoolteacher.

Fuchs's loves include politics and tennis and clothes and the New York Yankees.
But the passion of his life has been HBO.

''I do have a particular affection for this company,'' he admits. ''I grew up
with the place. I'm a pay-TV baby. HBO came along at the right time of my
life.''

HBO more than came along; it swept him off his feet. A native New Yorker who
graduated from Union College (he majored in political science) and N.Y.U. law
school, Fuchs worked as an entertainment lawyer and business affairs executive
at the William Morris agency, two assignments he found profoundly unfulfilling.

In 1976, a colleague suggested to the 30-year-old Fuchs that he might be
interested in a programming position at HBO. Only a year before, Time Inc. had
gambled $6.5 million to rent space on the Satcom I satellite, effectively
creating a national distribution arm for the nation's first channel offering
uncut films for a monthly fee.

Though Fuchs had no experience as a television programmer, he found immediately
that he had an instinct for what the HBO audience (dominated by young men) liked
to watch, as well as a taste for the roughhouse deal-making needed to secure
worthy programming.

Fuchs steered HBO in the direction of original programming, focusing on comedy
and made-for-cable TV movies, the first in the industry. Several early movie
efforts were flops. But eventually, HBO acquired a reputation for quality work,
producing films that filled a niche above the level of network TV movies though
somewhat below most feature films.

Fuchs forged his reputation as an executive to be reckoned with through his
willingness to be confrontational. In the early 1980's, when HBO used its
new-found economic muscle to humble the Hollywood movie studios, it was Michael
Fuchs doing the high-profile flexing. ''I will bring Hollywood to its knees,''
he was once quoted as saying. It was almost certainly a joke, but Fuchs never
hid his disdain for what he viewed as the corruption and duplicity of many
members of the movie colony.

Hollywood wanted to fight, and Fuchs was willing to oblige. He turned up the
pressure at every opportunity, financing independent producers at an early
stage, which cut the profit margins of studios that came in later on the
project, and holding back on commitments to those studios he felt had misused
him. ''Michael is a bad enemy,'' Seth Abraham says. ''You know how Britain is a
country that functions better in war than peace? We are a company and Michael is
an executive that functions better in the tug of war of business. Britain is an
island nation. We've always felt like an island company.''

That attitude of pugnacious isolation has not made Fuchs and HBO popular with
the rest of the cable industry. ''Time Inc. and HBO throw their weight around a
lot,'' a major cable executive says. ''Fuchs is a part of that. They're on solid
ground, but they would make fewer enemies if they were only a little polite
about it.''

Fuchs hasn't limited his verbal shoves to the studios. ''The erosion of the
networks is simply a fact of life; some of the network programmers are still
trying to ride the dinosaur,'' he said.

''That's Michael,'' Abraham says. ''The studios were there, so let's take them
on. The networks were there; let's take them on.''

''I accept that people find me arrogant,'' Fuchs says. ''I think it's a matter
of style. I like to give it back to people. I'm a pusher.'' His staff generally
handles the pushing well. Fuchs boasts of the longevity of HBO executives, many
of whom have been in top jobs at the company for at least a decade. The flip
side of that, according to one critic, is that nobody succeeds at HBO unless he
or she pledges unswerving loyalty to the boss.

Abraham, who clearly admires and likes Fuchs, acknowledges that he has
managerial limitations. ''In 11 years, Michael has never once told me: Good job.
I don't need it now. Now it would sound like a baseball owner giving a manager a
vote of confidence. Now I'd be worried if I heard it. But five or six years ago,
it would have meant something to me. Good job is not in his vocabulary.''

I ALWAYS DREAMT OF the place having a high-class programming reputation,'' Fuchs
says. ''I wanted HBO to stand for something, to have a philosophy, a point of
view.''

The HBO philosophy quickly became the philosophy of its chief programmer. Of
particular interest was any subject with political implications. Fuchs's roots
run deep in liberal Democratic politics. ''I have never voted Republican in my
life. I never even read Time magazine in college because it was so
conservative.''

Fuchs campaigned for Bobby Kennedy in 1968. He worked in the Senate office of
Birch Bayh of Indiana. In 1972, he became an advance man for Edmund S. Muskie,
and made one significant contribution to that Presidential campaign, when he set
up Muskie's appearance on the steps of the Manchester Union-Leader, an
appearance that ended with the candidate in tears and the candidacy in tatters.

Fuchs still calls himself ''cause-oriented.'' No one in the company has to
wonder which projects reflect Fuchs's personal interest. A series of HBO
biographical films has essentially been a compilation of his heroes: Edward R.
Murrow, Andrei D. Sakharov, Nelson Mandela, most recently Simon Wiesenthal.
''Murderers Among Us,'' about Wiesenthal, which first aired this spring, was
among the best films made for television this past season. It won the Emmy -
against the best the networks could offer - for writing in a television movie.
Fuchs had the pleasure of hearing himself cited in writer Abby Mann's acceptance
speech as the driving force behind the film.

''When I met Wiesenthal I told him he reminded me of my grandfather,'' Fuchs
says. ''I think in a different life I would have been a Nazi hunter. I think
Simon knew this was a mission for me.''

''Dear America: Letters Home From Vietnam'' won two Emmys and a Peabody. It,
too, was a product of Fuchs's personal passion for the subject, in this case the
Vietnam veterans movement. (He is not a veteran himself.) And this year's
''Common Threads: Stories from the Quilt,'' about the AIDS quilt in Washington,
was a major critical success, another example of the kind of project Fuchs has
backed even though it is not likely to add a single subscriber to HBO's lists.

In terms of commercial success, all else pales against the impact of a single
deal, one with no discernible cause other than the greater benefit of HBO's
bottom line - the deal that binds Mike Tyson to HBO. Tyson, by far the biggest
draw on HBO, is cited by 20 percent of its core audience as the deciding factor
in their subscribing. When Tyson fights, HBO ratings soar. For Tyson's last
fight - another one-round annihilation, against Carl (the Truth) Williams, on
July 21 - HBO's rating in homes that carry the service was a spectacular 39.

Fuchs and Seth Abraham are deep into negotiations for a contract extension with
Tyson's manager, the highly conspicuous Don King. HBO has no illusions about how
much it needs Mike Tyson. The money HBO is offering the champion is, in
Abraham's description, ''something approximating a phone number and area code.''

MICHAEL FUCHS'S OFFICE, which overlooks the New York Public Library and Bryant
Park, is cluttered with what he calls his ''stuff.'' Fuchs says, ''It looks like
an Italian garage sale.''

It is not the office of the stereotypical business executive. ''The business is
getting more sophisticated,'' Fuchs says. ''But I never want the business side
to swallow up the creative side. When I first took this job, the people at Time
didn't want me so much involved in the programming side. Now they don't talk
about it anymore. I cheated a little bit to keep my hand in the programming. I
had to do that psychologically. It's funny, but as CEO, you have a job, but you
don't have a discipline. If you're good, you can pick your spots.''

Some of Fuchs's early colleagues at HBO doubted he could excel as a CEO, because
his strength was creative, not managerial. Fuchs still disdains managerial
skill. ''To say someone is a good manager, to me, isn't even a compliment.''

''But Michael is a very good CEO,'' says another former HBO executive, Tony Cox,
who is now a Showtime executive. ''That surprised me - and himself, I think.''

Early in the Time Inc. takeover fight, when it seemed possible that Paramount
would succeed, Fuchs was forced to consider his options. He had heard reports
that he would be one of the first executives dismissed if the company changed
hands, but the price Paramount was talking about paying for Time stock would
have made him an extremely rich man. ''The prospect had a certain appeal,''
Fuchs says. ''I thought about taking the money and doing what I'd always
promised myself I would do: travel, maybe live in Europe for a while, play
tennis every day and really get in shape.''

The battle with Paramount over, the merger with Warner completed, Fuchs finds he
can go back to thinking about the future - his and HBO's. Mainly that means The
Comedy Channel - HBO's ''manifest destiny.''

Both Nicholas J. Nicholas and Time's chairman, J. Richard Munro, say the same
thing about their HBO operative. Nicholas: ''He's older, more secure; he's
mellowed.'' Munro: ''We've seen a mellowing in Michael. There was a certain
brashness about him when he was younger. You see the changes, a maturing. He can
do most anything at Time Inc.''

But those close to him don't see him occupying a rarefied corporate niche in the
Time & Life Building. Instead, they mention the possibilities opened up by the
new alliance with Warner.

The key to that future will be the relationship Fuchs forges with Steve Ross.
''I've known Steve over time,'' Fuchs says. ''There are people in the business
who think he's more my type of executive. He is a founder, a guy with vision.
He's a unique cat.''

For the moment, Fuchs is feeling the situation out. ''I'm not naive enough to
believe there won't be any changes after a merger like this.'' He adds, ''I've
been studying my Steve-ology.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Michael Fuchs on the roof of HBO studio (pg. 50)(Frank Fournier); Fuchs
with Billy Crystal (pg. 52)(Ken Regan)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 916 words



THE MAN WHO KNEW CARY GRANT, by Jonathan Schwartz. (Plume/New American Library,
$8.95.) The son of a composer with a cast of famous friends finds that his only
successful relationship is with his father. ''It is in his portrayal of the past
as an abiding presence that Mr. Schwartz excels,'' Janet Kaye said here last
year. This novel ''captures the ineffable sadness of lost time.''

WALDHEIM: The Missing Years, by Robert Edwin Herzstein. (Paragon House, $12.95.)
After spending two years following a trail of documents from Washington to
London, Belgrade and Vienna, a historian tries to close the gaps in the life of
Kurt Waldheim, the former Nazi officer who rose through Austrian politics and
became Secretary General of the United Nations. Last year our reviewer, Shirley
Hazzard, said Robert Edwin Herzstein wasn't hard enough on Mr. Waldheim or his
protectors. But she called the book ''a new threshold in the drama, for its
volume of pertinent facts and for the portrait of Kurt Waldheim. . . . The
reader emerges incredulous that any man could deny such experience.''

MIDNIGHT SWEETS, by Bette Pesetsky. (Ivy, $3.95.) Working in the ephemeral
medium of cookie dough, Theodora elevates baking to an art and establishes an
empire. ''If it's possible to create a novel whose structure is based on
cookies, [Bette Pesetsky has] done it,'' David Leavitt said here last year.
''I'm only sorry there aren't recipes.''

FASTING GIRLS: The History of Anorexia Nervosa, by Joan Jacobs Brumberg.
(Plume/New American Library, $9.95.) Anorexia is on the rise, the writer argues,
because ''the cult of diet and exercise is the closest thing our secular society
offers women in terms of a coherent philosophy of the self.'' Last year our
reviewer, Eileen Simpson, called this study ''comprehensive and readable.''

THIS IS YOUR LIFE, by Meg Wolitzer. (Penguin, $7.95.) The two daughters of
Dottie Engels, a fat stand-up comedian, know their mother mostly from her
appearances on the television screen. ''Ms. Wolitzer knows how to draw
characters who are trapped in childhood, who feel the pain and novelty that come
with fresh experience,'' Kit Reed said here last year. ''Swift and accurate,
bristling with detail, 'This Is Your Life' does not so much describe growing up
as demonstrate what it's really like.''

AN EMPIRE OF THEIR OWN: How the Jews Invented Hollywood, by Neal Gabler.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) Spurned by East Coast high society, entrepreneurs
like Adolph Zukor, L. B. Mayer, the Warner brothers and Harry Cohn established
their own fantasy land in Southern California. Last year our reviewer, Molly
Haskell, said Neal Gabler ''has a Balzacian zest for financial data, for how
deals and fortunes are made and unravel, and a novelist's eye for the way
success and failure are prefigured in character.''

A RECENT MARTYR, by Valerie Martin. (Vintage, $7.95.) In New Orleans an
unhappily married woman named Emma becomes tangled up in a sadomasochistic
threesome. ''This is a striking book, one with as much depth as the reader dares
to plumb,'' Carolyn Banks said here last year.

CHASING THE GLORY: Travels Across America, by Michael Parfit.
(Collier/Macmillan, $8.95.) A journalist and pilot retraces Charles Lindbergh's
flight around America to see how the landscape has changed. This book is ''an
elegy for what has been lost and a celebration of what remains unspoiled in
America - both in the land and in the people,'' John Byrne Cooke said here
earlier this year. ''It is also a pleasure to read.''

PACO'S STORY, by Larry Heinemann. (Penguin, $7.95.) A veteran with nightmares of
Vietnam moves to a small town in Texas to lose himself in the meditative
repetitions of a simple, mindless job. In 1987 our reviewer, Christopher Benfey,
said this ''carefully crafted, oblique narrative'' suggests that the horrors of
war ''may be as forcefully conveyed by a haunting scene in a greasy spoon as by
the tearing of human flesh.'' The novel won a National Book Award.

THE FLOATPLANE NOTEBOOKS, by Clyde Edgerton. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The patriarch
of a North Carolina family, who fancies himself an engineer, believes that
according to the principle of ''natural suspension,'' even a family stricken by
the tragedy of Vietnam can be uplifted. ''So perfect is the author's control
that each voice, like an individual bell in a handbell choir, rings true,''
Barbara Kingsolver said in The Book Review last year. ''Mr. Edgerton's gift is
for dialect that places its speaker squarely - not only on a geographical map,
but a psychological one.''

THE QUESTION OF HU, by Jonathan D. Spence. (Vintage, $8.95.) In early
18th-century France, a curious visitor from China found that in the context of
European culture his exuberant behavior qualified him for incarceration in an
insane asylum. Jonathan D. Spence's ''delicate but nevertheless ambitious
approach makes him one of the most original and exciting historians writing
now,'' Angeline Goreau said in these pages in 1988.

A SOCIAL HISTORY OF MADNESS: The World Through the Eyes of the Insane, by Roy
Porter. (Dutton/Obelisk, $8.95.) In this collection of case studies, the history
of the asylum is told from the point of view of the inmates. ''Often the
eloquence and cogency of the testimonies are striking,'' Marina Warner said here
last year. ''Pugnacious yet soft-spoken, the book gives us new ears to listen to
the so-called ravings and gibberish of the mad.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Kurt Waldheim in 1943.

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION;
THE WORLD'S WARS

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


This is a coffeetable volume of 75 war photographs, and since they depict the
conflicts of the 1980's they are all in color; the mangled flesh is red and the
flames are orange. These are strong, evocative pictures reminding us that a
guerrilla's vengeful rage or a child's poignant grief are just as affecting in
little wars - Nicaragua, Northern Ireland, Lebanon and the like - as they were
in earlier wars that slew millions. To an older generation of combat
photographers, DEEDS OF WAR (Thames and Hudson, $35), a collection of work by
the magazine photographer James Nachtwey, is a startling reminder of the
technical progress that has been made in photography. Newspaper and magazine
readers viewed the mayhem in the Somme trenches, the Tarawa landings, the Pusan
perimeter and even the fall of Saigon mostly in black and white, for a simple
reason: To catch the fleeting vignettes of war often requires high-speed film as
well as fast reflexes, and color film used to be too slow for much of the
lightning action of battle. But no longer. Among the eye-catchers in Mr.
Nachtwey's book is a picture of a Northern Irish partisan hurling a gasoline
bomb at an armored British tow truck as it attempts to move a burning car.
Everything in this remarkable picture - vehicles, fires, projectile and man - is
in violent motion, and yet the details are almost as crisp as one might expect
in a static landscape photographed at leisure. There are some who prefer war in
black and white. Perhaps Robert Capa's celebrated 1937 snapshot of a falling
Spanish Loyalist soldier at the instant of death would not have been as
memorable if its hues and tints had been spelled out in true color. Perhaps the
reek of war is sometimes better suggested by the impressionist's charcoal stroke
than by the master realist using a full palette. Be that as it may, Mr.
Nachtwey's vivid collection is one of the best of its kind to come along in
quite a while.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: San Migue Province, El Salvador, 1984 (From ''Deeds of War'')

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'LOVE IS A FEDERAL HIGHWAY'

BYLINE: By JENIFER LEVIN; Jenifer Levin's most recent novel is ''Shimoni's
Lover.'' She teaches creative writing at the University of Michigan's
Residential College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words



GIRL WITH CURIOUS HAIR
By David Foster Wallace.
373 pp. New York:
W.W. Norton & Company. $17.95.

With this collection of stories, David Foster Wallace, the author of the novel
''The Broom of the System,'' proves himself a dynamic writer of extraordinary
talent, one unafraid to tackle subjects large and small. Ever willing to
experiment, he lays his artistic self on the line with his incendiary use of
language, at times seeming to rip both the mundane and the unusual from their
moorings, then setting them down anew, freshly described.

Mr. Wallace is particularly interested in flux as a partial definition of human
nature, in distance as a component of love and - most important to him, perhaps
- in the obvious as well as the subtle linking of seeing and vision, masks and
the truth behind them.

Mr. Wallace is nothing if not audacious. Real-life heroes, villains, historical
figures, sports legends, television personalities - even dinosaurs - appear in
these stories alongside his fictitious characters, who themselves run the gamut
from banal to psychotic. In ''Little Expressionless Animals,'' for example, a
young woman with an incredible winning streak on the television game show
''Jeopardy!'' is finally defeated by her psychologically disturbed brother - the
whole encounter engineered when the producers become too touchy about her
ongoing lesbian love affair. In ''Lyndon,'' David Boyd, a fictitious mail clerk
who joins Lyndon Johnson's Senate staff, tells the story of his companionship
with Lady Bird and describes his own arranged marriage to a wealthy alcoholic
and his long homosexual union with a Haitian ''with diplomatic immunity.'' More
than mere storytelling, his is an attempt to probe the meaning of love and
responsibility to individual people and to his country against a background of
multiple declines: Johnson's from heart disease, Boyd's and his lover's from
AIDS, America's from Vietnam.

''Love is simply a word,'' says Mr. Wallace's fictional incarnation of Lady Bird
Johnson. ''It joins separate things. Lyndon and I, though you would disagree,
agree that we do not properly love one another anymore. Because we ceased long
ago to be enough apart for a 'love' to span any distance. Lyndon says he shall
cherish the day when love and right and wrong and responsibility, when these
words, he says, are understood by you youths of America to be nothing but
arrangements of distance.'' She goes on to explain that her husband's ''hatred
of being alone is a consequence of what his memoir will call his great
intellectual concept: the distance at which we see each other, arrange each
other, love. That love, he will say, is a federal highway, lines putting
communities, that move and exist at great distance, in touch. My husband has
stated publicly that America, too, his own America, that he loves enough to
conceal deaths for, is to be understood in terms of distance.''

In another story, the witty ''My Appearance,'' a successful television actress
agonizes over her upcoming spot on the David Letterman show, pops one
tranquilizer after another and muses (with emotionally disastrous results) over
the differences between the way things appear to be and the way they really are.
And in the title story, ''Girl With Curious Hair,'' the narrator - a successful
young corporate lawyer, the graduate of a military academy and several Ivy
League universities, the second son of an honored military family who also
happens to be a psychotic sociopath - reveals the childhood source of his
sadistic sexual compulsions while reminiscing about a Keith Jarrett concert that
he attended with a group of savagely lost punk-rocker companions.

If Mr. Wallace's characters include the transcendent as well as the maimed, his
style is similarly varied, running from prosaic to lyrical. ''I've just never
liked it,'' one of his characters says of poetry. ''It beats around bushes. Even
when I like it, it's nothing more than a really oblique way of saying the
obvious.'' To which her friend replies, ''But consider how very, very few of us
have the equipment to deal with the obvious.''

Mr. Wallace might as well be commenting on modern fiction in general here. He
himself is more than capable of dealing with the obvious. However, he is
obsessed not only with the appearance of things but with their true nature, with
objects and relationships as they really are, beneath the veils that hide them.
Interestingly enough, his ability simply to describe is superb. And it is when
he allows his observations to speak for themselves, when he does not permit
himself to become pedantic by overstating the obvious, that he is at his most
effective. When showing rather than telling, Mr. Wallace allows his characters
to function in both a symbolic and a living context. When showing rather than
telling, he is tender enough and strong enough not to shy away from love -
whether he's attempting to define it or (better yet) simply daring to expose it.

Mr. Wallace is such a bold writer that his failures can be almost as interesting
as his successes. Unfortunately, he sometimes slides into a kind of showboating,
a smug display of sheer knowledge and cleverness. And so the pieces that don't
work (''Luckily the Account Representative Knew CPR'' and a ponderous novella,
''Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way'') come off as the sort of inside
jokes that might play best in a creative writing seminar; they're meaningful and
witty, perhaps, to those who are willing to sacrifice substance to stylistic or
symbolic experimentation, but tiresome to the rest of us.

And yet, when Mr. Wallace is at his best he is undoubtedly among the very best.
The most successful fiction in ''Girl With Curious Hair'' has the quality of a
dream: powerful, fixating, explosive and mysterious. Mr. Wallace brings us, time
and again, to hidden, mythic places that are strange yet oddly familiar, larger
than life yet inexplicably known - and knowable. He is definitely interested in
what a television executive in one of the stories calls ''the capacity of facts
to transcend their internal factual limitations and become, in and of
themselves, meaning, feeling.''

This is especially true of the extraordinary story ''John Billy,'' a luminous
explosion into the realm of myth in which a bandylegged Oklahoman is transformed
by a near-fatal brush with death (and evil) into a creature of both darkness and
light, one whose damaged eyes extend like the waving ends of antennae from his
head, capable of finally seeing things. Those eyes are his undoing, for they
show him the wasted and bleeding countryside, linking him (like the Fisher King
of myth) to the death of the land.

In this daring exploration of the mythological and metaphysical context of
fiction - and thus of life itself - Mr. Wallace demonstrates his remarkable
talent. He succeeds in restoring grandeur to modern fiction, reminding us of the
ecstasy, terror, horror and beauty of which it is capable when it is released
from the television-screen-sized confines of minimalism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Gadfly Puts His Views in a Newsletter

BYLINE: By CAROLYN BATTISTA

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 16, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 932 words


EVERY week, David Grainger spends about 40 hours of his spare time on a project
he hopes will help people to influence their legislators' votes on issues like
gun control and apartheid.

Working in a tiny basement office in his Noank home, surrounded by saws and
paint cans, Mr. Grainger produces a weekly one-page flier called ''Of, By and
For the People.'' Each flier draws together information on various issues, tells
readers of upcoming legislative action and includes telephone numbers of
legislators to make it easier for readers to call and express their views.

In the first issue of the flier, which came out on Sept. 19, Mr. Grainger urged,
''Call Senator Dodd, 1-800-334-5341, thank him for supporting the South African
sanctions bill, let him know how you feel about the sale of semiautomatic
rifles.''

''Obviously, it's a selective consolidation,'' Mr. Grainger said of the
information he publishes. He selects issues that he considers important,
including acid rain, civil rights and world peace. He does not aim to be
neutral, but to help those who share his concerns to take action. ''I've been
wanting to do something that speaks to my conscience, satisfies my desire to
improve conditions, change things,'' he said.

A Vietnam Veteran

Mr. Grainger, a Vietnam veteran, is married and has two teen-age children.
''Processing the whole Vietnam experience, I came to the conclusion that the
Government isn't always right,'' he said, ''and that its wrongness can be
responsible for loss of life.''

A carpenter by trade, he has been active for more than a decade in groups that
address issues like peace in Central America. He once traveled to Nicaragua on a
fact-finding mission coordinated by Witness for Peace, an international
organization.

But he found that whenever he worked on one issue, he had to neglect others.
''You don't have time to put full commitment into a variety of issues,'' he
said, adding that just making a living as a carpenter took up a great deal of
time.

He explained that it bothered him to neglect some issues he cared about. ''For
instance, I care about the environment, but I wasn't doing anything about it,''
he said.

Mr. Grainger reasoned that other people must share his problem of having more
concern than time. He decided that a flier would alert people to the status of
particular issues so that they could call their elected representatives to
enlist their support. ''I didn't think there was a clearinghouse designed for
people who are busy, who don't have time to join a group for each issue,'' he
said. ''So I decided to start one.''

No Fancy Equipment

He did not wait to assemble fancy office equipment, but swung into action with a
telephone, an answering machine, a word processor, two boxes with hanging files,
a table and a mimeograph machine on loan from a local church. ''The need is
great at this particular time, with a new session of Congress and so many issues
to deal with,'' he said. ''I decided to get going.''

In his fliers, Mr. Grainger deals with some strictly local issues, like a
proposed toxic waste incinerator in the Town of Groton, of which Noank is a
part. But he usually focuses on national and international issues.

Each Friday, he telephones about 20 groups, including Amnesty International,
Handgun Control Inc., the Sierra Club, Witness for Peace and the Washington
Office on Africa, an anti-apartheid organization sponsored by several church
groups. He speaks with the lobbyists for the groups and finds out what Congress
is scheduled to vote on and asks what calls might be helpful.

''The key to this is that Congress doesn't vote on all the issues at once, so
you get a manageable variety of issues coming up,'' Mr. Grainger explained.
''You need to know about them just beforehand, in the time frame when you can
have some input.''

Mr. Grainger said that the calls take most of Friday, while consolidating the
information and writing the flier takes most of Saturday. ''Sunday is the day
for the mechanical part - cutting the stencil, printing the fliers, putting on
labels, sorting for bulk mailing,'' he said.

Mr. Grainger began by mailing fliers free each week to 288 people whose names
were on a mailing list of a group formed to oppose United States aid to the
contras in Nicaragua. ''In lieu of an advertising campaign, I tried to get it
going by just doing it,'' he said. Soon other people expressed interest in
receiving ''Of, By and For the People.'' The fifth issue, which urged calls
against sales of assault weapons and ''U.S. money to buy the Nicaraguan
election,'' was mailed to 487 people on Oct. 17.

The Last Free Flier

That flier was the last free one. Mr. Grainger is seeking subscribers who will
pay $4 a month for ''Of, By and For the People.'' A man with a sense of humor as
well as a mission, he noted that four people offered to pay ''without even being
asked.'' And, he said, ''Half of them I didn't know.''

Putting out the first five issues cost Mr. Grainger more than $500. Now, he
says, ''I want to be able to pay myself a wage.'' His plans - what he calls
''delusions of Grainger'' - also call for a team of workers to produce fliers
for all 50 states. But if he does not have 300 subscribers by Thanksgiving, Mr.
Grainger says the flier ''won't continue to exist.''

''It's supposed to be government of the people, by the people and for the
people, but there isn't a real mechanism for that to happen on a day-by-day,
week-by-week, issue-by-issue basis,'' he said. ''This can be a way to do that.
This is what I want to continue with.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Grainger printing newsletters in the basement of his
Noank home (NYT/Stephen Castagneto)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE GUIDE

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 11, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words




WALKING TOUR

Emphasizing Oyster Bay's waterfront and historic preservation efforts in the
community, the Friends of Raynham Hall will take everyone and anyone interested
in either or both subjects on a walking tour today.

Beginning at Raynham Hall at 3 P.M., the tour will include White's Creek, the
former Sagamore Waterworks, Snouder's Corner Drugstore and the Townsend Inn.

There also will be a stop at West Neck Restorations, where Harry Marino will
guide visitors through his workshop and discuss work he has completed on the
Presbyterian Church.

Raynham Hall, circa 1738, is at 20 West Main Street, Oyster Bay. Tickets:
922-6808.

CHILDREN'S HOURS

Today's the day to make youngsters all over the Island happy with some special
programming that varies from the traditional to the unexpected.

For example, how about some ''Chinese Kung Fu Story Theater''? It is available
by means of ''Classics for Kids,'' which opens its new season today with
performances at at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M. at Nassau Community College in Garden
City. Tickets: 222-7153. More-customary fare is being served today at:


* The Waldorf School, also in Garden City, where the Waldorf Chamber Players
will perform Saint-Saens's ''Carnival of the Animals'' during ''An Afternoon of
Music'' at 3 P.M. (742-3434).


* Chelsea Mansion in Muttowntown where, also at 3, the Cameo Quartet will offer
a free ''Afternoon of Music for Children''.


* The Sid Jacobson North Shore Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. in East Hills, where at 2 P.M.
''Story Salad III,'' a potpourri of music and storytelling, will be presented.
Tickets: 484-1545.

The special activity picks up again Saturday, when students at Hofstra
University in Hempstead stage the Maurice Sendak-Carole King musical ''Really
Rosie!'' at 2 and 4 P.M. in the Spiegel Theater.

Call 560-5833 for free tickets to the production, which will be repeated next
Sunday.

At Smithtown High School East, again on Saturday but at 1 P.M., the Smithtown
Township Arts Council is presenting the Paper Bag Players in ''Group Soup 2''
(862-6575), while at the Guild Hall's John Drew Theater in East Hampton,
TheatreWorks USA is offering ''Getting There Is Half the Fun'' at 2 and 4 P.M. .
Tickets: 324-4050.

'CURATORIAL CHATS'

Complete with a spot of tea, Old Westbury Gardens adopts a decidedly English
tone for this fall's ''Curatorial Chats,'' which begin today at 3 P.M.

The opening session, with the author-raconteur John Maxton-Graham chatting, is
devoted to ''The Princes of Wales: From 'Bertie' to Prince Charles.''

The final two weekly programs explore ''Two Centuries of the Park Gate Lodge''
and ''English and European Influences on American Porcelain.''

Tickets: 333-0048.

TEMPLE, CHURCH TALKS

Temple Beth-El in Great Neck has come up with a lively topic for its annual
series of free lectures: ''The Path to Social Conscience: Fulfilling Jewish
Goals.''

The programs begin Tuesday at 8:15 P.M., when Rabbi David Saperstein,
co-director and counsel of the Relgious Action Center of Reform Judaism in
Washington, discusses ''Jewish Roots of Social Justice.''

Subsequent sessions will examine substance abuse, the environment and human
rights.

The temple is at 5 Old Mill Road. For a complete schedule, call 487-0900.

This week also sees other religious institutions opening their doors to
community discussion. For example, at Temple Emanuel in New Hyde Park at 8:40
P.M. tomorrow, the North Shore Institute of Adult Jewish Education is the
sponsor of a talk by the journalist David K. Shipler on ''The Complex
Relationships between Arabs and Jews.'' Tickets: 746-1120.  The Justice and
Peace Committee of St. Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Massapequa
continues its survey of ''Dimensions of Women's Experience'' on Thursday with a
program devoted to ''Celebrating Our Spirituality.'' Dr. Janet Ruffing will
discuss ''Recent Developments in Women's Spirituality.'

The free talk is at 8 P.M. at the church, 2 Bayview Avenue.

A NEW OLD 'DYBBUK'

After years of research and travel to track down lost segments, the National
Center for Jewish Films finally has restored ''The Dybbuk'' to all its original
1938 mystical grandeur.

The New Community Cinema brings this fabled classic, one of the last completed
by the Yiddish film industry in Poland before World War II, to Huntington
Thursday for its Long Island premiere (and exclusive showing in the area).

The movie will be shown through next Sunday at the Cinema, 423 Park Avenue.
Tickets: 423-7610.

VETERANS DAY

Saturday is Veterans Day, and among the observances are two of particular note:
the Nassau County Salute to Veterans Parade and an Revolutionary War encampment.

Starting at 1 P.M., the parade will have more than 70 veterans' groups marching
along Old Country Road in Westbury to Eisenhower Park in East Meadow, where
there will be a ceremony at the Veterans Memorial.

''New York Soldier and the American Revolution'' pays tribute to those original
veterans, with authentically uniformed and eqipped ''members'' of the Third New
York Regiment, 1775, demonstrating the way it was.

The encampment runs from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. at Caleb Smith State Park in
Smithtown.

Admission: 265-1054. Meanwhile, on Thursday, newer veterans - those from the
Vietnam period - will mark 10 years of the Long Island Vet Center. There will be
workshops throughout the day and an open house. The center is at 116 West Main
Street, Babylon. Information: 661-3930.

NASSAU SYMPHONY

Continuing its exploration of the influences that helped shape the music of
Aaron Copland, the Nassau Symphony Orchestra on Saturday looks at ''Strength and
Substance: The German Connection.''

Andrew Schenck, the symphony's music director, will be on the podium and the
hornist Hermann Baumann will be soloist when Richard Strauss's ''Horn Concerto
No. 1'' is performed as a way of illustrating the theme.

''Chroma'' (''Northern Lights'') by Judith Lang Zaimont, the Long Island
composer who is the new chairman of Adelphi University's music department, and
Brahms's ''Symphony No. 1'' complete the program at 8 P.M. at the John Cranford
Adams Playhouse at Hofstra University in Hemsptead.

Tickets: 877-2718.

ON THEIR TOES

Fans of both classical ballet and contemporary dance can partake Saturday, when
two touring companies - the London Ballet Theater and the American Dance Theater
- come to Long Island.

At Tilles Center on the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University in
Brookville, the British troupe will perform the full-length ballet version of
Mozart's ''The Magic Flute'' at 8:30 P.M. It is part of the Friends of the Arts'
Dazzling Dance Series. Tickets: 922-0061.

The company will repeat the production next Sunday at 7 P.M. at Southampton High
School, courtesy of the East End Arts Council.

Tickets: 727-0900.)

The American Dance Theater, which used to be the Ballet Jazz de Paris, comes to
Long Beach, thanks to the local Council on the Arts. The thoroughly modern - and
American - troupe performs at 8:30 P.M. at the Lindell School. Tickets:
431-1212. $90BARBARA DELATINER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BLACKBOARD;
Acting Out The Work of Government

BYLINE: By Andrew L. Yarrow

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 20, Column 3; Education Life

LENGTH: 897 words


ONE OF three teen-age defense attorneys, wearing blue jeans, sunglasses and a
lawyerly black coat with tails, approached the bench, preparing to argue his
first Supreme Court case. ''Doesn't this publication present a clear and present
danger to national security?'' asked an equally precocious young justice, citing
Oliver Wendell Holmes's famous 1919 caveat about the limits to free speech.

''But people should know what the Government's doing,'' the young lawyer
replied, stating a basic First Amendment argument for freedom of the press.

Every weekday, a different set of ''justices,'' ''attorneys,'' ''defendants,''
''plaintiffs'' and ''witnesses'' climb out of school buses at Federal Hall
National Memorial in lower Manhattan to argue, present evidence and mete out
justice in a make-believe case about national security and press freedom, called
Denver Dispatch v. United States. Across the hall from this mock courtroom, a
group of student senators, lobbyists and witnesses grapple with the 14th
Amendment's equal-protection clause, debating hypothetical legislation
concerning gender discrimination in high school athletics.

These role-playing classes are the centerpiece of an innovative new program
designed to give junior and senior high school students hands-on knowledge of
how the government and legal system work. The program, which includes lessons
and workbooks for classroom use as well as the 90-minute classes at Federal Hall
- all free of charge to any class booked in advance by a teacher, started last
spring, but only began on a full-time schedule in mid-October. It is expected to
serve up to 25,000 New York-area students this year, according to John L. Bryant
Jr., president of the Constitutional Education Foundation, which developed the
program with the American History Workshop, a Brooklyn-based museum-consulting
firm. He hopes it can be expanded to other cities by next year.

Federal Hall, an imposing Greek Revival building at Wall and Nassau Streets, was
chosen as the setting largely because of the site's significance in the
development of American government, Mr. Bryant said. Not only was George
Washington inaugurated as President at the first Federal Hall, which was
destroyed in 1812, but the nation's First Congress also met there in 1789, when
it passed the Bill of Rights and sent the amendments to the states for
ratification.

''Kids have seen 'Night Court,' and they know how to strut back and forth in
front of a judge, but the idea of this program is to make the judiciary and
Congress come alive,'' said Cory Munson, the education director for The
Constitution Works, an organization founded to educate Americans about their
Constitution and Government, which administers the classes for the foundation.
''In the Denver Dispatch case, students learn that the Court has to balance
competing interests. In the mock Congressional debate, they have to decide
whether the 'separate-but-equal' doctrine can be applied to gender if it doesn't
apply to race. But the bigger idea is to empower students and see how the
concepts underlying American government are played out in everyday life.''

Geoffrey Cabat, an assistant principal at Seward Park High School on Manhattan's
Lower East Side, is one of many educators whose social-studies classes have
already participated in the program. ''It got youngsters involved who weren't
interested in history and motivated them to learn by making them active
participants,'' he said. ''Unlike a lot of programs, this doesn't have a
built-in bias. Both sides of a controversial issue are presented, and the kids
are allowed to make up their own minds. It develops critical thinking, and it
also was a lot of fun.''

Both classes require advance preparation for teachers and students before their
visit to Federal Hall, which can be scheduled on weekdays at 10 A.M. or noon.
Teachers must first sign up for training sessions, which Constitution Works
staff members conduct several times a month in schools, school-district offices,
United Federation of Teachers centers and at Federal Hall. They are given a
teacher's manual and student workbooks, which are to be used for 10 classroom
lessons.

The lessons for the court case include ones on the basics of the American
Constitution and legal system, as well as a primer on assembling briefs and
preparing oral arguments. The workbook has summaries of eight important First
Amendment cases, complete with lower-court rulings and excerpts of Supreme Court
justices' opinions. The cases range from Schenck v. United States, a 1919 case
in which an opponent of American involvement in World War I was convicted of
espionage for distributing antiwar leaflets, to The New York Times Company v.
United States, the 1971 ''Pentagon Papers'' case in which the Government tried
to block the newspaper's publication of a secret official history of the Vietnam
War. When they get to Federal Hall, nine students assume the roles of justices,
and the other two-dozen students take turns playing lawyers for either The
Denver Dispatch or the Government.

''It's important to ceremonialize these ideas in a great public building,'' said
Richard Rabinowitz, president of the American History Workshop. ''It helps
students step out of their roles, and the Constitution becomes a wonderfully
rich drama.''

For information on the program, call (212) 785-1989.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Barry Sadler, 49, Balladeer, Dies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 184 words

DATELINE: MURFREESBORO, Tenn., Nov. 5


Barry Sadler, a former combat medic with the United States Special Forces in
Vietnam who recorded ''The Ballad of the Green Berets,'' died today. He was 49
years old.

Mr. Sadler, who suffered brain damage and was partly paralyzed in a shooting in
Guatemala in 1988, died at the Alvin C. York Medical Center, a hospital
spokesman, Albert Archie, said. The cause of death was not given. Mr. Archie
said an autopsy would be performed.

Mr. Sadler had been hospitalized since he was critically wounded in what a
companion said was a robbery. The companion said at the time that Mr. Sadler had
been training Nicaraguan rebels in Guatemala and had received death threats.

Using his military title of staff sergeant, Mr. Sadler, co-wrote and recorded
''The Ballad of the Green Berets,'' a narrative tribute to the Special Forces.
The song No. 1 in the country for five weeks in 1966 and sold nine million
singles and albums.

He recorded other similar songs and wrote more than 20 adventure books featuring
a mercenary.

Survivors include his wife, Lavona; two sons, Thor and Baron, and a daughter,
Brooke.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

San Antonio Journal;
A Vietnam War Legacy: Museum Based on a Lie

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1416 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, Oct. 31


Across the street from the Alamo in a few rooms crowded with photographs,
mementos and T-shirts, America's longest war continues to sputter its confusing
legacy.

Wedged between a wax museum and a video game parlor, the Vietnam War Museum
beckons tourists with a sign that reads: ''The Vietnam story through the eyes
and hearts of those who were there.''

But now, the man who wrote the sign and created the museum confesses that he was
never in Vietnam, although he insists his heart was in the right place when he
said he was in soliciting support for the museum.

''I lied,'' said the museum founder, Gaylord O. Stevens. ''I was a liar; that's
the simplest way to put it. But, was I right or wrong? That gets more
complicated.''

Mr. Stevens began lying more than two years ago at about the same time he
decided to set up the museum. When he sought money or when he asked Vietnam
veterans to donate their souvenirs for the exhibits, he proclaimed that he had
fought there as a member of the Navy's elite commando unit, the Seals, in 1968
and 1969.

A week ago The Dallas Times-Herald disclosed that he had actually served in the
Coast Guard and had never left the United States. In addition, the newspaper
found that Mr. Stevens's chief assistant at the museum, Kenneth Bonner, had also
lied about serving in Vietnam and had even added seven years to his age so that
he would be old enough to have been in the Army then. Remarkably, both men
insist that neither knew the other was a fraud.

''It's all pretty schizophrenic, isn't it?'' said Mr. Stevens.

Mr. Stevens, 40 years old, describes himself as an artist who supplements his
income by painting signs. He is a short, gaunt man with a neatly trimmed black
beard and an agitated manner. He now seems to enjoy discussing his charade.
Given the amount of deception of all sorts that arose from Southeast Asia, he
said, ''maybe this is exactly the right museum for that war; maybe this is the
way it had to happen.''

''Museum'' might not be the most precise term for Mr. Stevens's creation. At
first it seems a cross between a surplus store and a hobby shop, with 1960's
music playing constantly on a stereo. Uniforms, weapons, flags and unit insignia
are mounted around the walls. Model airplanes hang from the ceilings. A replica
of a ''hooch,'' the shacks that often served as housing in Vietnam, has been
built into a corner.

What stands out, though, are the snapshots. They were made by soldiers and are
mounted in cheap gilded frames and scattered around the walls throughout the
place. There are dozens of little pictures, mostly unlabeled. Saigon street
scenes, a topical landscape marked by plumes of smoke and group shots of smiling
young men in fatigues are all reminders of the past.

Mr. Stevens sought no support from any Government body or veteran organization,
and there are no public allegations of financial wrongdoing. Since the museum
opened July 4 it has operated on the donations from visitors and cash collected
by supporters, mostly veterans, who walk the streets with cups in their hands.

In this city, which is ringed with military bases and is home to many people
retired from the military, the charade became a favorite topic and was featured
in news reports for days running. Nonetheless, the board of directors of the
museum, which was recently constituted as a nonprofit organization, asked Mr.
Stevens and Mr. Bonner to stay on as director and assistant director despite
their offers to quit.

''These guys did something valuable which no one else has been willing to do,''
said Richard Mosher, a board member who is an active member of several Vietnam
veteran groups. Mr. Mosher acknowledged that he was puzzled and dismayed at the
way many people now seem eager to claim service in Vietnam, as the war has
gained a new respectability through films and television programs.

''First the American people drove us into the closet,'' Mr. Mosher said. ''Now
they are letting us out and there are lots more people coming out of the closet
than went in. I don't get it.''

Mr. Stevens said no one would have taken him seriously if he had not pretended
to be a veteran and he resisted explaining why he undertook this effort. ''It's
a long story, something personal,'' he said.

When pressed, he spoke of ''a special, very close friend,'' who died in Vietnam
and a need to ''apologize'' for things he did during the war, and he mentioned a
desire to ''make up'' for the way veterans were treated when they first came
home.

Already making plans to expand the museum, Mr. Stevens said, ''Our goal is to
make the museum a place that does not provide answers because there are no
answers for this war.'' 'Maybe this is exactly the right museum.' By ROBERTO
SURO SAN ANTONIO, Oct. 31 - Across the street from the Alamo in a few rooms
crowded with photographs, mementos and T-shirts, America's longest war continues
to sputter its confusing legacy.

Wedged between a wax museum and a video game parlor, the Vietnam War Museum
beckons tourists with a sign that reads: ''The Vietnam story through the eyes
and hearts of those who were there.''

But now, the man who wrote the sign and created the museum confesses that he was
never in Vietnam, although he insists his heart was in the right place when, in
soliciting support for the museum, he said he was there.

''I lied,'' said the museum founder, Gaylord O. Stevens. ''I was a liar; that's
the simplest way to put it. But, was I right or wrong? That gets more
complicated.''

Mr. Stevens began lying more than two years ago, at about the same time he
decided to set up the museum. When he sought money or when he asked Vietnam
veterans to donate their souvenirs for the exhibits, he proclaimed that he had
fought there as a member of the Navy's elite commando unit, the Seals, in 1968
and 1969.

A week ago The Dallas Times-Herald disclosed that he had actually served in the
Coast Guard and had never left the United States. In addition, the newspaper
found that Mr. Stevens's chief assistant at the museum, Kenneth Bonner, had also
lied about serving in Vietnam and had even added seven years to his age so that
he would be old enough to have been in the Army then. Remarkably, both men
insist that neither knew the other was a fraud.

''It's all pretty schizophrenic, isn't it?'' said Mr. Stevens.

Mr. Stevens, 40 years old, describes himself as an artist who supplements his
income by painting signs. He is a short, gaunt man with a neatly trimmed black
beard and an agitated manner. He now seems to enjoy discussing his charade.
Given the amount of deception of all sorts that arose from Southeast Asia, he
said, ''maybe this is exactly the right museum for that war; maybe this is the
way it had to happen.''

''Museum'' might not be the most precise term for Mr. Stevens's creation. At
first it seems a cross between a surplus store and a hobby shop, with 1960's
music playing constantly on a stereo. Uniforms, weapons, flags and unit insignia
are mounted around the walls. Model airplanes hang from the ceilings. A replica
of a ''hooch,'' the shacks that often served as housing in Vietnam, has been
built into a corner.

What stands out, though, are the snapshots. They were made by soldiers and are
mounted in cheap gilded frames and scattered around the walls throughout the
place. There are dozens of little pictures, mostly unlabeled. Saigon street
scenes, a tropical landscape marked by plumes of smoke and group shots of
smiling young men in fatigues are all reminders of the past.

Since the museum opened July 4 it has operated on the donations from visitors
and cash collected by supporters, mostly veterans, who walk the streets with
cups in their hands.

The board of directors of the museum, which was recently constituted as a
nonprofit organization, has asked Mr. Stevens and Mr. Bonner to stay on as
director and assistant director despite their offers to quit.

''These guys did something valuable which no one else has been willing to do,''
said Richard Mosher, a board member who is an active member of several Vietnam
veteran groups. Mr. Mosher acknowledged that he was puzzled and dismayed at the
way many people now seem eager to claim service in Vietnam, as the war has
gained a new respectability through films and television programs.

''First the American people drove us into the closet,'' Mr. Mosher said. ''Now
they are letting us out and there are lots more people coming out of the closet
than went in. I don't get it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Barry Sadler, 49, Balladeer, Dies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 185 words

DATELINE: MURFREESBORO, Tenn., Nov. 5


Barry Sadler, a former combat medic with the United States Special Forces in
Vietnam who recorded ''The Ballad of the Green Berets,'' died Sunday. He was 49
years old.

Mr. Sadler, who suffered brain damage and was partly paralyzed in a shooting in
Guatemala in 1988, died at the Alvin C. York Medical Center, a hospital
spokesman, Albert Archie, said. The cause of death was not given. Mr. Archie
said an autopsy would be performed.

Mr. Sadler had been hospitalized since he was critically wounded in what a
companion said was a robbery. The companion said at the time that Mr. Sadler had
been training Nicaraguan rebels in Guatemala and had received death threats.

Using his military title of staff sergeant, Mr. Sadler, co-wrote and recorded
''The Ballad of the Green Berets,'' a narrative tribute to the Special Forces.
The song was No. 1 in the country for five weeks in 1966 and sold nine million
singles and albums.

He recorded other similar songs and wrote more than 20 adventure books featuring
a mercenary.

Survivors include his wife, Lavona; two sons, Thor and Baron, and a daughter,
Brooke.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

East Germany's Cabinet Resigns, Bowing to Protest and Mass Flight

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

DATELINE: EAST BERLIN, Nov. 7


The entire East German Cabinet resigned today in testimony to the scale of the
crisis that has seized the state under the pressure of mass demonstrations and
mass flight.

Wolfgang Meyer, appointed only today as the Government spokesman, announced at a
hastily convened news conference that the 44-member Council of Ministers, led by
Prime Minister Willi Stoph, had decided at a meeting to step down and to call on
Parliament to select a new government.

The Politburo of the Communist Party, the repository of real political power in
East Germany, met late into the night on the eve of a three-day meeting of the
party's Central Committee. Rumors swept the capital that radical changes in the
Politburo, which still includes Mr. Stoph and other members of the Communist old
guard, would be announced Wednesday.

Travel Law Rejected

The leadership's most pressing problem is the exodus of East Germans, which
continued today at the rate of 200 an hour, passing the 33,000 mark since East
Germany first let its citizens leave freely through Czechoslovakia on Saturday.
[Page A12.] In further evidence of the quickening pace of change, the official
press agency A.D.N. reported that the Constitution and Legal Committee of the
Parliament had rejected the Government's draft law on travel, published on
Monday.

The draft law would have permitted each citizen 30 days of travel abroad every
year, but it came under immediate fire for setting any restrictions at all. The
committee declared the draft ''unacceptable'' and called for visa-free and
unlimited travel for all.

Amendments Expected

The criticism was echoed by the Communist youth organization, effectively
insuring that the proposal will be extensively amended, probably granting the
free travel that has been denied East Germans since the Berlin wall was raised
in 1961.

The Constitution and Legal Committee also demanded a swift convening of
Parliament, saying that more than one-third of the members had called for a
session. Committee members said Parliament could be convened as early as this
week, especially now that the Government has announced its resignation.

At the same time, Communist academics at the Political and Legal Science Academy
in Potsdam, which trains lawyers and diplomats, called in an open letter for an
extraordinary party congress to change party rules and select a new Central
Committee. ''The party leadership's ignorant and arrogant behavior over years
toward reserved and moderate criticism provoked the crisis,'' the academicians
wrote.

A party congress is scheduled for May, but the growing clamor for changes has
made it increasingly unlikely that the party can afford to wait that long.

A Rubber-Stamp Cabinet

The resignation of the entire Council of Ministers was the most dramatic
development to date of the ''revolution from below'' that has swept East Germany
in the month since it celebrated its 40th anniversary amid a mass flight of its
citizens and virtually daily demonstrations by hundreds of thousands of people
demanding change.

The ministers are technically selected by Parliament, but in the past it has
merely convened to rubber-stamp the dictates of the Politburo. Mr. Stoph, 75
years old, has led the Government since 1964, with a break in 1973-76.

In the new atmosphere, however, it seemed certain that Parliament would act in a
more independent and assertive way, and there is no way to predict the shape of
the next government of the German Democratic Republic.

Reading a prepared statement, Mr. Meyer said, ''The Government turns to the
citizens of the G.D.R. in this politically and economically serious situation to
exert all efforts to maintain all the functions vital for the people, society
and economy.''

He appealed to East Germans who were still thinking of leaving to reconsider.
''Our socialist fatherland needs each and every one,'' he said, 'Certainly Not
Enough'

But it is a measure of the times that even the resignation of the Government was
deemed a transient step. Sebastian Pflugbeil of New Forum, the main opposition
group, called it a ''first step'' that ''clears the way for discussion of a new
election law.''

''But it is certainly not enough,'' he said. ''Without free elections, this is
an illusion.''

The West German Government also joined in the criticism. Rudolf Seiters, the
Chancellery Minister in Bonn, said East Germans ''want a real transformation of
the system, allowing them to decide their own future in freedom and
self-determination.''

The late-night meeting of the Politburo fed speculation of more dramatic
developments when the Central Committee meets Wednesday.

Party officials and Western diplomats speculated that Egon Krenz, the new party
leader, would promote Hans Modrow, the Dresden party chief, who has a popular
reputation as a reformer, to a key position in the leadership, along with Gunter
Schabowski, the East Berlin chief.

Mr. Krenz and Mr. Schabowski have been the only Politburo members to maintain a
public profile over the last month, and a senior party member said many others
had simply stopped showing up at their headquarters.

Of the 20 Politburo members, 7 have already been dismissed and at least 3 others
- including Erich Honecker, the fallen party chief - have lost their positions.
Two days ago Culture Minister Hans-Joachim Hoffmann added to speculation about
radical changes when he called for the entire Politburo to step down.

Protest at Party Offices

For the first time, some 3,000 demonstrators marched to the doors of the party
headquarters today, whistling, jeering and demanding free elections.

''Egon Krenz, we are the competition,'' chanted the crowd in a rejection of the
party's constitutionally guaranteed claim to a ''leading role.''

The total emigration so far this year is approaching 200,000 out of a population
of 16.6 million, straining facilities in West Germany and draining services in
East Germany.

To cope with the newcomers, the West German Government announced a four-year,
$4.3 billion plan to build new housing.

Inside East Germany, the flight has aggravated a labor shortage that had already
compelled the country to import laborers from abroad, mostly from Vietnam. Among
the areas worst hit has been health care. Hospitals and clinics have reported
losing as much as 30 percent of their staff as doctors and nurses have succumbed
to the lure of far higher pay in the West.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Germans demonstrating in Rostock, East Germany (Agence
France-Presse); map of Schirnding, West Germany (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
Amid Winds of Change, A Summit Conference

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 7


President Bush is meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet
Union early next month, he says, to get to know the cut of his jib as the two
leaders face together the hurricane of history that is blowing across Europe.

But there will be more to it than that, of course. Summit conferences always
produce something, even when that something is nothing -which is why many
Presidents have been so reluctant to take part except when the outcome was more
or less foreordained. It is far from that on this occasion.

The pressures are already building in Washington and elsewhere. Some specialists
on foreign policy argue that the United States must reassert its leadership,
starting now, or West Germany and Japan, which share American values but not all
American interests, will shape a post-postwar world that is not entirely to
American tastes.

Others worry that in a rush to help Mr. Gorbachev put his new ideas into effect,
the United States will forget that the Soviet Union still has selfish interests,
too, in places like Vietnam, Afghanistan and Ethiopia.

For his part, Mr. Gorbachev clearly approaches this shipboard meeting off the
coast of Malta - the Love Boat summit, as some would have it, or the Club Med
summit -with a long shopping list. He needs help in trying to keep economic
frustration from drowning political hopes in towns and cities all across the
Soviet Union. He needs reassurance that the United States will not seek to
profit too quickly or too greatly from the instability on his exposed western
flank.

''Next year will be Gorbachev's most difficult year,'' a senior American
official said, ''and that fact defines the context for Malta.''

But so does the political situation in the United States.

As the President prepares for his trip, liberals are calling for the diversion
of scarce tax resources from tanks and warplanes to an assault on the nation's
housing, education and drug problems. Some groups, like Sane/Freeze, advocate a
50 percent cut in military spending by the year 2000, which evokes far less
derision now than it would have only a year ago. And some Democratic analysts
think Mr. Bush is about to lose one of his party's most potent electoral
weapons, its primacy on foreign policy questions.

''Events have taken away a club that Republicans have long used to beat
Democrats over the head,'' says Geoffrey D. Garin, a poll taker who works for
Democratic candidates.

But conservatives, who have played a large part in the President's success (even
if many of them have never trusted him the way they trusted Richard M. Nixon and
Ronald Reagan), will also be watching. They want Mr. Bush to exercise continued
caution on arms control and, as Vice President Dan Quayle put it in California
not long ago, to insist that the Soviet Union manage its reforms by itself.

''Mr. Bush probably cannot get through the fall without choosing,'' wrote
Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator, who sees Malta as a key
moment for the President. ''He will emerge either as a Dwight D. Eisenhower,
splitting the difference with the Democrats, or in the Nixon-Reagan mold.''

But it is the riveting events in Eastern Europe that will supply the immediate
backdrop for the talks between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev. What will they say
about Poland's new non-Communist Government, or the apparent disintegration of
Hungary's Communist Party, or the migration of hundreds of thousands of East
Germany's best and brightest young people to the West?

Many events are important. A few truly capture the world's attention. What is
happening in Leipzig and Prague and Warsaw and even Sofia is both important and
captivating, and no matter how hard the White House tries to play down
expectations for this first East-West summit conference of the Bush
Administration, the expectations will remain, here and abroad.

That common European home Mr. Gorbachev likes to talk about is under
construction now, and people everywhere want to know what it will look like.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam to Export Rice

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 53 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 7


Vietnamese officials said today that farming reforms had produced a dramatic
recovery in rice production and three good crops this year meant it had ample
supplies for export. ''For the first time in several decades, Vietnam is back
again on the list of rice exporters,'' the Vietnam News Agency said in a
dispatch.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

2 Superpowers Failing in Geography

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


People in the Soviet Union and the United States know there is a world out there
that the superpowers want to influence. They just can't place it.

The first survey of geographic knowledge conducted in the Soviet Union, made
public today by the National Geographic Society, shows that Americans and Soviet
citizens share ''an astonishing lack of awareness of the world around them,''
the organization said.

Soviet adults scored slightly lower than Americans, who took an identical survey
last year, in being able to identify the locations of other nations of the
world, an unexpected result that a Soviet pollster termed ''a shock'' for a
nation that prides itself on education.

''The results are unbelieveable,'' said Vladimir G. Andreyenkov of the Soviet
Academy of Sciences, which conducted the survey with the Gallup Organization.
''They will have very great repercussions in the Soviet Union.''

Younger Russians Do Better

A bright spot for the Soviet Union is that younger people, between ages 18 and
24, did significantly better than their American counterparts. Young Americans
scored in last place for geographical knowledge among the 10 nations where the
test was given.

The young Soviet citizens correctly identified an average of 9.3 of 16 locations
on a world map, ranking fourth along with Canadians and Italians. Young
Americans came in last, with an average of 6.9 correct selections.

Soviet citizens in general identified an average of 7.4 of a possible 16
locations, which put them at the bottom, tied with Mexico. American adults
ranked sixth among the 10 nations, with 8.6 correct.

The overall scores were Sweden, 11.6; West Germany, 11.2; Japan, 9.7; France,
9.3; Canada, 9.2; United States, 8.6; Britain, 8.5; Italy, 7.6; Mexico, 7.4, and
the Soviet Union, 7.4.

Thirteen percent of the Soviet citizens could not find their own country on a
map, and 14 percent of the Americans could not find the United States.

'Mostly Discouraging'

Gilbert M. Grosvenor, president of the National Geographic Society, said at a
news conference that the surveys showed that people in the United States and the
Soviet Union ''have little understanding of the world around them.''

''We have learned a lot from this process, mostly discouraging,'' Mr. Grosvenor
said. ''In today's world, if you don't know where you are, you are nowhere.''

An indication of the depth of geographical ignorance, he said, was that only 38
percent of Russians surveyed could find Afghanistan on a map, even though it
borders the Soviet Union to the south and Soviet soldiers fought Afghan rebels
for nearly a decade before pulling out this year. The Afghan question was added
to the Soviet survey but not included in the previous one.

Just as surprising, the survey said, was that only 32 percent of Americans could
find Vietnam on a map.

Almost 11,000 people in nine nations were tested in their homes in the spring of
1988 and asked to locate the same 13 countries, Central America, the Pacific
Ocean and the Persian Gulf.

About 1,500 Soviet citizens took part in the survey last spring in Moscow and
Kursk, an industrial city of 425,000 people, 300 miles south of the capital. Mr.
Andreyenkov and Neil A. Upmeyer of Gallup said the results might not apply to
all of the Soviet Union because of its size and cultural diversity, but were
accurate for the European section of the country. A wider survey would have been
impractical, they said.

Opinion Polls Allowed Now

Public opinion surveys were banned in the Soviet Union for decades, but the
practice has been allowed again under a recent liberalization of policies.

Russians and Americans were good at locating each other. Seventy-six percent of
Russians could find the United States on the map. For Americans, 66 percent
correctly identified the Soviet Union.

Nearly 90 percent of the Russians surveyed - compared with 47 percent of the
Americans - said they had taken a course devoted entirely to geography. Mr.
Andreyenkov said total school education was the biggest independent factor found
in determining who would be best at identifying locations on the map.

In examining attitudes on what subjects people considered important to be
well-educated and competitive, participants were asked a series of questions.
Knowledge of geography was rated absolutely necessary by 52 percent of Russians,
compared with 37 percent of Americans. Computer skills were rated higher by
Americans than Russians, 64 percent to 42 percent, and knowledge of history was
rated necessary by 72 percent of Russians, compared with only 36 percent of
Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of the world

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

New Republic of 60's a Voice of Conscience

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 239 words


To the Editor:

Your Oct. 26 article on the 75th anniversary of The New Republic states that in
the 1960's and early 70's, the magazine ''favored the third world in general and
seemed to believe that America's pursuit of its national interest was a menace
to the world.''

That, as the record will amply demonstrate, is a cruel distortion, which wholly
misrepresents the wisdom and patriotism of Gilbert Harrison, its editor.

The New Republic did not favor the third world under Mr. Harrison's direction.
It was his perception of our true interest that led him, from the start, and
almost alone among our country's editors, to condemn our actions in Vietnam. His
record stands in splendid contrast to The New York Times's half-hearted
endorsement of that disastrous adventure.

An accurate appraisal of The New Republic's stance in the 60's was given by
Walter Lippmann on the occasion of the magazine's 50th anniversary in November
1964.

The New Republic, Lippmann wrote, was what its founders had meant it to be:
''informed, disinterested, compassionate and brave.'' He described it as ''The
organ of no party, of no faction, of no sect, of no cause -concerned not with
liberalism and progressivism and conservatism as ideologies but with all of them
in the tradition of civility in Western society.''

MICHAEL STRAIGHT
  Chilmark, Mass., Nov. 3, 1989

The writer is a former editor and publisher of The New Republic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Businessman Arrested in Sale of Jet Fighters

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 264 words

DATELINE: BUFFALO, Nov. 8


A businessman from the Philippines has been arrested on charges of selling two
jet fighters abandoned by American forces in Vietnam to undercover customs
agents, a prosecutor said today.

The United States Attorney, Dennis Vacco, said the man, Cenon Avellino, 39 years
old, was being held without bail in the Erie County Holding Center. Mr. Avellino
is charged with selling two Cessna OA-37 Dragonfly jets to undercover agents of
the United States Customs Service.

The jets were seized Monday night at the Peace Bridge, which links Buffalo to
Fort Erie, Ontario. The planes are worth more than $1 million each but were
being sold to the agents for a total of $300,000, Mr. Vacco said.

The planes, left by United States troops after the Vietnam War, were smuggled
through the Philippines to Toronto and were to be brought through Buffalo to
Jacksonville, Fla., Mr. Vacco said.

Mr. Avellino was held on unspecified charges in documents that were sealed at
the Government's request.

In a three-month sting operation, customs agents from Buffalo and Jacksonville
posed as illegal arms brokers to buy the jets, Mr. Vacco said.

The undercover agents gave the ring a $100,000 cash down payment during a recent
meeting in Jacksonville and then paid $200,000 more on Monday night in a Buffalo
hotel. Mr. Avellino was arrested shortly after, and the jets were seized at the
bridge.

The Dragonfly jet is described in Air Force manuals as a fighter that can carry
''rockets and bombs'' under its wings at speeds up to 507 miles an hour and can
reach a maximum altitude of 41,765 feet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Walter Tkach, 72; Served as the Doctor To Three Presidents

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 381 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Nov. 8


Dr. Walter Robert Tkach, a former White House physician who served three
Presidents, died of heart disease Nov. 1 at his home at Scripps Ranch. He was 72
years old.

A retired Air Force major general who flew into combat zones in the Vietnam War
to help the wounded, Dr. Tkach was an assistant White House physician in the
eight years of the Eisenhower Administration and the first eight months of the
Kennedy Administration. He was senior White House doctor during Richard M.
Nixon's years in office.

A native of LaBelle, Pa., Dr. Tkach (pronounced tuh-KAWSH) received his medical
degree from the University of Pittsburgh in 1945 and then joined the Army.
During the United States occupation of Japan, Dr. Tkach ran the medical
dispensary at Gen. Douglas MacArthur's headquarters in Tokyo.

He transferred to the Air Force in 1949, received training in aerospace and
aviation medicine and spent the Korean War years as a base flight surgeon at
Sewart Air Force Base in Tennessee.

Began at White House in 1952

Dr. Tkach began his White House service in 1952. Eight months into President
John F. Kennedy's Administration, he left the White House for Hickam Air Force
Base in Hawaii, where he was deputy surgeon of Pacific Air Forces.

He became command surgeon of the 7th Air Force at what was then Tan Son Nhut Air
Base in South Vietnam. Dr. Tkach often flew directly to combat areas to treat
the wounded.

With Mr. Nixon's election in 1968, Dr. Tkach, a friend of the Nixon family,
returned to the White House as the President's physician. The President's most
serious illness in this period was a bout with phlebitis, an inflammation of a
vein in his left leg, that became known on a trip to the Middle East in June
1974. The condition required Mr. Nixon's hospitalization in California after he
resigned later that year.

After Mr.'s Nixon resignation, Dr. Tkach became command surgeon for the Air
Force Systems Command at Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington.

In 1979, he retired and moved to San Diego.

His first wife, Helen, died in 1971. He is survived by his wife, Cheryle, whom
he married in 1973, and three sons, Marc, Jonathan and John Robert.

Dr. Tkach will be buried with full military honors next Tuesday at Arlington
National Cemetery, relatives said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dr. Walter R. Tkach (Associated Press, 1973)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WEEKENDER GUIDE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words



FRIDAY

2 BY 2

East Side performance art is migrating to the West Side. Starting tonight and
continuing through Dec. 2, the SoHo Repertory Theater is holding its After-Hours
series, in which a pair of acts will be presented on Fridays and Saturdays at 11
P.M. Among the artists making the trip across town are Lisa Kotin and Stephanie
Silverman, the monologuists who are to open the series tonight. Tomorrow, Eileen
Myles, a poet and playwright, is to perform an autobiographical sketch called
''Bath, Maine,'' and Kaniecki and Zippi, a pair of singers and guitarists, will
offer original folk songs. To appear in the coming weeks will be Penny Arcade
and Salley May, monologuists, and Yvonne Meier and Jennifer Monson, dancers, who
will be sharing an evening with Chris Wink, a performance artist. Ms. May and
David Leslie, a video artist, are to close the series. The theater is at 27
Barrow Street. Tickets are $8. Information: 925-2588.

'LIVE SHOW' RETROSPECTIVE

''The Live Show'' lives again. The avant-garde variety show of the art world,
which had a five-year run on cable television before it ended in 1984, is the
focus of a retrospective beginning today at the American Museum of the Moving
Image, 34-12 36th Street, at 35th Avenue, in Astoria, Queens. Produced on a
shoestring budget, ''The Live Show'' featured appearances by performers
including Ann Magnuson, Eric Bogosian and Laurie Anderson. The program's host
and interviewer was Jaime Davidovich, a painter and video artist, who portrayed
Dr. Videovich, a television therapist who could cure television addiction. Now
through Jan. 7, highlights from many of the series' old programs, as well as the
best of Dr. Videovich from 1983, can be seen during regular museum hours, noon
to 5 P.M. Tuesdays through Fridays and 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on weekends. The
screenings are free with the regular museum admission of $5. Information: (718)
784-0077 or 784-4520.

CHRISTMAS IN NOVEMBER

So what if the Thanksgiving Parade has yet to take place? Today, Radio City
Music Hall is ushering in Christmas with the opening of its annual Christmas
Spectacular, a 56-year-old extravaganza. The 90-minute show, which is expected
to draw more than a million theatergoers during its eight-week run, has a cast
of 117, including 36 Rockettes, the Music Hall Orchestra, two organists, ice
dancers and, of course, Santa Claus and his elves. This year's show will offer a
new Charles Dickens scene and a live version of ''The Night Before Christmas.''
The traditional finale, the ''Living Nativity,'' features live sheep, camels and
donkeys. Show times this weekend are 7:30 P.M. today and 11 A.M., 2 and 5 P.M.
tomorrow and Sunday, with an additional performance at 8 P.M. tomorrow. Tickets
are $27 and $30, and are available at the Radio City Music Hall box office, or
by calling TicketMaster, 307-7171. Information: 247-3555.

SATURDAY

VETERANS DAY PARADE

It may not be the most colorful New York parade, but for the more than 2,000
veterans who march in it - and the hundreds of spectators who watch it - the
Veterans Day Parade is one of the more meaningful. The annual tribute to those
who served in the armed forces will begin at 9 A.M. on Saturday, leaving from
Fifth Avenue and 39th Street and heading south to the Eternal Light Memorial in
Madison Square Park at 23d Street. There, at 11 A.M., members of the Vietnam
Veterans of America and the New York County American Legion are to preside over
a wreath-laying ceremony. The speakers are to include Mayor Edward I. Koch,
State Senator Roy M. Goodman, the Manhattan Republican leader, and Bernie
Edelman, the director of the New York Office of Veterans Affairs. Also joining
the festivities are to be the West Point Drill Team, the New York Chinese School
Crimson Kings Bugle Corps and the 173d Airborne Brigade in full uniform. There
is to be a locomotive for children to ride and a display of military vehicles.
Information: 627-3260.

HONORING 'SESAME STREET'

For the 20th birthday of the children's public-television series ''Sesame
Street,'' the Museum of Modern Art has mounted a film exhibition. The show,
''Sesame Street: The First Generation,'' will open on Saturday, and it includes
weekend screenings of animated and live-action clips by independent film makers,
interspersed with film of the Muppets. It will also feature kinescopes from
selected episodes including ''Christmas Eve on Sesame Street'' (1979), the
full-length film ''Follow That Bird'' (1985), and a daily showing of the
documetary ''The Sesame Street Experiment.'' The exhibition is open on Saturdays
and Sundays through December, with programs at noon, 1:30, 3 and 4:30 P.M.
Admission to the exhibition is included in the museum entrance price of $6;
children under 16 with adults are admitted free. Weekend hours are 11 A.M. to 6
P.M. Information: 708-9750.

STANDING PERFORMANCE

The Concerto Soloists of Philadelphia is a 25-year-old chamber orchestra whose
members stand while they perform. Composed of 15 strings, harpsichords and other
instruments when the repertory requires, the group is to perform at 8 P.M.
Saturday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The program is to include Handel's
Overture and ''Arrival of the Queen of Sheba'' from ''Solomon,'' Mozart's Piano
Concerto No. 14 in E flat, Faure's Ballade for piano and chamber orchestra, and
Haydn's Symphony No. 22, ''The Philosopher.'' The group's founder and music
director, Marc Mostovoy, is to conduct; Grant Johannesen is to be the piano
soloist. Tickets are $15. Information: 570-3949.

SUNDAY

FOR THE YOUNG

The V.Y.P. - that's short for Very Young People - Series is starting this
weekend at the 92d Street Y. This stage series, for children ages 3 to 6,
presents original musical theater written and performed especially for
preschoolers. It opens on Sunday with Maximillion Productions' ''Play Ball,
Amelia Bedelia and Other Stories,'' a revue based on children's tales. The
series, which runs through May, is to include Ella Jenkins, a singer and
storyteller, in December; Danny Orleans, a magician, and Kim and Jerry Brodey,
entertainers, in January; Marcia Lane, a storyteller, in February; the Let Them
Eat Books troupe in March; a clown, Bob Berky, in April, and a puppeteer,
Marshall Izen, in May. The shows, which run just under an hour, are at 1:30 and
3:30 P.M. on Sundays at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue. Tickets for seats
near the stage are $80 for the series, $43 for four shows or $12 for a single
admission. General admission tickets are $52, $28 and $8. Information: 996-1100.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THAI CHIEF CANCELS TRIP OVER TYPHOON

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 11


The Thai Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, has canceled state visits to the
United States, Japan and Denmark so that he can deal with the aftermath of a
typhoon that has left nearly 400 people dead, with another 400 still missing.

Mr. Chatichai was scheduled to leave on Sunday for a long-planned trip that
included meetings with President Bush and Vice President Quayle.

The Prime Minister has been trying to arrange a cease-fire in Cambodia since
Vietnamese troops withdrew at the end of September, but he has not been
successful. Thai officials said he had intended to talk to President Bush about
American policy in Indochina and to urge a more conciliatory policy toward
Vietnam in particular.

Thailand's Crucial Role

Mr. Chatichai has drawn Thailand closer to the Vietnamese-backed Government in
Phnom Penh, much to the annoyance of some of his other regional allies, and has
helped to break the diplomatic isolation of the Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun
Sen.

Thailand's role is crucial, for it is the transit point for military supplies to
the Cambodian opposition, including the Khmer Rouge. Mr. Chatichai believes that
the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops has changed the Cambodian issue, and he sees
no real point in sponsoring further civil war.

But for the moment, he has a national emergency to face, as well as something of
a political storm.

On Thursday, Mr. Chatichai visited the hardest-hit area of peninsular Thailand,
the coastal province of Chumphon, about 285 miles south of Bangkok. Thousands of
villagers surged to meet him, many of them weeping.

Mr. Chatichai handed out $120,000 in cash to village leaders, saying that each
family should receive $40 as ''pocket money.'' He promised that the Government
would provide at least $20 million in emergency aid.

Significant Political Gaffe

On Tuesday, visiting an area not too badly hit by the typhoon, Mr. Chatichai
said the situation was not as bad as after last year's floods, which killed
nearly 300 people. His comments were denounced by homeless villagers and were
viewed as a significant political gaffe. The next day, Mr. Chatichai said he had
merely been referring to the particular places he had seen.

On Friday, after visiting Pa Thiew, one of the hardest-hit villages in Chumphon,
Mr. Chatichai appeared shaken. ''It was like it was hit by an atomic bomb,'' he
said. He later went on national television to announce that he was postponing
his trip abroad and would spend the next few days in the south to supervise
relief efforts.

''The damage was no less serious than that inflicted by the major flooding last
year,'' he said.

The official death toll from Typhoon Gay thus far is 365, with 347 dead in
Chumphon alone. According to the Interior Ministry, about 400 more people are
missing, and 29,500 dwellings were damaged or destroyed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Thailand indicating a village in Chumphon hit by the typhoon.
(NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CLAMOR IN THE EAST: The White House;
Exchange With Gorbachev Leaves Bush Hopeful

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Nov. 11


President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has sent President Bush a message supporting the
changes taking place in East Germany and expressing hope that the situation will
remain ''calm and peaceful,'' the White House spokesman said today.

Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's press secretary, disclosed the message, which was
received on Friday while the President was here to dedicate a memorial to
soldiers killed in the Vietnam War.

The cable from Mr. Gorbachev was described by Mr. Fitzwater as ''an informal
message.'' Although its text was not released, the spokesman said the Soviet
leader spoke of ''the importance of the changes'' in East Germany and
''expressed the hope that the situation will remain calm and peaceful.''

Mr. Gorbachev also told Mr. Bush that he supported the actions of the new East
German leadership to open its their country's borders.

U.S. Response Is Promised

Mr. Fitzwater said later that ''the President will respond, and he will repeat
many of the things he said, as well as offering encouragement for the
continuation of political and economic reforms.''

Mr. Bush, addressing thousands today at an emotional Veterans Day ceremony in
which he dedicated a new Vietnam War memorial, said that the perforation of the
Berlin wall shows ''a great truth shining brighter with each passing day.''

''The quest for freedom,'' he went on, ''is stronger than steel, more permanent
than concrete.''

Recalling that his Administration had not foreseen the suppression of blossoming
dissent in China, President Bush said in an interview published today that he
has acted with ''prudence'' toward the developments in Eastern Europe because of
concern that bolder action could ''contribute toward an unforeseen disorder'' in
the Soviet bloc.

Inside View

In the interview, conducted on Friday with Texas reporters, Mr. Bush said he was
prepared to discuss ''a wide array of economic questions'' with Mr. Gorbachev.
But, in his first detailed response to the rapidly unfolding events of recent
days in East Germany and other nations of the Warsaw Pact, Mr. Bush reflected
the deep uncertainty within his Administration about how much the United States
can become involved.

He seemed frustrated both at criticism that he has been reluctant to take the
kind of leading role in Europe that the United States has pursued for four
decades and at the limitations on American action created by the current
upheavals.

Mr. Bush said his advisers believe that Mr. Gorbachev is irrevocably committed
to his reforms. ''They can't go back to Square One,'' the President said. But he
and his aides are still uncertain, and debating among themselves, how the
Kremlin will respond to the growing rift amomg its neighboring countries. What
About Prague?  With Friday's change of leadership in Bulgaria, Mr. Bush went on,
the Administration is eager to assess the possibilities for change in a
remaining hard-line Communist country, Czechoslovakia. Mr. Bush said that Prague
is now among ''the most egregious offenders of human rights, those that resist
change the most clearly.''

Asked if he was concerned that the rapidity of events could lead to instability
in Europe, he said, ''I think that's why I keep using the word like prudent.''

Still, he said, ''I am convinced, given not just the events of yesterday, but
the cumulative set of events that have taken place, that this change is real.''

The President and his advisers have repeatedly insisted that China and Eastern
Europe cannot be compared in political terms. But Mr. Bush would not disregard
the Chinese crackdown on dissent that culminated in hundreds of deaths in
Beijing in June, and he used that event to explain his seeming anguish over
policy toward Eastern Europe.

'Keep Our Eyes Open'

''I think many of us felt that what happened in China set back the relationship
there,'' he said. ''I hadn't seen anybody predict that was going to happen.''

''And so we keep our eyes open, and we keep acting prudently so as not to
exacerbate tensions but to encourage that democracy is whole and free. If we
continue to do that, we can hopefully not contribute to an unforeseen
disorder.''

Mr. Bush said he would like to return to Berlin ''to see it with the wall down,
not just with holes in it.'' But he said he did not plan to stop there after his
meeting with Mr. Gorbachev on ships off the coast of Malta on Dec. 2 and 3
''unless there were something that developed between now and then that would
make the presence of the U.S. President catalytic for peace or for evolution of
democracy.''

Possible Economic Help

Turning to questions about economic aid, the area in which the Administration
has been especially reluctant to engage the Soviet Union, Mr. Bush said: ''I
think the time is right, should the Soviets want to discuss how to improve their
economy, that we do that. I'm perfectly prepared to talk to Mr. Gorbachev on a
wide array of economic questions, and will be ready to do that.''

He added that he had had two ''interesting seminars'' with his advisers on
economic issues to prepare for the meetings with the Soviet President.

Despite some conflicting statements in recent weeks about the Soviet-American
relationship, Mr. Bush said he and his advisers agree on the substance of policy
toward the East bloc. Still, they ''sit and argue back and forth - How quick
will this happen? Or, What will be next? Or, what do you think is going to
happen to Mr. A. or Mr. B.''

''Will Gorbachev remain committed to perestroika and indeed to glasnost?'' Mr.
Bush said. ''Absolutely.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Joint Chiefs Must See Beyond Battlefields

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 262 words


To the Editor:

Edward Luttwak, holder of the strategy chair at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies, may be right about our lack of contingency plans for
crisis intervention in ''Do the Joint Chiefs Fear All Risks?'' (Op-Ed, Oct. 27),
prompted by our role in the Oct. 3 aborted Panama coup. However, it is shocking
that, as a military scholar, he would criticize the Joint Chiefs for insisting
nonmilitary factors get full consideration.

Mr. Luttwak should know that all military actions are, by definition, political
actions; that the military and nonmilitary dimensions of war are inseparably
linked, and that professionals, soldiers as well as diplomats, must consider all
relevant factors in order to do their jobs right.

Treating military affairs as something separate and apart from politics is the
kind of ignorant tripe one expects from journalists and other unqualified
amateurs, not from Edward Luttwak.

The last time the Joint Chiefs trusted civilians to take care of political
concerns, we got the Vietnam War. The civilians lost heart, messed up the
politics, and the soldiers were left holding the bag.

Thank God, we now have generals with the wisdom and courage to force the
civilians to think hard about getting their political ducks in a row.

Now if the President decides to fight, he'll know the ''cons'' as well as the
''pros.'' And he sure won't be able to blame war-mongering brass hats for having
made the decision, now will he?

HARRY F. NOYES 3D
Major, U.S. Army Reserve
  Fort Sam Houston, Tex., Oct. 27, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEYOND DAMNATION OR DEFENSE: THE MIDDLE YEARS

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE JR.; R. W. Apple Jr. is the chief Washington correspondent
of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1619 words



NIXON Volume Two: The Triumph of a Politician, 1962-1972.
By Stephen E. Ambrose.
Illustrated. 736 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $24.95.

Like most people who have written about Richard M. Nixon, certainly including
myself, Stephen E. Ambrose has a hard time pinning his man down. ''As to
questions of motive, of why he did what he did, I confess that I do not
understand this complex man,'' the biographer says with evident bewilderment,
right at the start of ''Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician, 1962-1972,'' the
massive second volume of aJU lprojected three-volume work. ''If he was the
ultimate cynic, a President without principle in domestic politics, he was also
the ultimate realist, a President without peer in foreign affairs.''

It is Mr. Ambrose's achievement to immerse himself in Mr. Nixon's life and keep
his cool. The outrageous lying of his subject may cause him something
approaching nausea, and the brilliance of Mr. Nixon's political intelligence may
strike him with something approaching awe, but he maintains his balance as few
people have. The result is a portrait that is all its subject is not: evenhanded
and thoroughly reliable. It is not, of course, definitive; more years will have
to pass, and many more boxes of Presidential documents will have to be unsealed,
before any book can aspire to that distinction.

Mr. Ambrose might have borrowed a subtitle from Winston Churchill's six-volume
history of World War II and called his book ''Triumph and Tragedy.'' For it is
here that we see Mr. Nixon, driven by his demons, sinking ever deeper into the
swamp of Watergate, yet at the same time pursuing his vision of world order
through detente with Moscow and undertaking his epic trip to Beijing. Here we
witness the climax of the professional career of this wildly contradictory man,
a figure who has dominated the politics of our time, from his witch-hunting days
just after World War II, his Vice Presidency during the 1950's and his first
lunge at the brass ring against John F. Kennedy in 1960, through his defeat in
the 1962 California gubernatorial race and his Presidential victories in 1968
and 1972, to his humiliating resignation from the White House in 1974 and his
improbable rebirth as an elder statesman still capable, this very month, of
catching the public eye with a return journey to China.

Mr. Ambrose, who teaches at the University of New Orleans, has just enough
detachment from the tempests of daily life in Washington to look dispassionately
at Mr. Nixon. The author of an acclaimed two-volume biography of Dwight D.
Eisenhower, he is almost as good at untangling the complexities of Mr. Nixon's
diplomacy as he was at explaining the conflicts in the Allied command during
World War II. He is also eloquent on the differences between the two men:
''Ike's smiles, Nixon's snarls; Ike's generosity of spirit, Nixon's meanness of
spirit; Ike's joie de vivre, Nixon's anger.'' He declares, ''Surely this author
is not alone in thinking that it must have been a wonderful thing to be Dwight
Eisenhower.'' And he concludes, ''Surely this author is not alone in thinking
that it must have been a terrible thing to be Richard Nixon.''

Some will regret the absence of psychohistorical techniques in this book. I do
not - not only because I have little confidence in them, but also because I
wonder whether any technique can fully explain the crippling lack of
self-confidence, the hatreds, the self-obsession, the sheer awfulness of Richard
Nixon's personality.

Norman Sherman, Hubert H. Humphrey's press secretary for many years, used to say
of the old Minnesota rouser that when God handed out glands, Hubert took
seconds. Of Mr. Nixon, it can undoubtedly be said that when God passed out
charm, the future President responded, ''No, thank you.'' Yet he is a compelling
figure, as surreal as one of Magritte's haunted little men - now in complete
control of his considerable faculties as he sends secret signals to the Chinese
through Rumania and Pakistan, while taking care to reassure the Russians and
prepare American opinion for the surprising opening to Beijing that lies ahead;
now all but disintegrating as he travels with his valet to the Lincoln Memorial
in the predawn hours to babble incoherently to antiwar student protesters about
the beauty of Prague and the power of the Syracuse football team before
stumbling on to Capitol Hill, where he sits in the empty House chamber and
listens to his servant make a speech about what it means to be an American
citizen.

All of this is described in a serviceable if Spartan prose, but the reader does
long for more. Mr. Ambrose makes no effort at all to tell us what places look
and feel like. He gives no description of the Oval Office or the Presidential
compartment on Air Force One or the other places where Mr. Nixon worked. He
provides no detailed portraits of the supporting cast, such as one remembers
from Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s Roosevelt and Kennedy books; the Presidential
aides H. R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman, Attorney General John Mitchell and the
others are sketched in with only a few quick strokes, if that. Nor does Mr.
Ambrose manage to wring much drama out of the great moments of the turbulent
decade covered in his book. Of the arrival in Beijing that marked the end of the
long, wrongheaded, costly estrangement of the United States from China, one of
the few events in our century to alter the balance of power in the world, Mr.
Ambrose says: ''When Nixon reached the bottom step [of Air Force One], he
extended his hand as he walked toward Chou [En-lai]. As the handshake took
place, Nixon later wrote, 'one era ended and another began.' ''

This flatness results partly from Mr. Ambrose's sparing use of personal
interviews, which could also have lit up some corners that are left shadowy. For
example, he records in detail the furious campaign against the television
networks that Mr. Nixon launched because of his irritation at their ''instant
analysis'' of his Silent Majority speech. Had he interviewed the veteran
broadcast journalist Daniel Schorr, or other senior Washington correspondents,
he would have discovered that Mr. Nixon, listening to skeptical comments about
his interpretation of a pivotal letter from Ho Chi Minh, had observed that the
networks might well have turned out to have been correct.

Mr. Ambrose's book is based, in the first place, on the official papers that are
available, especially the daily news summaries on which Mr. Nixon, who so
disliked personal confrontation, scribbled orders and commentaries to his
minions: ''K[issinger] - nip this fast''; ''H[aldeman] - I want our staff to
take RN's position on this regardless of their own views.'' Beyond that, he
relies on memoirs, especially Mr. Nixon's and Henry Kissinger's; on newspaper
files, especially those of The New York Times; and on secondary works,
especially those by Seymour Hersh and Raymond L. Garthoff dealing with Mr.
Nixon's tortuous search for a way out of Vietnam that could be dressed up as
something other than the first American defeat.

It was that futile search that dominated Mr. Nixon's first term. Mr. Ambrose
sees the main points clearly - that Mr. Nixon was operating from a position of
weakness; that he continued to spend American lives freely even after concluding
the war could not be won; that the Cambodian invasion and the bombing campaigns
bought him time but no better deal in the end than he could have had at the
start of his Presidency; and that he repeatedly rejected the extreme options,
such as invading North Vietnam or using tactical nuclear weapons, while talking
like an extremist. (For all of his bluster, Mr. Nixon saw the political utility
of occupying the middle ground, carefully placing himself between Barry
Goldwater and Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 and between George McGovern and George
Wallace in 1972.) Ultimately, what sets this book apart is Mr. Ambrose's
commanding grasp of material that has passed through many hands before, and the
freshness and balance of his analysis of it. There is no better example than his
treatment of the final week of the 1968 Presidential campaign between Mr. Nixon
and Vice President Humphrey, when President Johnson was trying to bring all
parties in the Vietnam War to the conference table. The moment was one of such
high stakes, intense pressure and widespread prevarication that even as talented
a reporter as Theodore H. White, the veteran chronicler of Presidential races,
struggled unsuccessfully to understand it.

The key point was Mr. Nixon's ''bold and brazen'' attempt to undercut Johnson
privately while supporting him publicly, in the (quite possibly correct) view
that progress toward peace would hurt Republican chances in the election.
Through John Mitchell and Anna Chennault, a wealthy supporter with extensive
ties in Asia, Mr. Nixon got word to Nguyen Van Thieu, the South Vietnamese
leader, that he should not agree to go to Paris to negotiate with the North
Vietnamese.

As Mr. Ambrose notes, the episode became a favorite of the Nixon-bashers. ''They
charged,'' he writes, ''that he was so utterly cynical, so completely
self-serving, so absolutely lacking in principle of any kind, that he
deliberately sabotaged peace just to win the election.'' Mr. Ambrose disagrees,
quoting with approbation a memo from Clark Clifford, the Secretary of Defense,
setting out five reasons why it was not in Saigon's interest to heed Johnson's
call to the bargaining table.

''Insofar as the charges imply that Nixon prevented peace in November 1968,''
the author coolly concludes, ''they are false. Not that Nixon did not want to,
or try to, but he did not have to.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Richard Milhous Nixon

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEYOND DAMNATION OR DEFENSE: THE EARLY YEARS

BYLINE: By KEVIN STARR; Kevin Starr teaches urban history at the University of
Southern California.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2024 words



RICHARD MILHOUS NIXON
The Rise of an American Politician.
By Roger Morris.
Illustrated. 1,005 pp. New York:
Henry Holt & Company. $29.95.

In April 1945, a slightly rumpled 32-year-old United States naval officer, just
returned from the Pacific, looked out of the 20th-floor window of a building on
Church Street in Manhattan and watched Dwight David Eisenhower, Supreme Allied
Commander in Europe, ride triumphantly through the ticker tape. The distance
between the five-star general and the small-town lawyer from Whittier, Calif.,
temporarily in uniform, was by any stretch of the imagination unbridgeable, and
no one felt this more wistfully than Lieut. Comdr. Richard Milhous Nixon.

One year later, Mr. Nixon was in the House of Representatives. Four years later,
he took his oath as the junior Senator from California. Six years later, before
turning 40, he was elected Vice President of the United States on the ticket
that took Eisenhower into the White House.

Where had this Nixon come from? To his enemies, many of them from the Eastern
Seaboard, the southern California politician seemed to arise from the void, a
creature of his own opportunistic self-invention. Even his friends and
supporters, as well as some members of his family, found him mysterious.

He is among the most enigmatic figures in American history. Of all our
Presidents, Mr. Nixon has been the most Shakespearean in his capacity to
self-destruct (Richard III and Coriolanus come to mind) and, even when
surviving, to elicit tortuous psychic drama from political action. The only
President ever to be forced to resign from office, he occupied center stage in a
unique instance of political theater. As if he were pushing the Shakespearean
metaphor still further, the loss of the Presidency almost cost him his life.

This life - so internally opaque, so resistant to interpretation, so provocative
of deep anger among the legions of Nixon opponents - is now the subject of a
projected three-volume biography by Roger Morris, a Harvard-trained political
scientist who served Mr. Nixon on the National Security Council before resigning
over the invasion of Cambodia. This first volume takes the story up to the Vice
Presidential inauguration in 1953.

''Richard Milhous Nixon'' is a massive, powerful biography, absorbing in its
research and in its skillful use of anecdote and illustrative detail. When the
project is completed, America will have a narrative useful to critics and
defenders alike. In fact, it will no longer be possible to damn or defend Mr.
Nixon without reference to this great locomotive of a work.

Certain biographers fasten onto their subjects at just the right time: not too
early, when meaning is impossible to fix, nor too late, when all that remains
possible is merely one more adjustment of the academic record. Like John Morley
on Gladstone or Arthur Schlesinger Jr. on Franklin D. Roosevelt, Mr. Morris is
writing at a moment when his subject is at once part of history and part of the
central political consciousness of our era. The roles Mr. Nixon played, the
lines he spoke - in the Alger Hiss case, in the McCarthy controversy, in the
Vietnam, Cambodia and Watergate crises - are pivotal points in our contemporary
history. By turns admirable, despicable and even tragic, he has played dark or,
in the case of China, inspired parts in momentous events that to this day affect
our political values and behavior.

All of the protagonist's adult roles in ''The Tragical History of Richard Nixon,
Part One'' are a long way from the young Nixon who pulled down the kitchen
shades of the family home in Yorba Linda, Calif., so that no one could see him
washing the dishes after supper; or who wrote to The Los Angeles Times at the
age of 11 asking for a job as an office boy and saying that he would work at any
wage offered; or who took a merciless pounding as a junior-varsity tackle at
Fullerton High School, pushing himself again and again into the game despite his
essential ineptitude; or who became a small-town lawyer after failing to land a
job in a fancy New York law firm despite his good grades at Duke University Law
School; or who, as a persistent suitor, had his future wife, the astonishingly
beautiful Thelma Patricia Ryan, bolt the door in response to his persistent
knocking.

Mr. Morris's biography is filled with hundreds of moments in which the reader is
tempted to say: ''Now I understand Richard Nixon.'' I am not talking here of
psychoanalytic understanding or of a political or ideological response. I mean
an intuitive leap - even if empathy wars with distaste - into the inner
landscape of another's existence. Outside of his devoted family and a very small
circle of close friends, Mr. Nixon has remained curiously resistant to such
empathy.

Snobbery has accounted for some of this failure to empathize. Middle-class
people like Mr. Nixon do not have the easy appeal to the intelligentsia
possessed by patricians or campesinos. Even Arthur Miller finds it hard to like
Willy Loman. But Mr. Morris has exhaustively established the human story of Mr.
Nixon's early years in all their day-to-day detail, illuminating, for better or
worse, defenders or critics, the public man.

The setting of this first installment is southern California, where Mr. Nixon
grew up, was educated and got his political start in two ruthless campaigns. For
many educated Americans, the area is terra incognita, as unsusceptible to
interpretation and as tempting to scornful invective as Mr. Nixon himself. But
it has been richly harvested by Mr. Morris.

Outside of those employed in the movie business, few southern Californians have
entered the national arena, a surprising fact given the region's wealth,
population and politically important entertainment industry. Those who have
achieved national reputation - for instance, Gen. George S. Patton Jr. and
Ronald Reagan - have by and large had their California associations held against
them. Besides, Patton was an aristocrat, impeccable in his Virginia ancestry,
and Mr. Reagan was a Midwest import turned film star. In southern California
terms, Richard M. Nixon was the real thing.

Thus, when he went on television during the 1952 campaign to make his famous
Checkers speech, he defended himself as the common man in politics, the sort of
fellow who could afford only a cloth coat, not a mink, for his wife, Pat. This
desperate ploy worked, in part because Mr. Nixon, so clumsy, so eager in his
white starched shirts, perfectly embodied the lower-middle-class aspirations at
the core of the southern California experience in the early 20th century. As a
boy in the 1920's, Mr. Nixon was often taken, along with his brothers, to the
Angeles Temple in Los Angeles to hear Aimee Semple McPherson preach.
Brilliantly, ''Sister Aimee'' knew just what the Nixons and the others in her
congregation wanted to hear: a message of redemption, economic as well as
religious, amidst the bungalows and citrus groves.

Frank Nixon, the future President's father, was a sometime streetcar conductor
who worked just such a citrus grove. But when the bills came due before the
lemon trees matured, he turned to running a gasoline station and a grocery
store. He had married above his station, into a clan of Whittier Quakers named
Milhous, which could never accept Hannah Milhous's choice of a poorly educated,
intermittently surly motorman as her husband. In later years, Hannah - a radiant
figure by all reports, emanating a fundamental goodness born of an intrinsic
spirituality - experienced both the positive and negative results of her choice.
On the one hand, her husband adored her. And yet he could be difficult, sitting
truculently in a parked car while she was visiting her relatives and honking the
horn if she stayed too long. She worked by his side in the gasoline
station-grocery store. Indeed, he seemed to panic when she was not by his side.

The major portion of the book concerns Mr. Nixon's political races against Jerry
Voorhis and Helen Gahagan Douglas, his involvement in the Hiss case and the 1952
Presidential campaign. Each of these sections derives its power from the fact
that a superbly told story is grafted onto the earlier narrative of Mr. Nixon's
private life, extending through World War II. These youthful years are not
employed as reference points to justify psychologically any of Mr. Nixon's more
egregious offenses - the redbaiting of Douglas, for example, whom he defeated
for a Senate seat in 1950. But described in detail, they do present, for the
first time, a portrait of the 37th President as a full, if flawed, human being
and not merely a symbol to be accepted or rejected on partisan grounds.

We see Mr. Nixon at age 12, losing his beloved younger brother Arthur to
influenza and, later, his older brother, Harold, to tuberculosis. We see the
teen-age Nixon rising at 4 A.M. to buy vegetables at the farmers' market for his
father's grocery store, yet refusing to wear a grocer's apron and still
delivering orders for his dad after he passed the bar and became a lawyer. We
see him in high school, avoiding the dirty corduroy pants that were the fashion,
angling for election as student body president. We see his inhibited college
courtship of Ola Welch, who left him for a man who was more fun. And we see the
dean's-office break-in he undertook with two fellow students at Duke to get an
early look at their grades. That incident, which could have cost him his career
had he been discovered, showed his massive insecurity even as a second-year law
student (and, of course, is chillingly prophetic of a future break-in that would
cost him the Presidency).

Mr. Nixon's courtship of Thelma Patricia Ryan has all the power of a realist
novel set in southern California. Raised on a hardscrabble ranch in Artesia,
Calif., she initially craved the bright lights and the big city. She attended
junior college in Fullerton, Calif., and worked in a New York City hospital
before returning to graduate from the University of Southern California.
Resourceful enough to earn one speaking line in the 1935 film ''Becky Sharp''
(the line was cut), she opted instead for the respectability of becoming Miss
Ryan, teacher of commercial subjects at Whittier High School.

Mr. Morris allows none of these early details to obscure his narrative's honesty
or to sentimentalize it. Those who loathe Mr. Nixon because of his role in the
Hiss case or the smears he leveled against Helen Gahagan Douglas in his Senate
campaign will find much to corroborate their judgments.

In terms of the major events of the early career, Mr. Morris recounts a great
deal that is new. During the Hiss case, for example, Mr. Nixon was in secret and
risky contact with the F.B.I. He was also being fed information by the Rev. John
Cronin, a priest who had his own extensive network of informants. Mr. Morris
discloses Mr. Nixon's support in the anti-Communist Roman Catholic community,
including that of then-Monsignor Fulton J. Sheen, and the equally important
support of elite WASP's in Pasadena and San Marino, Calif. It was these
gentlemen who created the fund that allowed Mr. Nixon to avoid out-of-pocket
expenses for campaigning, and consequently almost cost him his place on the 1952
ticket. The account of this crisis reveals Mr. Nixon at his most complex, by
turns brooding, despairing and courageous. Turning public opinion around with
his Checkers speech, a televised tour de force, he buried his face in the studio
curtains after the broadcast, convinced that he had blown it. He was soon
capable, however, of forcing a previously vacillating Ike to eat humble pie in
Wheeling, W.Va., then collapsing in tears again after the ordeal was over.

Such accounts give this biography its authority, and it will continue to be read
as long as there are those who understand that to fathom Richard Milhous Nixon
and his career is to come close, very close, to the inner landscape of
middle-class America in all its aspirations, strengths and deficiencies. The
composer John Adams understood this in his opera ''Nixon in China.'' So does
Roger Morris.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Richard Milhous Nixon (pg. 1); President Richard Nixon in the Oval
Office, 1971 (From ''Nixon''/Wide World Photos) (pg. 64)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WHO HAS TIME FOR SELF-DOUBT?

BYLINE: By TOM GOLDSTEIN; Tom Goldstein is the dean of the Graduate School of
Journalism at the University of California, Berkeley.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 953 words



RIGHT PLACES, RIGHT TIMES
Forty Years in Journalism
Not Counting My Paper Route.
By Hedley Donovan.
Illustrated. 463 pp. New York:
Henry Holt & Company. $27.95.

When he was 23 years old, Hedley Donovan tells us in ''Right Places, Right
Times,'' he wanted to teach history. His credentials were ample: he had been
elected to Phi Beta Kappa in his junior year at the University of Minnesota,
which in the 1930's had a fine history department, and he had sailed through
three years at Oxford as a Rhodes scholar. But the best offer he could stir up
was $600 a year as a teaching assistant at Harvard.

He settled for his second choice, journalism. Then, as now, jobs were scarce.
Nobody in New York City, not even at Time Inc. (which he later supervised for 15
years), would hire him as a reporter. Mr. Donovan turned down a $17.50-a-week
job as a copy boy at The Daily News and went to Washington, where the editorial
page editor of The Washington Post, himself a former Rhodes scholar, referred
him to Casey Jones, the managing editor. ''I don't know whether he cared much
one way or the other that I had been to Oxford,'' Mr. Donovan recalls, ''but he
was pleased when it turned out I was the same polite Donovan boy his wife had
always spoken so well of when I was delivering the afternoon paper to their
front step in Minneapolis, where Casey was then City Editor of the Journal.''
Such was the start of one of this century's grand careers in American magazine
journalism.

With his boyish enthusiasm and his belief that he was engaged in ''outrageously
entertaining work,'' Mr. Donovan was the polar opposite of the cynical,
hard-bitten journalist. He was living out a fantasy. Within a couple of years at
The Post, he was covering national politics, including the 1940 Democratic
National Convention. Mr. Donovan quotes H. L. Mencken, who called a political
nominating convention ''a show so gaudy and hilarious, so melodramatic and
obscene, so preposterous . . . that one lives a gorgeous year within an hour.''
Imagine, Mr. Donovan gasps nearly half a century later, ''being twenty-six years
old, sitting next to the great Mencken himself.'' Imagine.

After four years at The Post and another four as a Navy lieutenant commander,
Mr. Donovan graduated from daily journalism to writing for Fortune (''You're
going to the big leagues now,'' Casey Jones told him), where he was accompanied
on stories by a researcher who took notes on interviews and checked finished
drafts for accuracy. In his five years at the business magazine, he received
only one byline, the Fortune tradition being ''if the writer wanted recognition,
he could look up his name on the masthead.''

From there he became the heir apparent to Henry Luce, spending five years as
deputy to the founder and proprietor of Time Inc., whom Mr. Donovan admired
deeply. Why did Luce choose him? ''You'll do'' was Luce's laconic explanation.

Parts of this autobiography are disingenuous. Mr. Donovan attributes his ascent
to ''a classic case of being in the right place at the right time.'' One
suspects that his march upward was more treacherous than he lets on, that the
internal politics at Time were much more brutal than he describes them and that
operating in the shadow of perhaps the most important private citizen of his
time was much more unnerving than he wishes to set down on paper.

But, in 463 pages, Mr. Donovan pretty convincingly makes the case that he is an
unabashed optimist, rarely dusted by self-doubt: ''I never arrived in the office
with the slightest doubt that I could deal with the problems I knew about - or
the ones I didn't that were about to break.'' His successor, Henry Grunwald,
described him as a man of ''massive calm.''

From 1964 to 1979, as the editor in chief of all Time publications, he ended
Life magazine's run as a weekly, converted Fortune to a fortnightly and started
up Money (a name Mr. Donovan did not like much but found preferable to the
runner-up, Advantage) and People (''I found it utterly unembarrassing to head
the People masthead,'' he writes).

He set editorial policy, including an initially hawkish stance on Vietnam, but
otherwise it was pretty middle-of-the-road. He gave speeches, roamed the world
and spent, he reckons, one-quarter of his time on cover-to-cover reading of the
magazines after they came out. He includes many of his pithy comments, some of
which are gems. In one critique of Sports Illustrated, he wrote: ''Whoever said
'pretty coeds' should tighten up his standards in coeds, as well as caption
writing.''

As an editor, Mr. Donovan was intolerant of flabby writing and wasted words. As
a memoirist, he wastes many. Clearly he is one of the people who never throw
anything out, and he feels compelled to record too much. As witty as his
memorandums were, he gives us too many. As well crafted as some of his articles
were, he includes too many excerpts. It is also apparent that he kept most
pictures of himself and his family, and the 26-page section set aside for
photographs could strike a space-conscious editor as self-indulgent.

But such excesses can be overlooked in this otherwise pleasing book, marked by
its old-fashioned things-will-never-be-quite-so-good-again quality. Mr. Donovan
finished his book earlier this year while the Time-Warner Communications merger
was still pending. But he speculates about the deal: ''Week by week the 'old'
Time Inc. was disappearing, its magazines and books to become, at best, an
important sideline in an entertainment company. Would Time Inc. journalism still
flourish? My constitutional optimism was being sorely tried.'' That, given Mr.
Donovan's incurable penchant for understatement, says a lot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Hedley Donovan with Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt and Wilton Wynn, Cairo
bureau chief Time, 1979.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS LIST: November 12, 1989

SECTION: Section 7; Page 62, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 953 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3    MIDNIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $4.95.)
            Inexplicable deaths and strange horrors take over
            a once-idyllic California town.

 2     7    BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler.
            (Berkley, $5.50.) The many facets of a 28-year
            marriage are revealed during a drive to a funeral.

 3     1    WISHES, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $4.50.) A
            handsome stranger from Maine excites the
            passions of two Colorado sisters.

 4     11   TREVAYNE, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $5.95.)
            A President's aide probes a corrupt ''secret
            government'' within the Government.

 5     2    KOKO, by Peter Straub. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.)
            Three Vietnam veterans on the trail of a friend
            who may be responsible for a series of murders.

 6 *   6    FINAL FLIGHT, by Stephen Coonts. (Dell, $5.95.)
            Colonel Qazi, an ''international terrorist,'' plots to
            steal American nuclear weapons.

 7     1    ANYTHING FOR BILLY, by Larry McMurtry.
            (Pocket, $5.50.) The exploits of Billy the Kid, as
            shared by a dime-novel writer.

 8 *   7    SO WORTHY MY LOVE, by Kathleen E.
            Woodiwiss. (Avon, $10.95.) The abduction of a
            woman leads to romance in Elizabethan England.

 9     1    MITLA PASS, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $5.95.) A
            writer's struggles with his heritage and two loves
            reach a climax during the 1956 Sinai war.

10     7    THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice.
            (Ballantine, $5.95.) Continuing the author's
            chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.

11     1    SINS OF OMISSION, by Fern Michaels.


(Bal
lant
ine,
$5.9
5.)
Two
Worl
d
War
I
vete
rans


inad
vert
entl
y
find
roma
nce
in a
Fren
ch
chat
eau

 and
exci
teme
nt
in
glit
tery
Holl
ywoo
d.

12     1    DEMON LORD OF KARANDA, by David
            Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.95.) The third
            volume in the ''Malloreon'' fantasy saga.

13     1    ONE, by Richard Bach. (Dell, $4.95.) A husband
            and wife find themselves in a fantasy world where
            the possibilities of their pasts still exist.

14     1    HOT SIBERIAN, by Gerald A. Browne. (Avon,
            $4.95.) To save his life, a trader must stop the flow
            of Soviet diamonds flooding the world market.

15 *   1    GLAMOROUS POWERS, by Susan Howatch.
            (Fawcett, $5.95.) A vision recalls a reclusive Brit
            ish cleric to the work and world he once knew well.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     7    BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss. (Signet/NAL,
            $5.95.) The family tragedy that came to light after
            the 1984 murder of a Toms River, N.J., woman.

 2    316   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 3     77   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
            Siegel. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The
            importance of a patient's mind and emotions.

 4     31   CHAOS, by James Gleick. (Penguin, $8.95.) A
            ''new science'' that makes it possible to see order
            and patterns in what appears to be erratic.

 5     16   PERFECT VICTIM, by Christine McGuire and
            Carla Norton. (Dell, $4.95.) The capture and
            seven-year enslavement of a woman hitchhiker.

 6     6    DEADLY MEDICINE, by Kelly Moore and Dan
            Reed. (St. Martin's, $4.95.) The case of a nurse who
            killed 30 babies in Texas pediatric clinics.

 7 *   60   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell
            with Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in
            which mythology illuminates the stages of life.

 8     7    CHILD STAR, by Shirley Temple Black. (Warner,
            $5.95.) The autobiography of the No. 1 film actress
            of the mid-1930's.

 9     24   BITTER BLOOD, by Jerry Bledsoe. (Onyx/NAL,
            $4.95.) Nine murders in three families connected
            by obsessive love and custodial conflicts.

10 *   11   GENERATION OF SWINE, by Hunter S.
            Thompson. (Vintage, $8.95.) Essays on politics
            and popular culture during the 1980's.

11 *   4    THE QUEEN OF MEAN, by Ransdell Pierson.
            (Bantam, $4.95.) A biography of Leona Helmsley.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     6    THE CALVIN AND HOBBES LAZY SUNDAY
            BOOK, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews & McMeel,
            $9.95.) A new collection of cartoons.

 2     6    THE PREHISTORY OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary
            Larson. (Andrews & McMeel, $12.95.) The
            cartoonist's sketches and notes.

 3     68   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie.
            (Hazelden/Harper & Row, $8.95.) Solving your
            own problems while caring for other people.

 4     10   THE NIGHT OF THE MARY KAY
            COMMANDOS, by Berke Breathed. (Little,
            Brown, $7.95.) ''Bloom County'' cartoons.

 5 *   2    THE OLD FARMER'S ALMANAC 1990. (Yankee
            Publishing, $2.95.) The 198th annual edition.

 6 *   21   BEYOND CODEPENDENCY, by Melody Beattie.
            (Hazelden/Harper & Row, $9.95.) How to resume
            a normal life after surviving a crisis.


 These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Out of the Cold'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 53, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 207 words


To the Editor:

Robert S. McNamara's ''Out of the Cold: New Thinking for American Foreign and
Defense Policy in the 21st Century,'' as reviewed by Adam B. Ulam (Oct. 8),
gives us yet another example of an attempt at image refurbishment on the part of
a charter member of ''the best and the brightest.'' One would think that, having
spent this country's blood and money - not to mention its credibility - as
wastefully as they did on misadventures such as the Bay of Pigs invasion and the
war in Vietnam, such people would be content to retire quietly to the rather
congenial worlds of academe or high finance or foundations.

The fact that the general public and, to a large degree, the press have not
elevated Mr. McNamara or any of his former associates to the status of ''elder
statesman,'' as Mr. Ulam has, reflects favorably on the basic judgment of
everyman. Most people would think twice, to put it mildly, before buying a used
car from someone who had sold them a junker once before; why should anyone feel
inclined to accept advice on defense and foreign policy from someone who shares
a great deal of responsibility for the precarious position in which the world
finds itself today?

STEVEN J. HENDEL
Ann Arbor, Mich.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WE COULD HAVE WON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By ROBERT MANNING; Robert Manning, who was an Assistant Secretary of
State from 1962 to 1964 and is a former editor of The Atlantic, edited the
25-volume history ''The Vietnam Experience.'' He is at work on a memoir.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1800 words



LOST VICTORY
A Firsthand Account of America's Sixteen-Year Involvement in Vietnam.
By William Colby with James McCargar.
Illustrated. 438 pp. Chicago:
Contemporary Books. $22.95.

William Colby, a career intelligence agent and administrator, became the
Director of Central Intelligence in 1973, just as the C.I.A., that murky,
semi-autonomous duchy, was being wrenched reluctantly into the daylight. For
several years before that, to the exclusion of almost everything else, he had
been caught up in America's Vietnam adventure. He was something of a rarity
among Americans so involved, in that he had at least some familiarity with Asian
history and customs and at least a primitive acquaintance with the Vietnamese
language. In contrast to most Americans, who served the customary one- or
two-year tours of duty, he was intimately involved in the drama in various
influential ways for the full 16 years of its run. That surely entitles him to
tell his version of a sad story. And he does so in ''Lost Victory,'' written
with James McCargar, a former intelligence officer.

In essence, here is the book's theme. Victory could have been won by the
Americans and South Vietnamese if we had fought the C.I.A.'s kind of war,
countering the so-called people's war being fought by the Communists. Instead,
American leaders, civilian and military, drowned our chances in a torrent of
blunders, among them the rather basic mistakes of fighting the wrong war with
the wrong strategy, the wrong tactics and the wrong soldiers. Even late in the
game there was a chance for victory, but instead we abandoned our South
Vietnamese allies to the surprised but grateful invaders from the Communist
North.

First going to South Vietnam as a C.I.A. operative in 1959, Mr. Colby got close
to President Ngo Dinh Diem and even closer to his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu and Nhu's
wife, Madame Nhu. As depicted by Mr. Colby, Nhu was a man of greater substance
and more selfless devotion to his country than the reptilian eminence portrayed
in the journalism of that time. Mr. Colby's intimacy with the brothers, whose
Catholic faith he shared, led him to a broad circle of Vietnamese acquaintances.
Soon, he relates, he found himself seeing the events unfolding before him
through eyes that had become partly Vietnamese. What he saw was a country that
was far from ready for the American-style democracy being pressed on it but
certainly deserving of American help to establish its freedom.

What he also saw was a need for the United States to help Diem fight his
Communist antagonists for control of the land and the loyalty of its people.
Diem, with his ''strategic hamlets'' program and his sometimes maddening but
necessary insistence on acting as an independent leader rather than the puppet
of his American advisers, was, in Mr. Colby's view, on the right track. It is
surely no coincidence that this was the very track the C.I.A. had been
encouraging in the persons of Edward Lansdale, an adviser to Diem, and
Lansdale's cohorts from the beginning of Diem's regime in 1955.

The American aid program consisted of actions both overt and secret (secret,
that is, only from the American people, not the North Vietnamese or their
Russian and Chinese allies) to build up South Vietnam's regular forces while
pursuing the same kind of political, ideological and consensus-shaping
activities among the people that Ho Chi Minh and the Communists were pressing.
The United States would provide military advisers and other guidance, materiel
and other aid the South Vietnamese needed. But the fighting would be essentially
Vietnamese against Vietnamese. Although many Americans made noble efforts, the
record suggests that we never gave that strategy a chance.

Instead of sticking with the autocratic Diem, the Kennedy Administration
encouraged the 1963 coup that culminated in Diem's and Nhu's assassinations. Mr.
Colby, who by then was in Washington in charge of the C.I.A. Far East Division,
says that the coup was the beginning of the end. It was, he writes, ''America's
primary (and perhaps worst) error in Vietnam. The two later ones - fighting the
wrong war, refusing to help an ally at the critical moment - stemmed inexorably
from it.'' Mr. Colby remembers hearing a leading Vietnam Communist exult that
Diem's removal was ''a gift from Heaven for us.''

President Lyndon Johnson inherited the ensuing mess. As matters went from bad to
worse under a succession of Laurel and Hardy-type military regimes in Saigon,
President Johnson and his top advisers - the same men who had advised President
Kennedy - turned over Vietnam to the United States military and let it fight as
if it were still engaging in the fixed battles of World War II and Korea. And
the Americans won just about every confrontation, at horrendous cost in death
and destruction, while decisively losing the war.

''Sink or swim with Ngo Dinh Diem'' was a derisive chant in the precoup days,
but what if the United States had chosen to continue to support Diem? Mr. Colby
argues that with dedicated American backing Diem might well have saved South
Vietnam as an independent nation. But what if that hadn't worked and the South
had fallen to the North? ''Vietnam, the United States and the world as a
whole,'' he writes, ''would have suffered less in all ways than by postponing
the event to . . . 1975.'' Now, many years and millions of casualties later,
that outcome seems starkly preferable.

Mr. Colby is fond of repeating Robert Kennedy's remark that there were enough
mistakes made in Vietnam for all concerned to share responsibility. And the
author does parcel it out. The only military man who gets his warm endorsement
is Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the last commanding general in Vietnam, who
recognized the need for nonmilitary, political warfare. Mr. Colby is scathing,
though, in his scorn for Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge and his ''lone-wolf
vendetta against the Diem regime.'' As for Secretary of Defense Robert S.
McNamara, the author writes that ''there was something sad in watching [him]
intensely trying to produce policy and carry out programs by the numbers.'' He
doesn't place every bit of the blame for the fall of Diem on critical
journalists, or on American television for converting the massive failure of the
Communists' 1968 Tet offensive into a defeat for the United States, but you can
almost see the sardonic smile on his face when he wrote the line about newsmen
acting ''in the best journalistic tradition of detachment from responsibility
for the consequences to follow.''

What concerns Mr. Colby most in his look back at the shambles of Vietnam is the
effort to achieve ''pacification'' in the broadest sense of that word, i.e.,
nation-building. He gave his heart and guts to pacification for several of his
Vietnam years, even risking his C.I.A. career by taking a leave of absence to
work for CORDS, the intensive 1967-68 pacification program that for the first
time truly integrated all-out civil and military, American and South Vietnamese
energies. These efforts included the Phoenix program for rooting out members of
the Viet Cong infrastructure. Mr. Colby personally directed that operation,
which put the finger on some 30,000 Communist operatives, and he makes a
convincing refutation of allegations that it was a vicious assassination
program. He delineates in mind-dazzling detail the laborious layering of
bureaucracies that went into CORDS. These chapters will make a good case study
for professors who specialize in teaching Government bureaucrats how to be more
bureaucratic.

It is true that the successes of pacification efforts were too little recognized
by the press, or by many of the military-minded officials in Washington. Still,
Mr. Colby's claims for the achievements of CORDS seem excessive to one who has
read voluminously in the war literature. He goes so far as to maintain that as
late as the 1970's, the Vietnamization of the war was succeeding and
pacification efforts had at last built the base for the South's victory. That
victory was thrown away, he says, because the United States, having already
bugged out in the field, did so at the bargaining table in Paris as well (the
American antiwar movement was ''the invisible participant'' there). Then
Congress cravenly cut off even elementary aid, and President Nguyen Van Thieu's
Government was left naked to its enemies.

The idea that victory for South Vietnam was still possible so late in the last
act of this tragedy is difficult to substantiate, but it can't be disproved
either. The same can be said of a view that is different but just as plausible:
that by the 70's the opportunity had long been gone to win anything but a
Pyrrhic victory to be followed by the prolonged presence of American troops in
Vietnam. So much for looking back. The Vietnam War is long over. Still, we
cannot stop thinking about it, can we?

'I DID NOT KNOW THE ANSWER'

My return [to America] in 1971 fully opened my eyes to the intensity of the
antiwar movement. . . . While I had opened my description of Phoenix with the
fact that the Viet Cong terrorism that it was designed to combat had killed some
6,000 South Vietnamese local leaders and ordinary citizens during the past year,
the statistics that caught the attention of the press in its accounts of my
testimony [before the House Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and Government
Information] were those of the effects of Phoenix on the enemy. I recounted that
during the years since it began in 1968, the Phoenix program had brought about
the capture of some 28,978 Communist leaders in the Viet Cong Infrastructure,
that some 17,717 had taken advantage of the amnesty program, and that some
20,587 had been reported as killed. I made it quite clear that those killings
occurred ''mostly in combat situations'' and supported that statement with the
further details that some 87.6 percent of those killed were killed by regular or
paramilitary forces, and only 12.4 percent by police or irregular forces.
[Representative Ogden] Reid then asked, ''Can you categorically state that
Phoenix has never perpetrated the premeditated killing of a civilian in a
noncombat situation?''

''No,'' I replied, ''I could not say that, but I do not think it happens often.
I certainly would not say never,'' adding, ''Phoenix, as a program, I say, has
not done that. Individual members of it, subordinate people in it, may have done
it. But as a program, it is not designed to do that.'' Reid then tried to get me
to make an admission in specific numbers of people who may have been
inaccurately identified as members of the VCI, which I successfully resisted. I
did not know the answer, and I understood that he was seeking a good headline.

From ''Lost Victory.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: William Colby in Hue, South Vietnam, with the porvincial chief, Col. Le
Van Than, 1970 (From ''Lost Victory'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SALVADORAN ARMY COUNTERATTACKS IN CAPITAL CITY

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1538 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Nov. 13


The Salvadoran Army used helicopter gunships to attack leftist guerrilla forces
in the capital today as heavy fighting continued to rage in many neighborhoods
and bedroom communities, mostly on the periphery of the city.

Although much of the city was calm, in the combat areas soldiers used heavy
machine guns mounted on the helicopters to rake some guerrilla strongholds. The
rebels ripped up cobblestones and built barricades, as if preparing for a long
siege by troops with superior firepower. The army said it was using helicopters
selectively.

The fighting began Saturday night with dozens of attacks here and on targets
elsewhere in the country by forces of the rebel alliance, the Farabundo Marti
National Liberation Front.

U.S. Estimate of the Toll

As the battles continued through a second day, casualties steadily mounted. The
Government did not provide casualty figures, but by nightfall, the United States
Embassy estimated that 339 people had been killed and 373 wounded. Of the dead,
86 were Salvadoran Army soldiers, 202 were rebel troops, and 51 were civilians.

In Washington, the Bush Administration asserted that the offensive by the
leftist guerrillas was long planned and that its goal was the weakening of the
Salvadoran Government and the creation of a popular uprising in parts of the
country. [Page A12.] The rebel offensive is the strongest in almost 10 years of
civil war, in which 70,000 people have died.

The guerrillas said they had attacked 50 targets in and around the capital;
today, fighting continued sporadically at no more than half of them.

''We'll stay until it ends,'' said a guerrilla soldier armed with an automatic
rifle and rocket-propelled grenades as gunfire ripped through the public-housing
complex where his assault team was housed. ''If it takes a month to take power,
then that's how long we'll be here.''

Fighting Elsewhere Reported

Little news reached the capital from other cities, but fighting has been
reported in 8 of the country's 14 departments. There were reports of heavy
combat in the eastern city of San Miguel, the region's central market and
manufacturing base, as well as in a northern province, Morazan, and the city of
Santa Ana, a bastion of support for the rightist Government. It was not possible
to independently confirm those reports.

Despite the casualties on both sides, neither seems close to breaking. The
rebels' morale appeared high. And the Salvadoran armed forces seemed to retain
the momentum even though they are having severe trouble dislodging the rebels.
Still, the military, which does better in pitched battles than in guerrilla
warfare, has the advantages of superior firepower, mobility and often, the
luxury of choosing when to attack.

An estimated 1,500 rebels were reported doing the fighting at San Salvador; the
army strength in the capital is about 5,000, but many are involved in guard duty
rather than direct combat.

The army strategy appears to be to surround the rebels, who are receiving
support and food from many local residents. It then closes the noose, attacking
one guerrilla position after another. While the insurgents believe they are in
control of their areas, the army sees them as trapped. So far, however, that
does not appear to have fazed the rebels. A Prod to Negotiations?  Many Western
diplomats saw the rebel offensive as an attempt to demonstrate their power and
force the Government to make some fundamental compromises in negotiations, which
broke off last week.

The United States Ambassador to El Salvador, William J. Walker, referring to the
rebels by the front's initials, said: ''The spasm of violence and destruction is
an attempt by the F.M.L.N. to demonstrate the damage it can inflict, It wants to
enhance its position at the bargaining table.''

The staccato sound of combat crackled throughout this low slung capital most of
the day, even though the fighting was much more confined than during the first
two days of the offensive. Occasionally, however, heavy explosions punctuated
the steady rhythm of automatic-weapons fire.

Hour by hour, the toll has mounted with the rebels apparently taking the heavier
share of losses. The main morgue was full, and hospitals reported that they were
crowded and short of medical staffers.

Almost Blase About War

After almost a decade of war, distant gunfire no longers causes shock here. In
many areas of the capital and in some suburbs, it seemed more like a Sunday or a
religious holiday than the middle of a fierce offensive.

Families lounged on their porches, listening to the gunfire. Most had little
choice. A national traffic stoppage, imposed by the rebels, was observed by most
bus companies. Pickup trucks, decked with white flags and piled high with
passengers, were the only public transportation running.

The Government halted radio newscasts by imposing a state of siege, which
suspends most personal liberties and gives the army vast powers to arrest and
hold citizens. It was imposed on Monday night.

A reporter for one station, YKSL, said a senior aide to President Alfredo
Cristiani called and threatened to revoke the station's license after it began
broadcasting news. There were unconfirmed reports that the Government would
impose strict censorship of newspapers starting Tuesday.

Many Blame the Rebels

There was little obvious reaction to the declaration of a state of siege and a
curfew. The guerrilla offensive has angered many Salvadorans, and switchboards
at local radio stations have been jammed with callers demanding even tougher
measures, especially against the rebels' political allies.

The guerrillas said they thought it would help their cause by polarizing the
residents of the capital, driving those in the political center to their cause.

''The people know we're on their side,'' one rebel said. ''They know we're the
people. If we give them a bomb, they throw it. If we give them a gun, they fight
- even the children.''

The fighting and the transportation shutdown stranded hundreds of San Salvador
residents, separating them from loved ones. A weeping Maria Ramirez de Lopez
walked three hours trying to bring four small rolls to her daughter, Reyna, and
her two children. But the rebels were entrenched in the housing complex where
her daughter lives and she could not enter.

''They can't get out,'' she said, crying. And she expressed fear for her
2-year-old grandson, who had recently been treated for convulsions.

Unfortunate Civilians

Both the rebels and the army seem to have inflicted civilian casulaties. A
rocket-propelled grenade, apparently fired by the guerrillas at an unknown
target, today hit a house in a working-class suburb, Soyapango, residents said.

The armed forces seem to have caused the majority of the civilian casualties.
Residents in at least three neighborhoods seized by the rebels said the air
force strafed and rocketed the guerrilla strongholds, causing numerous deaths.
Several said the army had also used heavy machine guns mounted on armored
personnel carriers.

''The boys don't shoot at the people,'' said Juan Carlos Ortiz Sales, a
42-year-old construction worker, using the colloquial term for the rebels. His
small concrete and aluminum shack had been hit by four heavy-caliber bullets
today, allowing stiletto-thin beams of sunlight to stream into the dark living
room.

But Ambassador Walker blamed the rebels for the civilian casualties. He noted
that they had taken up positions in residential areas, forcing the army to
attack homes.

How the Insurgents See It

In an eastern suburb, the rebels held propaganda meetings, or ''popular
councils,'' to explain their decision to residents.

''I just want peace for the people,'' a female soldier told reporters.

A compatriot then walked up. ''Our job is to kill as many people as possible,''
he said.

''They're scared and don't come,'' one rebel said as the army fired on his
apartment building in a northeastern suburb, Zacamil. ''They just shoot in the
air.'' But this afternoon the army attacked the working class neighborhood in
force, sparking heavy fighting.

It is questionable how long the insurgents can hold on in the face of the
American-trained armed forces' advantages. A Western diplomat said they appear
to have miscalculated the breadth of their support and proved the Government's
claim that they are a decided minority.

Daring Helps

The guerrillas were apparently hoping that their audacity and the breadth of
their attacks would spark a popular insurrection and become the equivalent of
North Vietnam's Tet offensive of 1968. The Vietcong suffered disproportionate
casulaties during that campaign, but their show of force is widely considered to
have been a turning point in the war.

''There's no sign of any insurrection,'' the diplomat said. ''The rebels are
looking for the Salvadoran equivalent of the Tet offensive. The snag is that
this isn't Vietnam.''

Still, the rebel offensive was an impressive display of the motivation,
coordination and logistical ability of their insurgent army, which is considered
one of Latin America's best. Their tenacity has also shown that they retain the
support of a broad part of the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a civilian running past Government soldiers who took cover in
Soyapango. (Reuters) (pg. A1); map of El Salvador (NYT) (pg. A13)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Governments Start Preparing for Global Warming Disasters

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2773 words


IN the quickening international debate over global warming, the spotlight has
played mostly on the question of how and whether to control the growing
emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that trap heat in the atmosphere.

Now another concern is starting to come to the fore as well. No matter what
action is taken, some scientists say, there are already enough of these
''greenhouse'' gases in the atmosphere to cause a major warming, and more are
certain to accumulate before the buildup can be halted.

As a result, climatologists, social scientists, planners and government
officials are beginning to focus on how society might adapt to rising sea
levels, shifting agricultural zones, changing climates and other problems that
global warming would bring if it occurs on a significant scale.

Already, state and local governments along the coast of the United States are
starting to plan for a possible long-term rise in the sea level, and a few have
taken action to cope with it. In the Netherlands, planning is well advanced for
an expansion of that country's system of dikes, dunes and other coastal
defenses, and the Dutch are also offering their expertise to Indonesia and the
Maldives.

Agricultural researchers are stepping up efforts to develop heat-resistant and
drought-resistant crops that might gradually replace traditional crops if the
climate changes.

And the electric power industry in America is planning how to meet the increase
in the demand for power for air-conditioning that would surely result from
global warming. In one of the first studies, the Electric Power Research
Institute has calculated that for every 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit in climatic
warming, power demand in the summer would rise 2 to 3 percent in the New York
metropolitan area - enough to have a sizable effect on the region's limited
generating capacity.

These stirrings are somewhat tentative, both because of uncertainty about the
whole question of global warming and because of a tendency on the part of some
environmentalists and politicians to play down the question of adaptation for
fear it will divert attention from what they see as an overriding need to limit
production of the greenhouse gases.

But reining them in is bound to be difficult. The world economy runs on fossil
fuels, and burning these fuels generates increasing amounts of carbon dioxide,
the most important greenhouse gas. Weaning the world away from them is likely to
be a long and costly business. For developing countries especially, fossil fuels
are tightly linked to prospects for development and a better life for their
peoples, leaving those countries reluctant to give up the fuels.

As the difficulty of reducing greenhouse emissions has come home, the focus has
shifted somewhat ''from prevention to a focus on adaptation,'' said Michael H.
Glantz of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo. Dr.
Glantz, a social scientist, heads a group that studies the impact of climatic
change on societies. And while a number of environmentalists, scientists and
officials continue to believe that the first priority should be a reduction of
emissions of greenhouse gases, some are now saying that adaptation must be
considered as well.

In a report to President Bush earlier this year, the National Academy of
Sciences argued that adaptive measures should be assigned a high priority. ''We
are already irrevocably committed to major global change in the years ahead,''
the report said, expressing the view prevalent among climatologists. ''The
elevated concentrations of greenhouse gases produced to date by human activities
will persist for many centuries and will slowly change the climate of the earth,
regardless of our actions.''

Still, although many scientists agree on the broad outlines of global climate
change, the system is so complex they cannot predict exactly how great the
change will be or when and how it will affect specific regions.

This uncertainty means that in planning for a broad range of long-term
activities like coastal development, construction of ports, location of
waste-disposal sites, water projects and agricultural enterprises, flexibility
is crucial, the academy told Mr. Bush.

In studying and planning for the expected impact of global warming, the
Environmental Protection Agency is emphasizing this need for flexibility.
''You've got to leave yourself leeway,'' said John Hoffman, the director of the
agency's global change division.

The planning options for industrialized countries, with all their resources, are
numerous, the academy's report said. But that is not the case for many
developing countries. For instance, a one-meter rise in sea level, which some
experts consider likely by the end of the next century, would cover broad areas
of Bangladesh, Indonesia and Southeast Asia holding some of the world's largest
populations and richest agricultural lands. Those countries, experts say, simply
do not have the resources to deal with such a disaster.

Some experts, moreover, express concern that the industrialized countries,
following a well-documented human tendency, will not take adaptive action until
disaster is near, when it may be too late.

The Science
Complexity Makes Prediction Chancy

In the greenhouse effect, energy from the sun is trapped in the earth's
atmosphere by carbon dioxide, methane, chlorofluorocarbons and other trace
gases. The more gases, the more heat is trapped.

Carbon dioxide, the principal greenhouse gas, is emitted by the burning of
fossil fuels. Scientists say atmospheric concentrations of all these gases
combined have increased from about 280 parts per million of carbon dioxide at
the start of the industrial age almost 200 years ago to the equivalent of 400
parts per million today. At the present rate of increase, scientists say that
the level will grow to 570 parts per million, more than double the
pre-industrial level, possibly as early as 2030.

Scientists calculating from mathematical models of the earth's atmosphere say
this doubling could cause the atmosphere to warm by 3 to 8 degrees Fahrenheit.
By comparison, the atmosphere has warmed by about 9 degrees since the end of the
last ice age. But climatic and atmospheric change is so complex that there is
great uncertainty about the predictive accuracy of the models.

How long it will take for maximum warming to be reached is uncertain because the
oceans slow such warming. Most scientists expect the maximum warming to take
place by the second half of the next century.

If change is slow enough, the Environmental Protection Agency said earlier this
year in a report to Congress, adaptation may be manageable. But a sudden or
rapid change, it said, might make it problematic.

Sea-Level Rise
Defending Coasts Is a Concern

A rise in sea level is ''one of the most certain impacts of climate change,''
the agency said in its report to Congress. Higher global temperatures would
probably cause glaciers to melt, as well as leading to an expansion of the
oceans because warm water occupies a larger volume of space than cold water. If
levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere double, sea levels will rise;
estimates of the average rise are from 1.5 feet to 6.5 feet. Some leading
experts regard a rise of 1 meter, a little more than three feet, as most likely.
They expect it to occur gradually in the next century, affecting coastal areas
where about a billion people, a quarter of the world's population, now live.

In adapting to global warming, ''the primary issue is coastal defense,'' said
Michael Oppenheimer, a senior scientist with the Environmental Defense Fund.
''Planning for sea-level rise must be done decades in advance of the actual
unfolding of the consequences. If you're going to protect such areas with
seawalls, or carry out a careful retreat of populations, which will be
inevitable in some cases, or protect houses, those are measures that must be
planned many decades ahead of time.''

Gjerrit P. Hekstra, an ecologist in the environmental protection branch of the
government of the Netherlands, said defending a settled coastline or coastal
city from rising seas requires ''a complete restructuring of your hydrological
infrastructure - ship channels, dikes, canals, rivers, everything.''

Dr. Hekstra's country has been doing that for many decades, and the experience
of the Netherlands may prove instructional for much of the rest of the world.
For the Dutch, adapting to a sea-level rise means simply an expansion of the
elaborate, modern coastal defense system it has developed in the last 30 years.
Government studies have shown that to protect the country from a sea-level rise
of 1 meter will require an investment, over the long term, of up to $10 billion.
The Netherlands has already spent $15 billion on coastal defense in the last
three decades.

Coastal defense means building dikes and piling up sand on the coast to
strengthen dunes and sculpting rivers and canals to keep sea water from
penetrating the soil and ruining both fresh water supplies and agricultural
land. Dr. Hekstra said it is his opinion as a private ecologist that all this is
well within existing technology and requires only money.

''So I don't think your country and my country is the real problem,'' he said.
That is not to minimize the problem, he said, since the United States would have
to spend billions of dollars to defend coastal cities and developments against a
one-meter rise in sea level and might well have to abandon some low-lying
regions altogether.

''We can cope,'' Dr. Hekstra said. ''But not Indonesia, not Bangladesh, not
Vietnam. They don't have the resources to do it. Who's going to pay the bill for
the developing countries?'' In the United States, the E.P.A. has made extensive
studies of the effect of a rise in the sea level, and most coastal states are
beginning to plan for it. Questions being examined include not only coastal
defense but matters like beach erosion and the intrusion of salt water into
rivers and bays where it would foul drinking-water supplies. Possible solutions
to salt-water intrusion include the construction of barrier dams in estuaries
and canals to divert the salt water from drinking water intakes. Close attention
is also being paid to the control of hazardous-waste disposal sites in areas
likely to flood.

Most of the efforts are in early stages. But ''I haven't talked to a single
coastal state that isn't doing some hard thinking about this and where the
government is starting to put together some plans,'' said Thomas W. Curtis, the
director of the natural resources group of the National Governors' Association.

South Carolina, North Carolina, Maine and Florida, with sea-level rise in mind,
have all enacted standards designed to control construction on their shorelines.


Water Resources
Shortages Likely For California

Some predictions of climate change, admittedly chancy, forecast drier conditions
for much of the American West, with serious consequences for a region where
water scarcity is already a major factor of life and prosperity. The E.P.A.
study for Congress, for instance, found that California's water demand could
increase, even as water supplies decrease. The decrease would come about partly
because more snow would melt in the winter and less in the summer. Since
reservoirs do not have the capacity to store all the winter runoff, spring and
summer water supplies would drop.

Experts say that a number of adaptive measures could help in such a situation.
These could be as simple as lining irrigation systems so that less water is
wasted or expensive solutions like building larger reservoirs or even such a
harsh measure, should water become scarce enough, as imposing high prices on it.

''Despite a growing awareness of the problem, the institutions involved in
managing our water resources are not really taking account of the greenhouse
effect,'' said Peter H. Gleick, director of the global environment program of
the Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment and Security, a
nonprofit research institute in Berkeley, Calif.

''The difficulty is that we don't know how precipitation patterns are going to
change,'' said Dr. Oppenheimer of the Environmental Defense Fund. This, he said,
underscores the limitations of adaptation.

Agriculture
Crop Adaptation Seems Promising

No more critical activity stands to be profoundly affected by global warming
than agriculture, but scientists also consider it one of the most adaptable.

Almost all the crops now grown in the United States, for example, originally
came from some other part of the world and were adapted to this continent.

Building on this tradition, the Federal Department of Agriculture is preparing
to ease the way for whatever transplants might be required by global warming.
Jim Duke, an economic botanist at the department's research center in
Beltsville, Md., has been collecting data for some years on the temperature and
rainfall conditions in which 1,000 agricultural plants flourish. He is now
preparing to use this data in mathematical models of climate, which would tell
what crops would adapt best if, for instance, New York's average temperature
rose three degrees and its rainfall also increased.

The E.P.A. report to Congress said that warming might force abandonment of 10 to
50 percent of the Southeast's agricultural acreage.

''We might lose the conventional crops'' in the Southeast, said Dr. Duke. ''But
assuming we didn't go dry, we would bring in semitropical crops. It's just a
matter of selecting variety. We could bring in a wealth of tropical fruits and
vegetables.''

At the same time, agricultural researchers around the world have long been
striving, through both genetic and cultivation techniques, to make many crops
more adaptable to harsh environments. Gary Evans, a special assistant for global
change issues at the Department of Agriculture, said, ''We are augmenting most
of our current plant-stress programs with an eye to what would take place if
temperature or moisture shifted.''

Researchers are also striking out in new directions with important implications
for adaptation to global warming. At the University of Arizona, for instance,
researchers led by Carl N. Hodges are experimenting with getting plants to grow
in sea water. If they succeed, the technique could save fresh water in arid
areas near oceans.

In Israel's Negev Desert, a team led by Yosef Misrahi of Ben Gurion University
of the Negev is growing fruits and nuts at temperatures higher than 115 degrees.
In the same area, the Jewish National Fund, the Israeli agency in charge of
forestry and land conservation, is experimenting with a genetically improved
species of loblolly pine, using seedlings donated by the Georgia-Pacific
Corporation. Much of this sort of research is directly related to the prospect
of global warming.

Prospects
Seeds of Change In Hurricane

Even before Hurricane Hugo, Charleston, S.C., was attuned to two of the major
effects scientists expect from global warming: a rising sea level and more
frequent and more potent hurricanes. It had already required new buildings near
the shore to be built far enough off the ground to escape flooding, which they
did in the hurricane. The city had also begun installing pumping stations to
insure proper drainage, unlike the situation with sewers that work by gravity,
which do not drain when rising water covers their outlets.

But the hurricane certainly made a difference. ''The hurricane deepened our
resolve,'' Mayor Joseph P. Riley of Charleston said, ''and made us more
confident that our decisions along those lines were wise ones, and it certainly
deepened our commitment to new ways of thinking and acting.''

That, according to the conclusions of a study directed by Dr. Glantz of the
National Center for Atmospheric Research, is how action to combat a long-term
threat usually gets started. A number of case studies sponsored by the center
found that a catalyst was usually necessary before governments would act. Once
they did act, ad hoc responses were favored over longer-term, planned responses.

These responses, the study concluded, ''have often built into the existing
social structures an additional degree of rigidity'' that make it more difficult
to adapt flexibly.

Those charcteristics illustrate the difficulties of adaptation, Dr. Glantz said,
especially in a situation so fraught with uncertainty as global warming, where
the threat, however serious it ultimately proves to be, may not become readily
apparent for years or even decades.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Diagrams (pgs. C1 & C13)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Congress Curbing Bush's Ability To Aid the Cambodian Guerrillas

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 14


Over the objections of the Bush Administration, Congress is imposing new
restrictions on the President's ability to send weapons to non-Communist
guerrillas in Cambodia, Congressional aides said today.

The restrictions, part of a secret appendix to the military appropriations bill
for the current fiscal year, prevent Mr. Bush from using contingency funds of
the Central Intelligence Agency to arm the Cambodian guerrillas unless he first
gets approval from Congress.

The use of such funds does not ordinarily require permission from Congress. But
key members of the Congressional appropriations committees, especially the
chairman of the Senate panel, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, adamantly oppose
American military support for the Cambodian guerrillas.

Mr. Byrd said he feared such aid could lead the United States into ''a major new
military involvement in the wars of Southeast Asia.''

An Uneasy Coalition

In Cambodia, two non-Communist guerrilla groups, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk
and Son Sann, a former Prime Minister, are in an uneasy coalition with the
Communist Khmer Rouge, fighting the Phnom Penh Government. Vietnam, which
invaded Cambodia in 1978 to end nearly four years of repressive rule by the
Khmer Rouge, says it withdrew the last of its soldiers in September of this
year.

The United States continues to profess unswerving support for Prince Sihanouk
even though he embarrassed many of his backers by insisting in August, at peace
talks in Paris, that the Khmer Rouge be included in an interim coalition
government. Hun Sen, the Prime Minister of the Vietnamese-installed Government
in Phnom Penh, rejected the idea of sharing power with the Khmer Rouge.

The Bush Administration has repeatedly said it wants the option of providing
military aid to the non-Communist guerrillas. It formally proposed such aid in
May, but received a chilly reception from the House and Senate intelligence
committees. Vice President Dan Quayle made a speech supporting such aid in June
and lobbied for it in July, just before the Paris conference. Help From the U.S.
For more than a year, the United States has provided the non-Communist guerrilla
forces with food, medicine, clothing and money. Administration officials say the
United States is not supplying weapons to them.

But guerrilla commanders from Mr. Son Sann's faction said last month that
American arms, including Dragon antitank missiles, had enabled the rebels to
penetrate deep inside Cambodia from their camps near the border with Thailand.
The commanders did not say how they had obtained the weapons.

Mr. Son Sann's group, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, is also
reported to be using Armbrust shoulder-fired antitank weapons manufactured by a
West German company. The Phnom Penh Government says it seized such weapons from
the guerrillas, who are believed to have obtained them through Singapore.

Asian diplomats and Cambodian rebel leaders say the Soviet Union has sharply
increased its military aid to the Cambodian Government this year. Bush
Administration officials predict that there will be fierce fighting as the Phnom
Penh Government and the guerrillas try to seize territory in advance of further
negotiations on a political settlement.

Thailand Seeks a Change

The Prime Minister of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan, informed American
officials last month that he favored a change in the policy long pursued by the
United States and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. He said that an
international team of observers should be sent to Cambodia to verify the
withdrawal of Vietnamese troops even if there was no agreement on the details of
a comprehensive political settlement or a formula for sharing power among the
Cambodian factions. The team, he said, could also arrange a cease-fire and
prepare for general elections.

The United States maintains that ''international verification of the Vietnamese
withdrawal must be part of a comprehensive settlement.''

In a recent message to his troops, Prince Sihanouk said he was ''very worried''
because the Phnom Penh Government was gaining support from other countries, and
''foreigners now want to embrace this Hun Sen regime.''

The United States has belittled the significance of ties between the
non-Communist guerrillas and the Khmer Rouge, the most powerful group in the
rebel coalition. But Prince Sihanouk boasted of cooperation among ''the three
armies of Cambodia's national resistance movement,'' saying, ''We assist one
another in every circumstance and cooperate with one another on the
battlefield.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Fear of Khmer Rouge Success Appears on Rise

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 14


With the United Nations scheduled to begin its yearly Cambodia debate on
Wednesday, there are signs of increasing discomfort among Western countries
about even indirect collaboration with the Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who
dominate the opposition coalition that holds the country's United Nations seat.

The United Nations vote, scheduled Thursday, is expected to easily confirm the
retention of the seat by the coalition, which also includes the smaller,
non-Communist factions of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and a former Prime Minister,
Son Sann.

The vote will continue the formal isolation of the Phnom Penh Government, which
was installed by Vietnam when it invaded Cambodia in late 1978, driving out the
Khmer Rouge.

Success Breeds Apprehension

But six weeks after Vietnam says all of its troops have left Cambodia, a bout of
new fighting and some military successes by the opposition coalition have
brought fresh concern that the Khmer Rouge, under whose rule more than a million
Cambodians were killed or died of famine or disease, may be able to fight their
way back to power in Phnom Penh.

And there is also nervousness among countries that limit their aid to
non-Communist resistance forces that even their military successes, by
undermining the Phnom Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, will work to
the ultimate benefit of the Khmer Rouge.

''We don't want a military solution in Cambodia,'' said a senior Western
diplomat here, whose country supports the non-Communist insurgent groups.
''Because we believe if there is one, the Khmer Rouge is likely to win.''

But there will have to be a period of fighting, the diplomat said, to get Mr.
Hun Sen to agree to a comprehensive peace settlement. The difficulty, he
admitted, is in gauging the line between losses that make Mr. Hun Sen open to
concessions and losses that create panic, with the risk of causing his regime to
collapse and allowing the Khmer Rouge to rule Cambodia again. Have Khmer Rouge
Changed?  The difficulty of defending such a policy against those who regard the
Khmer Rouge as unchanged and comparable to the Nazis has caused some countries
to move closer to Vietnam and Mr. Hun Sen.

Australia recently announced that it would open a trade office in Vietnam,
cracking an American-led embargo on aid, trade and investment with Hanoi, and
already has a large contingent of aid workers in Cambodia.

Thai officials say that Finland and Sweden will abstain in the United Nations
vote Thursday, in an effort to emphasize a shift in concern from Vietnamese
aggression to the dangers of a re-emergence of the Khmer Rouge.

Last week, Britain became the first Western nation to publicly conclude that
Vietnamese forces were no longer in Cambodia, rejecting Chinese and
opposition-coalition assertions that thousands of Hanoi's troops remained behind
dressed in Cambodian uniforms. The question is important, because it allows the
current fighting to continue to be characterized as a battle against an invader
and not a civil war.

How British Aid Will Flow

In a statement to the House of Commons last Wednesday, Britain's new Foreign
Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said tersely, ''Vietnam has withdrawn its combat units
from Cambodia.''

Also significantly, Mr. Hurd said that Britain would send government aid into
Cambodia, although channeled through nongovernmental organizations like Oxfam
and Unicef, and not merely provide money to support the camps of the opposition
coalition in Thailand.

A British diplomat will go to Phnom Penh to coordinate the aid effort, Mr. Hurd
said - the first Western diplomat in years to openly visit Phnom Penh on a
formal mission. The diplomat, Andrew George, head of the political section of
the British Embassy in Bangkok, is scheduled to leave as soon as space opens a
flight there.

While the issue of Cambodia's United Nations seat is already settled for this
year, Mr. Hurd said, this was a ''legal and technical matter'' that in no way
implied a readiness to deal with the coalition as a government or to lend any
support to the Khmer Rouge.

Humanitarian Role

Britain will also work to modify the draft resolution on Cambodia to remove any
implied support for the war being waged against Phnom Penh, Mr. Hurd explained
in a later interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation.

''It is distancing ourselves some way from the actual armed struggle going on in
Cambodia,'' he said. ''Our job is not to support a political group, but to
concentrate humanitarian aid wherever that is needed.''

The British and Australian moves were regarded with concern by officials of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the main sponsor of the United Nations
resolution, as an indication that support for the Khmer Rouge-dominated
coalition was slipping as its troops met with some success on the battlefield.

But in fact, Western and Asian diplomats and intelligence officials say, there
has been very little change on the ground in Cambodia in nearly a month, and
despite claims by all sides, not very much fighting either.

A Stalemate of Sorts

A modest offensive by one non-Communist faction, the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front of Mr. Son Sann, has bogged down outside a small town, Svay
Chek, for nearly three weeks. And the faction's goal of capturing Sisophon, a
city in northwestern Cambodia, now seems remote. But neither has the Cambodian
Government done much to retake the territory lost.

The morale of the Phnom Penh forces is said to be low, and many have fled their
positions or defected. But with the dry season coming in a few weeks, the army
should be able to use its artillery and tanks to some advantage, and thus far,
no significant population center has fallen.

The forces of Prince Sihanouk, whom the United States regards as the key figure
in any comprehensive Cambodian settlement, continue to be reluctant to fight,
diplomats say. They have been organizing the areas orginally captured last month
by Son Sann's faction, moving in administrators.

''It would be helpful if the non-Communists would do some more fighting,'' a
Western diplomat said. ''The problem isn't supplies. In no sense are they really
hurting for aid.''

The Khmer Rouge, however, has been more efficient, taking an important
gem-mining area and district capital, Pailin, while moving to try to surround
and isolate Cambodia's second-largest city, Battambang. Judging Khmer Rouge
strength is difficult, the diplomats say, in part because the guerrillas are not
likely to try to obtain any major victories before the United Nations vote.

Worried about the effect of any such victories on world opinion, Thai and
Western officials have urged the non-Communists to start fighting again -if only
to insure that if Sisophon or Battambang falls, the Khmer Rouge are not seen as
taking them alone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Svay Chek, Cambodia

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Salvador Army Is Said to Seize Rebel Positions

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Nov. 15


Heavy Salvadoran Army counterattacks today and Tuesday night appear to have
routed leftist guerrillas from several strongholds on the outskirts of this
city.

For the first time since Saturday, when rebels launched their countrywide
offensive, gunfire did not reverberate continuously through the capital.

The insurgents, whose tenacity has stretched the American-trained army, remained
entrenched in a few pockets. But diplomats and reporters who have visited the
areas, as well as Government officials and army commanders, said it appeared
they were weakening and might be squeezed out soon.

Rebels Near Defeat, Envoy Says

The United States Ambassador, William J. Walker, today showed a map indicating
that the guerrillas, who once held nearly a third of the city, now controlled
only isolated positions along the north, northeast, south and southeast
periphery of the city.

''I think they are on the brink of both a military and a political defeat,'' the
Ambassador said in an afternoon briefing.

Still, even the strongest army supporters acknowledged that it would take time
to recapture all the rebel-held positions.

Hundreds Reported Dead

The fact that the United States Embassy has been giving briefings to reporters
for the last two days underscores Washington's heavy involvement in Salvadoran
affairs. For some veteran reporters it was reminiscent of the days in Saigon
when the United States briefed reporters every afternoon. But unlike Vietnam,
American forces are not supposed to be engaged in offensive combat here.
Officials asserted today that no Americans have been involved in the fighting.

Accurate casualty figures are difficult to obtain. Hospitals around the city
reported 394 dead and 888 wounded.

The armed forces put the civilian toll at 33 dead and 144 wounded. United States
officials said the army had told them that by 5 o'clock this morning 434
guerrillas had been killed, 457 wounded and 44 captured. The rebels had killed
146 soldiers and wounded 362, the army said.

The army, like the rebels, is accused by critics of inflating the casualties of
the opposing side and under-reporting its own. Relief groups estimate that the
civilian casualty figure may be 10 times higher than the army reports.

Although little news has reached the capital from outlying cities, it appeared
that heavy fighting continued in San Miguel, the marketing and industrial center
for the eastern half of this Massachussetts-sized country; in Santa Ana in the
we; ; in Zacececoluca in the central province of La Paz, and in the provinces of
Chalatenango and Usulutan.

Heavy Bombing Reported

A Salvadoran returning from a short visit to San Miguel said that there had been
hundreds of casualties there and that the air force had bombed residential areas
for hours. He said relief organizations had been unable to get into the outlying
areas to help the wounded.

''It's the worst thing I've ever seen,'' said the visitor, who helped transport
a young boy whose right leg had been blown off to a hospital in San Salvador.

The rebels began their offensive in the capital with an estimated 1,500 troops
and appear to have suffered heavy casualties in the campaign, which set off the
fiercest urban combat of the decade-old civil war. The effect of these
casualties on the rebels is hard to assess, but it may take them time to rebuild
their forces and their arsenals..

Their offensive has shown they have support among the poor and in working-class
communities, where the standard of living has dropped by more than 20 percent
since the outbreak of the war.

Many Salvadoran civilians willingly risked their lives for the insurgents, but
the campaign has given support to the Government's claim that rebel supporters
are in the minority.

Residents Told to Flee

Many of the rebels appear to have pulled back into the pockets they still
control. Others appear to have laid down their guns and, under the cover of
darkness, slipped behind army lines.

The army has been telling residents living in and near rebel-controlled zones to
flee. But many have decided to stay.

''My wife is here,'' said a young man as he walked in Mejicanos, a working-class
community just north of the capital. ''This is my home.''

He had to weave around cars sitting on steel rims and with every piece of glass
shattered by the crossfire, which continued. A dead dog lay nearby.

In other communities, exhausted soldiers today began combing neighborhoods from
which the rebels retreated overnight. When the army finally retook the
Metropolitan Technical Institute in the suburb of Zacamil, the whitewashed
building was little more than a scarred shell.

Soldiers in the area said they had found two booby-trapped houses and had
stacked captured supplies behind a cobblestone barricade built Saturday night by
the insurgents outside their former command post.

Civilians Burn Body

A brown wig lay next to an assortment of European and American guns. Gaily
colored bags filled with ammunition had been dumped next to stacks of surgical
gloves and guitar strings, which the rebels use for sutures. The body of a
guerrilla, covered with a towel, lay a few yards up the torn-up street. Down the
block civilians were burning a body that had rotted in the gutter since the
first moments of the guerrilla offensive.

''We have wounded a lot of the terrorists and that gives us a little glory,''
said a soldier as he wearily prepared for the next counterattack. He said he had
not slept since Friday but had been ordered to help in an assault on an
estimated 100 rebels in the neighboring community of Santa Marta.

The insurgents' urban offensive capped weeks of growing violence in the civil
war, which has displaced one in 10 citizens and claimed the lives of 70,000
people, most of them killed by rightist death squads linked to the army and the
governing party.

The campaign failed in its effort to topple the administration of President
Alfredo Cristiani. But the rebels are given credit by impartial diplomats here
for impressive planning and motivation.

The army also proved itself, showing that despite remaining problems in the
morale and training of some troops it can match the rebels even when limiting
the use of its superior firepower in an effort to prevent the slaughter of
civilians, which would have provoked a dangerous political backlash.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of El Salvador showing location of San Salvador (NYT) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Honor, Bullying and Conformity In the Trial in 'A Few Good Men'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words


Even if the stage were not a battleground of tables and chairs in gun-metal
gray, it wouldn't take long to recognize the terrain in ''A Few Good Men,''
Broadway's new play about a court-martial. ''It's an open-and-shut case,'' goes
an early line. ''I suspect there's more to this case than what's reported in the
division report,'' goes another. The cast of antagonists includes a sarcastic
Navy defense attorney who doesn't want to be a hero (Tom Hulce), a tightly wound
commanding officer who insists on being one (Stephen Lang) and some cowed
enlisted men caught in the crossfire. Let the scene change, and more than a few
good marching men in crew cuts and khaki will sound off, ''One, two,
three-four!''

So pronounced is the deja vu at the Music Box that one can only assume that the
author, Aaron Sorkin, is invoking ''The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial'' and its
brethren intentionally. And why not? It's reassuring to watch familiar
conventions being given a new workout. The Music Box Theater, after all, is
where an even older genre of boulevard drama was made fun again in ''Sleuth''
and ''Deathtrap.'' When the evidence of a ''conspiracy to commit murder'' piles
up in the opening hour of ''A Few Good Men'' - and when that evidence is
buttressed by some very good acting under the direction of Don Scardino - one
sits back in confidence that Mr. Sorkin is laying land mines for 10 o'clock
explosions.

But it's nearly 11 when the play ends, and Mr. Sorkin never does reward one's
expectations. ''A Few Good Men'' is too predictable to satisfy as courtroom
entertainment, and its attempts to tie its plot to some larger moral issues, in
the manner of Charles Fuller's ''Soldier's Play,'' are lightweight. The
evening's message is: ''You don't need to wear a patch on your arm to have
honor.'' There is a higher code than the Marine code, and there are times when
good soldiers must disobey orders. If that lesson isn't news, at least it might
have been made compelling. But despite passing allusions to Nuremberg and My
Lai, ''A Few Good Men'' doesn't argue its unarguable point in the gripping
context of history.

Mr. Sorkin's talky case is instead merely a generic one about bullying and
conformity in the barracks of the peacetime Marines. Though the play's fictional
crime was committed in 1986 at the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
the time and place seem irrelevant. The co-defendants are accused of overdoing
the unofficial punishment of an unpopular private. The most pressing question
raised by their trial is whether they might be covering up for higher-ups.

While it is announced that the Marine Corps itself is on trial, the story turns
on much narrower grounds. The why-and-whodunit solutions prove unsurprising, and
to reach them the author force-feeds laborious clues into the action, some
errant luggage tags among them. For a subplot, Mr. Sorkin charts the slowly
blossoming alliance of three ill-matched defense lawyers, each of whom comes
with a single psychological characteristic whose cause (a domineering father,
for instance) may also be affixed like a luggage tag.

Since one of the trio is a woman, a crusading special investigator played by
Megan Gallagher, there might have been a love triangle within the defense team.
But that possibility for drama is foreclosed early, when one of her male
colleagues (Mark Nelson) is revealed to be a devoted new dad. This leaves any
possible romantic activity to Mr. Hulce, who is schematically presented as Ms.
Gallagher's contentious opposite: as he is afraid to fight a serious case, so
she loves to fight yet doesn't know how to win. They're made for each other, of
course, but they are the last people in the theater to figure that out.

Despite the handicap of a Hollywood coiffure, Mr. Hulce draws on his
considerable stores of humor and sensitivity to portray his character's fast
conversion from arrogant goof-off to daredevil legal-eagle. Ms. Gallagher
forcefully sounds her one note of two-fistedness, and the impassioned Mr. Nelson
professionally snaps Mr. Sorkin's one-liners, some of which are so redolent of
show business they seem to have wandered in from a Johnny Carson monologue
instead of ''Mister Roberts.''

No less fine are such supporting players as Victor Love and Michael Dolan as the
stoical defendants, Clark Gregg as a legal defender of the military faith, Paul
Butler as a no-nonsense judge and Geoffrey Nauffts as the witness inevitably
called upon to provide comic relief in Act II. In a class by himself is Mr.
Lang, the base commander, whose spectacular performance as a feral Vietnam
veteran in Steve Tesich's ''Speed of Darkness'' in Chicago this year is matched
here by his mesmerizing turn as a post-Vietnam military strongman with a smile
and tongue as fierce as his muscles.

For all Mr. Scardino's accomplished direction of actors, his staging makes hokey
use of tacky lightning-and-thunder effects to try to simulate the riveting
suspense missing in the plot. One result is to make ''A Few Good Men'' look
dated, and that impression is compounded by a script that has been unluckily
ambushed by current events. ''We live in a world that has walls, and those walls
have to be guarded by men with guns,'' says Mr. Lang at one point - a perfectly
plausible statement for his character to make in 1986. But to an audience in
November 1989, the historical imperatives underlying ''A Few Good Men'' may seem
almost as ancient as its courtroom theatrics.

Familiar Conventions In New Workout

A FEW GOOD MEN, by Aaron Sorkin; directed by Don Scardino; set design by Ben
Edwards; costume design by David C. Woolard; lighting design by Thomas R.
Skelton; sound score and design by John Gromada; production stage manager,
Dianne Trulock. Presented by David Brown, Lewis Allen, Robert Whitehead, Roger
L. Stevens, Kathy Levin, the Suntory International Corporation and the Shubert
Organization. At the Music Box, 239 West 45th Street.

Sentry ... Ron Ostrow
Lance Cpl. Harold W. Dawon ... Victor Love
Pfc. Louden Downey ... Michael Dolan
Lieut. (j.g.) Sam Weinberg ... Mark Nelson
Lieut. (j.g.) Daniel A. Kaffee ... Tom Hulce
Lieut. Comdr. Joanne Galloway ... Megan Gallagher
Capt. Isaac Whitaker ... Edmond Genest
Capt. Matthew A. Markinson ... Robert Hogan
Pfc. William T. Santiago ... Arnold Molina
Lieut. Col. Nathan Jessep ... Stephen Lang
Lieut. Jonathan James Kendrick ... Ted Marcoux
Lieut. Jack Ross ... Clark Gregg
Cpl. Jeffrey Owen Howard ... Geoffrey Nauffts
Capt. Julius Alexander Randolph ... Paul Butler
Comdr. Walter Stone ... Fritz Sperberg
Marines, sailors, M.P.'s, lawyers, et al. ... Stephen Bradbury, Jeffrey
Dreisbach, Michael Genet, George Gerdes and Joshua Malina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mark Nelson and Tom Hulce in ''A Few Good Men.'' (Joan Marcus)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Backs Measure on Cambodia That Allows Khmer Rouge a Role

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 474 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 16


The United Nations General Assembly overwhelmingly approved a resolution today
calling for a comprehensive political settlement in Cambodia. The settlement
would give the Khmer Rouge a role in an interim government led by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk while internationally supervised elections are prepared.

But for the second year running, the resolution also warns against a return to
the ''universally condemned policies and practices of the recent past.'' That is
an allusion to the brutal four-year rule of Cambodia by the Khmer Rouge, during
which at least one million people died in politicial purges, famines and
epidemics as the Khmer Rouge attempted to impose agrarian communism on the
largely urban population.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia and drove the Khmer Rouge Government, led by Pol Pot,
from power in 1978. The Khmer Rouge then formed a loose alliance with two
weaker, non-Communist opposition groups led by Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann.
Those groups are all now fighting the Vietnamese-installed Government of Hun
Sen.

China's Position

Although the resolution is phrased vaguely and does not mention the Khmer Rouge
by name, it enabled China, the group's principal backer, to vote in favor, thus
publicly committing itself to a democratic solution to Cambodia's internal
differences.

The resolution was carried by the widest margin since the Cambodia issue first
came before the Assembly in 1978, with 124 countries voting in favor, 17 opposed
and 12 abstaining. Last year a similar resolution won 122 votes, with 19 against
and 13 abstentions.

The reference to the ''universally condemned policies and practices of the
recent past'' was placed in last year's resolution in response to widespread
fears that the Khmer Rouge might seize power this fall if Vietnam fulfilled its
pledge to withdraw its forces from Cambodia.

With Vietnam claiming all its forces have gone and with fighting increasing in
Cambodia, there is growing unease about the Khmer Rouge's intentions.

Southeast Asian Nations' Stand

The six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Singapore,
Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand - continue to contend
that the Khmer Rouge must be brought into any comprehensive political
settlement.

But Sweden and Finland, which voted for the resolution last year, abstained
today to protest the possibility of the Khmer Rouge's returning to even partial
power.

Officially, the Khmer Rouge says that Pol Pot and the other leaders responsible
for its genocidal policies in Cambodia have retired from political life, and
there are persistent reports that Pol Pot is seriously ill.

Asian diplomats say Son Sann, who is prime minister in the opposition alliance,
suggested to the Khmer Rouge that it send its most notorious leaders into exile.
But the Khmer Rouge refused.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

MILITARY TO DRAFT PLAN FOR A 6% CUT IN 1992-94 SPENDING

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON with STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to The New York
Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1337 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has ordered the nation's armed services to draw up
plans for cutting $180 billion in projected spending, reflecting the Bush
Administration's judgment that Federal deficits and political changes in Europe
are leading toward a smaller Pentagon budget.

In addition, Mr. Cheney appears prepared to accept a decline in military
spending in the fiscal year 1991 after inflation is taken into account, a senior
Administration official said. The Administration will present its 1991 spending
plan to Congress in January.

The $180 billion in cuts by the services would cover Pentagon spending from the
fiscal years 1992 through 1994. It would represent an average annual drop of
about 5 percent in spending after inflation over the three-year period,
Administration officials said. President Bush had previously proposed increases
of 1 or 2 percent in each of these years.

No Decision at Hand

A senior Pentagon official said Mr. Cheney has made no decision on whether to go
forward with all the $180 billion in reductions and added that the exercise is
intended to force the services to identify their priorities and to set an outer
limit for negotiating somewhat less extensive trims.

Administration officials said a $180 billion reduction could mean extensive base
closings, deactivation of several Army divisions and the retirement of two or
three aircraft carriers. That would mark a retrenchment equivalent to the
decline that followed the Vietnam War. A Pentagon official said, however, that
if the cuts were enacted, the Defense Department would do everything it could to
avoid reductions in forces by paring spending on maintenance and on
installations.

One of Potential Sources of Cuts

But this official and other Administration specialists said the orders were
significant because they represent a recognition that the twin pressures of
budget deficits and political changes in Europe have eroded Mr. Bush's earlier
plans for slow, steady growth in the Pentagon budget.

With the White House committed not to increase taxes, cuts in military spending
represent one of the few potential sources of money to pay for Administration
programs that Mr. Bush has begun with great fanfare but limited financing,
including his effort to combat drug abuse. The military budget represents about
a quarter of total Federal spending but has well over half the money available
for reductions because programs like Medicare and Social Social Security have
been relatively politically difficult to cut.

''We have got to be prepared for the inevitable, instead of waiting for it to
happen and doing the cuts in haste,'' a senior Pentagon official said.

''This is quite serious,'' another official said. ''It is not a game.''

'Worst-Case Scenario'

Another senior official in a military service termed the proposed $180 billion
cuts a ''worst-case scenario'' intended to produce options for Mr. Cheney, but
added: ''This is not a bookkeeping exercise. My sense is that if we do not take
the bull by the horns we will be gored by it.''

Sean O'Keefe, the Pentagon's comptroller, sent a directive to the services
Monday night ordering them to devise plans for cuts by today because the recent
changes in Eastern Europe added new momentum to the growing movement on Capitol
Hill for significant reductions in the military budget.

The Pentagon comptroller's directive was intended in part to change the Pentagon
''culture'' in which the military based plans on the assumption that military
spending would steadily increase in the future, officials said.

'Not All Asleep at the Switch'

''What this indicates is that we are not all asleep at the switch,'' an official
said. ''This building is going through culture shock. The services have always
assumed you have got to produce some kind of growth out there.''

Members of Congress have warned in recent days that East Germany's decision to
open its border to the West will lead to a further erosion of public support for
military spending. By some estimates, about 60 percent of military spending is
devoted to the defense of Western Europe.

Cuts in American military spending will come at a time when the Soviet Union is
beginning to make its own cuts in military spending, apparently fulfilling the
promises made by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader. Mr. Gorbachev has said
the Soviet Union will cut its military spending by 14.2 percent. Soviet
officials said the cuts will occur over three years, beginning with a 1.5
percent cut in 1989, 7 percent in 1990 and 5.7 in 1991.

Conservative members of Congress, like Senator Jim Exon, a Nebraska Democrat on
the Armed Services Committee, said the Pentagon must now be prepared to accept
cuts after inflation of up to 5 percent over the next several years.

''I would say that if the Defense Department suffered only a 2 percent per year
annual cut over the next five years, it would be a miracle,'' said Senator Exon,
who heads the Armed Services' Subcommittee on Strategic Forces and Nuclear
Deterrence. ''There is a general perception in the land that peace has broken
out all over. The public will demand, and the Congress will respond in some
fashion.''

Mr. Bush pledged strong support for military spending in last year's
Presidential election campaign, portraying Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of
Massachusetts as soft on the military.

Temper Spending Plans

But the growing Federal deficit is forcing the Bush Administration to temper its
plans, Administration officials said.

Mr. Bush has proposed spending about $295 billion on the military in fiscal
1990, which keeps pace with inflation. Congress is the process of approving the
fiscal 1990 spending plan.

The Administration is now preparing its military spending request for fiscal
1991, which will be reviewed by the Cabinet in early December and sent to
Congress in January.

Mr. Bush had projected a $311 billion Pentagon budget for fiscal 1991, a 1
percent increase on top of inflation.

One Pentagon official said, however, that preliminary cuts of $13 billion to $14
billion have been identified in the projected spending for fiscal 1991, although
the military services are expected to appeal some of the cuts.

Pentagon officials are considering a range of options, including a cut of 3 to 4
percent in the fiscal 1991 budget after the effects of inflation are taken into
account. Already, the fiscal 1990 budget now before Congress marks the fifth
consecutive year that military spending has decreased after the effects of
inflation are discounted.

Cuts of the magnitude under discussion are likely to force members of Congress
to make an unpleasant choice between closing bases and canceling weapons that
provide work for large numbers of constituents.

''Cheney is right,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who
serves on the Appropriations Committee's Subcommittee on Defense. ''There are
bases that will have to be closed, and we're going to have to accept that. We're
not going to be able to just stretch out procurement costs to save money.

'Some Serious Choices'

''There will be some serious choices about cutting whole systems,'' Mr. Leahy
continued, ''and that's going to hurt some companies that are major employers in
member's districts.''

''We can't do this by nickel and diming,'' Senator Leahy said.

Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, has said that next year's
spending plan will be the first ''Gorbachev-driven budget,'' an allusion to the
political changes encouraged in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe by Mr.
Gorbachev. Other lawmakers agreed, but said that the deficit remains a
significant factor pushing military spending downward.

Senator Malcolm Wallop, Republican of Wyoming, said the tide had shifted in
Congress for lower spending. He expressed concern that Congress was being
overwhelmed by a ''1935-style isolationism'' but said Pentagon budgets of zero
real growth could be preserved if Mr. Bush exerts vigorous leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 20, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A headline in some editions on Saturday, with an article about the reduction in
spending that Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has ordered the armed services to
plan for, misstated the percentage of the reduction. With inflation taken into
account, it would average about 5 percent annually for the fiscal years 1992
through 1994.

GRAPHIC: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has ordered plans drawn up to cut $180
billion in military spending (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
Pitiful, Helpless Giants All

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


Suddenly the world seems littered with pitiful, helpless giants. There was Lech
Walesa in Washington knocking on the castle door, talking of another Marshall
Plan to help make freedom ring in Poland.

President Bush gave him a medal and sent him up to Capitol Hill for a round of
applause. That's nice, like getting a big locomotive and a chorus of ''Boola
Boola,'' but Marshall Plan it ain't.

What ''Marshall Plan'' means is not just ''big, big money,'' but also a heavy
commitment of American political vigor and brain power. It means dollars by the
billion and determination to make the investment pay off, as it paid off in
turning 1945's ruined Western Europe into today's economic powerhouse.

The American giant that did all that has not grown old and feeble so much as
muscle-bound to the point of helplessness. Congress will provide some money for
Poland and Hungary, but it will be a lot less than $1 billion for the two, and
ever since Washington discovered the trillion you're not even talking money down
there if you're talking less than $1 billion.

The old muscle-bound giant has billions galore. He measures his bills by
trillions nowadays, but his money is all tied up in enterprises he can't seem to
get out of even when they don't pay off.

There's $70 billion committed for the Stealth bomber. Its usefulness was always
debatable, but since the cold war started to vanish, it now seems a grotesque
boondoggle. For obvious political reasons, though, the giant finds it nearly
impossible to switch any of those Stealth billions to something as useful as a
''Marshall Plan'' for Poland: the cold war has built us an economy that lives by
Stealth bomber construction.

Switch a few billion from Stealth to Poland and California screams, just as Long
Island screams whenever somebody suggests switching Grumman's share of the
cold-war budget to something sensible.

With American politics tied inescapably to cold-war spending, it's hard to come
up with money for anything new, no matter how necessary - short of raising
taxes, of course.

And what are the chances people will sit still for new taxes so long as the
daily news is all about gigantic swindles conducted at taxpayers' expense?

President Bush is criticized for not showing zealous enthusiasm about
Communism's collapse in Europe, yet one can see why it is a blessing he might
have preferred not to happen on his watch. The cold war was a familiar way of
life, the American economy was based on assumptions of its permanence, and
American mentality was conditioned to preserve and promote it.

An end to the cold war meant rethinking absolutely everything. This would have
been an extraordinary challenge for the most inventive and imaginative minds,
and invention and imagination are not the strengths of Mr. Bush and the men
around him, nor for that matter of any group anywhere on the American political
horizon at present.

So we have the old muscle-bound giant hunkered down in the castle at Washington,
dazzled by the excitements going on around him, but probably wishing, if the
truth be known, that people didn't expect him to get up and participate in the
havoc.

It was President Nixon who coined the phrase ''pitiful, helpless giant'' in a
different context. The United States, he warned during the Vietnam War, would
become ''a pitiful, helpless giant'' unless Americans showed the resolution
needed to claim some kind of victory there.

He was alarmed partly by the popular movement against the war which had divided
the country and made it difficult for him to apply American power casually in
Asia.

Now we see popular movements everywhere turning governments into pitiful,
helpless giants. Gorbachev, by responding to popular hunger for release from a
moldering past, reveals that the Soviet Union may be the most pitiful, most
helpless giant of all.

The discovery that Stalin really is dead, and Lenin had it all wrong, and the
castle at Moscow is all cobwebs and decrepitude, quickly exposed the pitiful
helplessness of eastern Europe's antique tyrants. While they had been strutting
like giants, history had left them as pitiful, though not alas as comical, as
the Wizard of Oz.

Armies of course can always give half-pints the illusion they are giants (see
China), but the air just now is filled with a sense that the age of the giants
is ending. In Washington nobody seems to have any idea what to do about it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AIR FORCE OFFERS TO CLOSE 15 BASES AND SCRAP MISSILES

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


Responding to the Administration's call for major cuts in military spending, the
Air Force has proposed closing 15 bases, stretching out purchase of the Stealth
bomber and eliminating five fighter wings, Administration officials said today.

The Air Force plan also proposes cuts in purchases of the F-16 fighter, retiring
some B-52 bombers that carry conventional weapons and retiring Minuteman II
nuclear missiles. The proposal came in response to an order from Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney for the services to offer reductions totaling $180 billion
from projected spending levels in the three years that begin with the 1992
budget year.

The officials said the Air Force cuts equal about $34 billion, about $10 billion
short of the amount the service was asked to find for the three years. #2
Factors Propel Policy It could not be learned today what the other services had
suggested to meet the goals set by Sean O'Keefe, the Pentagon's comptroller.
Some Pentagon officials have said cuts of two to three Navy carriers and several
Army divisions would be necessary to meet the targets.

Mr. Cheney's request for the $180 billion in cuts from projected spending from
1992 through 1994, disclosed this week, has been driven by the need to reduce
the Federal deficit and respond to reforms in Eastern Europe, Pentagon officials
said.

The decision to consider cuts of this magnitude is one of the major policy
developments in the first year of President Bush's Administration.

The proposed Air Force reductions reflect the difficulties the Bush
Administration faces in trying to rein in Pentagon spending without becoming
caught up in the whirlpools of self-interest in military services and on Capitol
Hill.

The Air Force plan proposes reducing the number of American bases worldwide to
125 from 140, 10 more than it had been previously expected to do. Officials did
not say which bases would be cut. Proposals for base closings have historically
touched off fevered protests from the House members and senators whose
constituents are effected.

Counter to Cheney's Wishes

And the preference for stretching out procurement, as opposed to killing weapon
systems outright, runs counter to Mr. Cheney's stated preference for making hard
choices.

In general, Pentagon officials oppose delaying procurement because it forces
inefficiencies in production, thus raising the cost per weapon.

The Air Force proposal does call for canceling some small programs for bombs or
missiles, but prefers to extend procurement when it comes to the Amraam missile
to shoot down fighter planes, one of the service's more favored new programs.

The plan calls for cutting the number of fighter wings to 31, from 36.

Military officials said the Air Force intends to submit further reductions in
the coming days. Administration officials defended the Air Force recommendation
against eliminating major weapons programs, citing the importance of maintaining
weapons that are the subject of ongoing arms control talks.

Mr. O'Keefe asked the services to come up with cuts totaling $43 billion in
fiscal 1992, $59 billion in fiscal 1993 and $78 billion in fiscal 1994,
representing a reduction of approximately 5 percent annually after recent
assumptions about the rate of inflation are incorporated, Administration
officials said.

The Pentagon is looking to the long-term reductions even as it prepares a budget
for the fiscal year 1991 that will cut military spending after inflation. An
option under consideration includes cuts of about 3 percent.

Administration officials and lawmakers say Mr. Cheney stands at the center of
maelstrom as the Administration tries to work out what may become the sharpest
cuts in military spending since the end of the Vietnam War.

In an interview with The Washington Post today, Mr. Cheney said he was carrying
out President Bush's instructions in ordering Pentagon budget analysts to find
ways to cut spending. In assigning the task to Mr. Cheney, the President has
underscored a striking feature of the political alignments in his Cabinet. Mr.
Cheney, whether by accident or design, has positioned himself as one of the
Administration's foremost skeptics about change in the Soviet Union and has thus
armed himself with the hard-line credentials needed to roll Pentagon spending
back from the high levels reached in the years of President Ronald Reagan's
military buildup.

The American military cuts are coming at a time when the Soviet Union is
beginning to make its own. Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet President, has said
the Soviet Union will cut its military spending by 14.2 percent beginning in
1989.

In an interview today on the CNN program ''Evans & Novak,'' Mr. Cheney confirmed
that the Soviet Union has cut military spending this year.

The outlines of the Pentagon spending problem have been clear from the moment
Mr. Bush anchored his Presidential campaign on a pledge of no new taxes. But
they have come into sharper relief in recent weeks, as the fast-moving events in
Eastern Europe have increased the pressure for a dramatic change in the military
budget.

Money for Other Purposes

Mr. Bush's political advisers believe that to hold his support among younger
voters, he must make some dramatic proposal on issues of concern to them, which
polls show are drugs, the environment and education. One of the largest amounts
of money available to deal with these problems is the Pentagon budget.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has confided to
associates that he fears that the combined impact of the deficit and the
euphoria over changes in Eastern Europe could stampede the Administration into
cuts of as much as 25 percent in the military's forces over the next five years.

Administration officials say they are determined to learn the lessons of the
1970's, when the Pentagon achieved the post-Vietnam reductions by cutting across
the board. Instead of eliminating whole divisions, for example, the Army shaved
money for men and supplies from each outfit. The effect of this, Administration
officials said, was to create a ''hollow Army'' that looked good on paper but
was ill-prepared for combat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Civil War's Fields Are Intelligence Classrooms

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 37, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


Can intelligence officers learn anything from battles fought 125 years ago? Yes,
says Walter P. Lang of the Defense Intelligence Agency.

Since September he has been escorting groups of intelligence agency analysts to
Civil War battlefields to learn about aspects of warfare they will not find with
satellite photographs or electronic intercepts.

Most civilian intelligence officers lack first-hand knowledge of war, and this
shows in their analyses, said Mr. Lang, a retired Army colonel who heads the
Middle East directorate of the Defense Intelligence Agency.

''They have no feel for the effects on a battle of such things as terrain,
weather, fatigue and the personality of the commanders,'' he said. ''Neither do
they grasp the inherent confusion of battle.''

Discussions on the March

Understanding those elements, he said, is important in analyzing third-world
battles for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. To give the analysts a sense of battle,
Mr. Lang and a fellow Civil War buff, Jeffery White, decided on Civil War
battles to illustrate complexities of combat, because many Civil War
battlefields are fairly close to Washington and are preserved.

The two arranged with the National Park Service for tours of places like
Antietam, Bull Run and Gettysburg.

As a group trudges over the old battleground, Park Service historians recount
events of the battle and Mr. Lang and Mr. White lead discussions on lesser-known
factors that were critical to the outcome.

''What looks neat and clear on a battle map was at the time confused and
chaotic,'' Mr. White said. ''It is no different today despite the advances in
military technology.'' The idea for the tours arose during the fierce battles of
the Iran-Iraq war. Mr. Lang, a combat veteran of the Vietnam War, said the
Defense Intelligence Agency analysts reported what was happening, ''but they had
trouble understanding that sometimes the outcome of a battle depends upon
intangibles like morale more than it does upon weapons and firepower.''

Inspiration for the Blitzkrieg

''This may be a new practice within the intelligence community,'' said Mr.
White, ''but military officers from many nations have for years come to Civil
War battlefields to gain insight into the nature of war.''

Between the world wars, officers of the German general staff retraced Jackson's
classic maneuvers in the Shenandoah Valley. Later, some of the Confederate's
tactics showed up in the Blitzkrieg of 1940. Now American officers visit
battlefields around Washington regularly, says a Park Service historian, A.
Wilson Greene.

On the most recent tour, 16 intelligence analysts trod the battlefield at
Spotsylvania, Va., 45 miles south of Washington. Most of them were uncertain of
the value of the visit; they seemed most interested in spending a beautiful
autumn day away from the Pentagon. But they were soon debating decisions made by
Union and Confederate commanders.

At Bloody Angle, where remnants of the original Southern defensive trenchline
can still be seen, the analysts got an example of the humanity and irrationality
of battle.

On a cold, rainy day in May 1864, one of the Civil War's goriest and most
violent dramas was fought there. In an area no larger than a football field,
thousands of Northern and Confederate soldiers clashed and clubbed, shot and
bayoneted one another for 20 hours.

Neither side gave ground or stopped attacking, even when it was clear that it
was a stalemate. The struggle at Bloody Angle took on a life of its own without
regard to other events; it ended only when rage had burned itself out and the
focus of the fighting shifted elsewhere.

The carnage accomplished nothing, but the stubbornness of both sides at
Spotsylvania would have told a modern intelligence analyst that even though the
Civil War was then in its fourth year, it was far from over.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: Oklahoma;
War Is Theme For Annual Party And Donations

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 5; Style Desk

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: NORMAN, Okla.


Members of a University of Oklahoma fraternity, long censured by Vietnam
veterans, whom they claim to be honoring with an annual party, met less
hostility this year than in the past after taking what one veteran called
''concrete steps'' to prove their sincerity.

Delta Tau Delta, home of the Mekong Delta Party held each November since 1974,
has defended itself against charges of displaying ignorance and insensitivity
toward Vietnam veterans by insisting that the party's purpose is to commemorate
events in Southeast Asia and to honor those who fought there.

For this year's event, which ran Friday and yesterday and was restricted to
members and their friends dressed in fatigues, the fraternity assembled before
starting the two-week decoration process to discuss the war's significance. One
pledge, who did not want to be identified, said, ''We talked about it beforehand
to remind one another how serious it all was and to remember those who died
there and those who are still living with it.''

Guests at this year's party arrived to find the parking lot in front of the
franternity house turned into the Mekong River, surrounded with sandbags and
with a bridge of logs and sandbags across it leading to the front door.

Machine Gun and Stretcher

On either side of the bridge were guard towers made of heavy logs lashed
together with rope. The entry foyer was draped with camouflage netting hanging
from the ceiling. A large sign of camouflage colors and white lettering said:
''Mekong! Dedicated to the men who fought in Vietnam.''

A local Army surplus store donated some props, including an unloaded machine
gun, set up inside a sandbag bunker. A military-issue stretcher leaned against a
wall, while netting decorated several downstairs rooms.

Wilbur Scott, associate professor of sociology and a Vietnam veteran, said he
does not feel honored by the event. But he acknowledged that changes instituted
last year ''show that they have some consciousness of what happened in the
war.''

Three years ago, he telephoned the fraternity, saying the party was a sensitive
issue to Vietnam veterans. The fraternity invited him to share his thoughts with
members.

Help for Scholarship Fund

Mr. Scott told them, ''The average age of the soldiers fighting in Vietnam was
exactly the same as the average age of the guys in the fraternity.'' What
irritated him, he said, was that those in the fraternity who seemed to be making
light of the war were the ones who would have been least likely to serve in it.
He told them the two groups overrepresented in Vietnam were blacks and rural
whites.

Last year, Mr. Scott addressed the group again. He had decided not to ask them
to stop the party, he said, ''on the issue of freedom of speech.''

Instead, he told the fraternity members if they wanted to do something concrete,
the Vietnam Memorial Scholarship Fund, of which he is director, would be an
appropriate charity for them to adopt. Since then, Delta Tau Delta has become
the fund's largest contributor. Mr. Scott has been able to award the fund's
first two scholarships to the university. Eligible recipients are Vietnam
veterans, their descendants and Vietnamese-Americans.

Mr. Scott, who earlier this year presented the fraternity with a plaque thanking
it for its participation in the scholarship program, declined an invitation to
attend this weekend's party.

''I'm not a defender of the party,'' he said, ''but I am a defender of freedom
of speech.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Despite criticism about their insensitivity toward Vietnam veterans,
members of the Delta Tau Delta fraternity at the University of Oklahoma have
held a Mekong Delta Party every year since 1974 to commemorate events in
Southeast Asia. Brady Cantrell, a fraternity member, helps to prepare the site
for the party. (The New York Times/Lisa Rudy)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE WORLD;
Once Again, Vietnamese Are Turned Out to Sea

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


THE irascible Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohamad, recently caused a
stir when he used the word ''scum'' to describe Vietnamese boat people who
remain here after Western resettlement countries select those among them who
qualify as refugees. ''Why should we be responsible?'' Mr. Mahathir asked. ''We
did not cause the Vietnam War.''

Mr. Mahathir's remark was consistent with what Western diplomats and relief
workers describe as the real inhumanity: Malaysia's policy, since the end of
May, of refusing first asylum to boat people who land here and sending them,
though with fresh provisions, back out to sea.

According to Eric E. Morris, the representative of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for Malaysia and Brunei, some 2,600 Vietnamese
arriving in at least 48 boats have been sent on from Malaysia since the end of
May.

Mr. Morris's figures represent boat people who have landed elsewhere, most on
the Indonesian island of Salang, south of Singapore. There is no way of knowing
if others did not survive, he said. Mr. Mahathir says that ''all we are doing is
preventing foreign vessels from entering our waters.'' But Mr. Morris says that
virtually all the Vietnamese boats came ashore here before being refurbished or
re-provisioned.

While mistreatment, rape and murder have been an intermittent hazard for the
boat people for 14 years, Malaysia's pushoffs, Mr. Morris said, violated an
agreement reached in June between so-called first-asylum countries like Malaysia
and resettlement nations like the United States, Australia, France and Canada.
Mr. Morris added pointedly that the agreement was reached at a Geneva conference
instigated by Malaysia, and at which Malaysia held the chairmanship.

But Mr. Mahathir's comments and Malaysia's actions also reflect an impatience in
Asia as the numbers of Vietnamese boat people continue to rise in camps
throughout Southeast and East Asia. The old system of dealing with Vietnamese
fleeing their homeland has been discarded; the operation of the new one, which
was adopted in June, has been stymied by a disagreement over the forcible
repatriation of Vietnamese judged not to be true political refugees, but simply
economic migrants.

The dispute has pitted the United States, which insists on no forcible
repatriation of Vietnamese, against most of the rest of the world, including
Britain. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher often points out that Washington sends
back Haitians, Mexicans and others who enter the United States illegally if they
are economic migrants.

A British Lead

Britain, whose temporary colony, Hong Kong, is now coping with some 56,500
Vietnamese, has been most outspoken about wanting to send those who do not
qualify as refugees back to Vietnam involuntarily. The only reason it has not
yet done so, Western diplomats say, is because of strong opposition from
Washington.

Under the old international agreement, all Vietnamese boat people were
considered refugees fleeing political or religious persecution. The old
agreement was reached a decade ago to end an initial period of extreme hardship
for Vietnamese refugees, in which many died at sea. But in 1987, 12 years after
the Vietnam War ended, a new surge of people fleeing one of the poorest of
countries coincided with a drop in Western interest in their resettlement.

With the number of migrants in the camps rising again, Thailand started pushing
the Vietnamese boats back to sea in early 1988, setting a precedent for other
nations. The first-asylum countries, led by Malaysia and Thailand, insisted on a
new agreement. Boat people arriving after March 14, 1989 (and in Hong Kong,
after June 16, 1988), would be screened under United Nations supervision to see
if they were legitimate refugees. Resettlement countries agreed to take everyone
in the camps before the cutoff dates and those arriving afterward who were
judged to be refugees. The first-asylum countries agreed to provide shelter for
everyone arriving in the meantime. But the disagreement over what happens to
those who do not qualify for refugee status has gummed up the process.

Inhospitality

What most exercises Mr. Mahathir is the prospect of being stuck indefinitely
with what he calls the ''residue.'' Some Asians have suggested putting those who
do not qualify in conditions so inhospitable they will agree to go home;
diplomats and relief officials say the British in Hong Kong, though they deny
it, have been trying just that, prompting protests by the High Commissioner and
human-rights groups.

Malaysia, for its part, has been treating the 20,750 people now in its camps
very well, with adequate food, shelter, clothing and health care. But more than
half of them arrived after the cutoff date, and some officials argue that
politically, no Southeast Asian country can afford to be seen lagging too far
behind the British.

The United States finds itself in an awkward position, allied with Vietnam in
opposition to forcible repatriation. But what bothers many other Western
diplomats and relief officials is what they see as a deeper American
inconsistency, rooted in what they regard as Washington's lingering trauma about
Vietnam.

These critics say there is a contradiction between the American desire to
resolve the problem of the boat people, many of whom are still seen as
ideological heroes for fleeing Vietnam, and the way Washington continues to
isolate Hanoi.

The continuing American-led Western embargo on aid, trade and investment in
Vietnam helps keep Vietnam backward and impoverished, they argue. Though some
countries like Australia are slowing cracking the embargo, there is a widespread
feeling among Washington's allies that the United States is punishing Vietnam
and adding new conditions for normal relations.

''Vietnam has to come to peace with itself and the United States is not
helping,'' said an Asian diplomat. ''And one of the prime consequences of that
is the boat people.''

In the meantime, the Vietnamese linger, the boats keep coming, and some continue
to be pushed away, back into the insentient and unforgiving sea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A chart last Sunday about Vietnamese refugees arriving in three Asian countries
was incorrectly labeled. The numbers were in thousands.

GRAPHIC: Vietnamese boat people at a refugee camp in Malaysia (Sygma/Jacques
Pavlovsky); graph of number of Vietnamese refugees arriving in Thailand,
Malaysia and Singapore, 1981-89 (Source: State Department); map of Southeast
Asia showing number of Vietnamese refugees in surrounding countries

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HERS;
A Brothers's Death

BYLINE: BY BARBARA LAZEAR ASCHER; Barbara Lazear Ascher's most recent book is
''The Habit of Loving.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words


IT COULD HAVE BEEN a parade of Civil War soldiers, wounded and near defeat,
marching toward another battle. They stared ahead with eyes from which all joy
had been banished.

They had marched in too many funeral processions, they had watched as disease
dismissed courage and defiantly claimed their friends. This day, three months
ago, they marched in a New Orleans jazz funeral for my brother, Bobby, dead of
AIDS at 31.

I rode with my sister, mother and father, and my brother's companion, George, in
a mule-drawn wagon, ahead of the parade of friends, and behind the musicians,
old black men who knew the route and the music by heart.

The street was closed for the occasion. The citizens were shuttered inside cool
interiors away from the fireball that is New Orleans' August sun. The day was
ours, the streets were ours. The sun beat down on us alone. We, in the cart, sat
as still as stones.

George cradled a carved wooden box that looked like an ornate bird house - the
house of ashes that had been my brother's bones.

Still as stone we rode through the streets of New Orleans as jazz rose up around
us and the old men played ''The Old Rugged Cross'' to lead us to the church. If
we moved, if we cried, we might never stop moving, never stop crying. It was
better to be still.

My brother was a wild thing. The confines of our New England homes could not
contain him. He kept flying into windows. Released, he flew south to warmth, to
a landscape large enough to absorb his exuberance. To sympathetic souls who held
him when exuberance failed.

A friend who volunteers at the Gay Men's Health Crisis tells me, ''You would be
surprised how many families first learn that their son or brother is gay at the
same time they learn he has AIDS. They get a phone call that says, 'I've got two
things to tell you.' '' My family was more fortunate. We knew that my brother
was gay, and his openness had enabled my parents to share the happiness he and
George were finding together, to know and accept that in a careless world, love
is precious whatever the pairing. But there is no accepting that one's child is
doomed.

We are not alone in our anger, grief and disbelief. The horizon is filling up
with parents burying young sons. Fewer and fewer of us are allowed the smug
certainty that AIDS has nothing to do with our lives. Soon, each of us will have
a child, brother, friend, friend of a friend, a distant relative who is doomed.

Until recently, the statistics have insulated many of us. We've read that the
risk group comprises homosexuals, bisexuals and intravenous drug users. If we
didn't fit in the categories, we said, ''Well, I'm safe,'' and turned the page.
To number fatalities is to depersonalize them. The body count in Vietnam. The
deaths from drunk driving. Numbers don't touch our hearts.

My parents, well known in their community, broke through those barriers of
denial by making it clear, in their son's prominent obituary, that the cause of
Bobby's death was AIDS. Not ''pneumonia'' or ''heart attack'' or ''respiratory
failure,'' or other causes of death we now see in obituary columns when we read
about single men dying in their prime.

The letters of sympathy began to come in immediately.

''Thank you for being honest about Bobby's illness. My best friend's son has
AIDS.''

''When my cousin died of AIDS, it was a family secret, and that robbed us of the
opportunity to mourn and be supported in our grief.''

''My best friend in college, captain of the football team, a Rhodes scholar,
just died of AIDS.''

It became clear from the letters that AIDS was coming home. AIDS had come to
Donna Reed America, to Father Knows Best America. AIDS was killing kids who once
wore Mickey Mouse Club caps and wrote mash notes to Annette Funicello.

When we first learned of Bobby's illness it seemed incomprehensible that this
could be happening to our baby brother. My sister and I began a journey into
paralysis. There were days when it seemed we had to concentrate on putting one
foot in front of the other if we were to walk at all. If we traveled more than a
couple of blocks, we were exhausted for the rest of the day.

We were hungry, we weren't hungry. We made chocolate chip cookies and chocolate
brownies and didn't eat them. We opened and closed the refrigerator door,
looking for something that might cushion the pain, fill the chasm that was
opening from within.

Now I realize that this was the beginning of grief which starts in the stomach,
yawning like the gaping mouth in Munch's painting, ''The Scream.'' But what did
we know of grief? We were young, our beloveds had not yet died. I began to
understand that grieving is like walking. The urge is there, but you need a
guiding hand, you need someone to teach you how.

I went to speak with a wise and trusted minister at my church who warned that
there were bad times ahead. The death of a sibling, he said, grievous in itself,
is also a startling reminder of our own mortality. I suppose it's not dissimilar
to the time in youth when we first learned of our origins and began to
understand, if they made me, then they can make another. After that we became
the nervous sentinals of our territory. When a sibling dies, the absolute
certainty of death replaces the cherished illusion that maybe we'll be the
exceptions. When a sibling dies, death tugs at our own shirt tails. There's no
unclasping its persistent grip. ''You too,'' it says. ''Yes, even you.''

When you are new to grief, you learn that there's no second-guessing it. It will
have its way with you. Don't be fooled by the statistics you read: Widows have
one bad year; orphans three. Grief doesn't read schedules.

One morning, three weeks after Bobby died, I arose feeling happy and energetic.
Well, now, I thought, I guess we've taken care of that. Wrong. The next morning
I was awakened by a wail I thought was coming from the storm outside until I
realized it was coming from me.

Grief will fool you with its disguises. Somedays you insist that you're fine,
you're just angry at a friend who said the wrong thing. One day I wept into the
lettuce and peaches at our local market when an acquaintance approached to scold
me for my stand in an old battle. Of course, we both assumed that she was
responsible for my tears.

You learn that you can cry and stop and laugh and even follow a taxi driver's
commands to ''Have a nice day,'' and then cry again. You learn that there is no
such thing as crying forever. Three months ago I was certain that I would never
be happy again. I was wrong.

Grief is like the wind. When it's blowing hard, you adjust your sails and run
before it. If it blows too hard, you stay in the harbor, close the hatches and
don't take calls. When it's gentle, you go sailing, have a picnic, take a swim.

You go wherever it takes you. There are no bulwarks to withstand it. Should you
erect one, it will eventually tire of the game and blow the walls in.

We cannot know another's grief, as deeply personal as love and pain. I cannot
measure my own against the sorrow of my brother's friends who must wonder every
day which among them will be next. Who must have wondered, as they marched
through the streets of New Orleans, which of their families would sit one day in
the mule-drawn cart. I shy away from the magnitude of my brother's own grief
when, upon being diagnosed, he heard the final click of a door as it closed on
possibility.

A friend of mine said of her son when he died at 30, ''He was just beginning to
look out at the world and make maps.'' So was my brother. And then there was no
place to go.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'The Long Gray Line'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1410 words


To the Editor:

This is in response to what was presented in your publication on Oct. 22 as a
review of ''The Long Gray Line,'' Rick Atkinson's nonfiction account of my West
Point class, the class of 1966. I do not write to defend the book or to comment
on a review of it, but to address the venomous attacks that are thinly veiled as
elements of a book review - attacks against the class of 1966, thousands of
other West Point graduates of the Vietnam era, service academies and the Army.

I certainly do not question the right of the reviewer or that of The New York
Times to publish critical views of this or any other book. I do object, however,
to misstatement and distortion of fact, especially when they go well beyond the
bounds of literary criticism to discredit the honor and integrity of thousands
of individuals, all of whom deserve fair treatment and many of whom can no
longer speak for themselves.

The attack opens with the headline on Tom Buckley's piece, ''Anyone for War?,''
introducing his preposterous and malicious theme - that most of the West Point
graduates of the class of 1966 were dishonorable cowards who shirked their duty
to their country and did all they could to avoid serving in Vietnam. Mr. Buckley
first takes the reader to the assembly, late in my final year at the United
States Military Academy, at which we members of the graduating class were asked
to select our first assignments in the Army from among the locations and units
available. He asserts that all at this assembly ''were invited to waive their
choice of a first assignment and volunteer for service in South Vietnam'' but
that ''only 98 cadets answered the call.'' The rest of us, he goes on, ''headed
for graduate school as planned, tried to get orders for someplace quieter or
simply hoped for the best.'' He charges ''a certain impropriety in the Army
ordering tens of thousands of draftees into action while allowing the men who
had been painstakingly trained to lead them to decide the matter for
themselves.'' The reviewer further questions the valor of our class, and other
classes of the Vietnam era, by pointing to the number of our classmates killed
in action in the war (30 members, or more than 5 percent, of the class of 1966)
and saying that he ''had supposed that it was much higher.''

This attack seems to be based largely on the reviewer's misunderstanding and
misinterpretation of some of the key facts in this matter and his ignorance of
other such facts. I trust the following will set the record straight.

The class of 1966 graduated with 579 men. At least 550 of them served in
Vietnam. Thirty were killed in action there, and more than 100 others were
wounded. Of those who did not serve in the war, five were Allied cadets who
could not serve in Vietnam. Ten others died or were disabled before having an
opportunity to serve there. Of those from our class who could have served in
Vietnam, therefore, 98 percent did so.

To lend additional perspective: about nine million Americans served in the
military during the Vietnam era; fewer than three million of them served in the
war zone.

Back to that assembly in the spring of 1966, when we were asked to select the
locations for our first tours in the Army. Yes, 98 members of the class were
accepted that night for initial assignments to Vietnam. That was, in fact, the
maximum number that could be accepted that night. As the Superintendent of the
Academy stated in his annual report covering this period, ''the graduating class
of 579 desired Vietnam duty in such numbers that a limiting quota of 98 had to
be established by the Department of the Army to insure that the class would be
distributed properly throughout the Army.''

Even these particular 98 graduates could not be sent immediately into the war
zone; to do so before they received some additional training and at least some
seasoning in the ''real Army'' would have foolishly escalated the risk to them
and tragically escalated the risk to the men they would be assigned to lead. In
addition, West Point graduates and other regular Army officers were required to
complete ranger training before arrival for duty in Vietnam. Three weeks of
parachute training was also required of those going immediately to airborne
units.

As the review points out, three West Point classes had battle death rates of
more than 10 percent during World War II. In large measure, of course, the
differences between these death rates and those of the Vietnam era reflect the
relative magnitude and nature of the conflicts. In part, too, they resulted from
the relative quality and rapid accessibility of medical attention. The officials
who deliberated on these issues in 1966, some of whom were members of those
World War II classes, were also convinced that graduates would be better
prepared for leadership positions in Vietnam, and less likely to get themselves
and their men killed at such high rates, if they got some pertinent training and
at least a minimum of seasoning before being rushed into battle.

Apparently not aware that these quotas and policies had been established or not
understanding why, Mr. Buckley alleges that we were cowards because we were not
willing to accept the risks involved in ''volunteering'' in larger numbers
immediately, especially when that would have been the ''sound career move''
given what he implies to have been the fleeting nature of the opportunity. He
says that ''although many people had already decided that the Vietnam War was
stupid, immoral or both, few yet thought that it was unwinnable. The prevailing
opinion, in fact, was that once the military buildup had been completed, victory
would come quickly.'' If such an opinion prevailed anywhere, it certainly was
not widely held in our class. The Department of the Army, too, took the longer
and, as it unfortunately turned out for our country, the more accurate view -
the war would not end quickly.

Beyond that initial group of 98, then, the remainder of the class carefully
considered where and with which unit to serve before going to the war in turn.
Some decided to select units they believed might soon be deployed to Vietnam.
Others selected locations, like the border area between North and South Korea,
that seemed to approximate most closely the physical environment and combat
conditions of Vietnam. Still others chose units in Germany as their next
training ground in our chosen profession. Only the top 5 percent of the class in
academic standing was eligible to go directly on to graduate school before
serving in units, but a good number of them chose units instead. In sum, the
discussions in our class at the assembly that night, and during the weeks
leading up to it, were not centered, as the reviewer leads one to believe, on
how best to hide from the war but rather on how best to prepare for the war.

Mr. Buckley also discredits the integrity of cadets, graduates and the academy
by referring to the cheating scandal that occurred there in 1976 and saying that
the scandal ''exposed the cherished cadet honor code as a sham.'' The honor code
is no sham. It is a valuable discipline that has served cadets, graduates and
the nation well, and continues to do so.

Finally, our nation clearly has not yet fully recovered from the Vietnam War.
Deeply held convictions as well as doubts, both of which were felt in our class
as they were throughout our country, cut deep and ugly wounds that are only
thinly covered even now and still bleed. We would all like to see these wounds
healed at last. It is past time, and we have much still to do together.

RON BARTEK
Washington

Tom Buckley replies:

Ron Bartek's quarrel is with the author of ''The Long Gray Line,'' not with me.
The book does not mention the existence of a quota for Vietnam volunteers. I did
not state, and I did not imply, that the West Point class of 1966 was cowardly.
A ''lack of elan,'' the term I used, is quite different and seems to fit the
case. I wrote that the volunteers ''fought bravely,'' and I have no doubt,
although the book provides little information on this count, that, by and large,
those who followed did also. Mr. Bartek asserts that ''at least 550'' members of
the class served in Vietnam. He gives no source for this figure. Whatever the
number, it does not appear in ''The Long Gray Line.'' My comments on the honor
code reflect the book, which cites widespread abuses and subsequent reforms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cadets in formation at West Point. (From ''The Long Gray Line'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'The Long Gray Line'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


To the Editor:

I was extremely disappointed with Tom Buckley's review of ''The Long Gray
Line.'' It was not Mr. Buckley's attitude toward the book that bothered me, but
rather his attitude toward the West Point class of 1966. His review goes beyond
a balanced assessment of the book to an insinuation that this class did not
answer the call of war upon graduation. This charge is levied against a class
that suffered 30 deaths and more than 100 wounded in Vietnam.

Rick Atkinson's book, which Mr. Buckley says lacks a point of view, affected me
deeply. As a member of the West Point class of 1974, I attended my 15th-year
reunion last month. My first action upon my return to West Point was to visit
the cemetery and the graves of the class of 1966. ''The Long Gray Line''
introduced me to these soldiers who paid the ultimate price as well as to other
classmates of theirs who survived. I have the utmost respect for these veterans
who served bravely during one of the most troubled times this country has faced.
I would only hope that, given the call, I would have been as courageous.

PATRICK A. MCBRAYER
Yardley, Pa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cadets in formation at West Point. (From ''The Long Gray Line'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'The Long Gray Line'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 139 words


To the Editor:

I was appalled by Tom Buckley's flippant, smug review of Rick Atkinson's book,
''The Long Gray Line.'' As a woman married to a member of the West Point class
of 1966 for the past 23 years and who dated him through his four years at the
academy, I am compelled to respond.

Our friends and classmates who died in Vietnam were not, as Mr. Buckley so
cruelly states, ''blown away.'' They died, as they lived, as individuals. In
most cases their deaths were horrible, painful ones that happened in a faraway,
grim place. The power of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington is witness
to the fact that 55,000 Americans died in this war and they each died one at a
time, until their sheer numbers broke even the hardest heart.

These men deserve better than what Tom Buckley gave.

CLAUDIA SMITH
Reston, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cadets in formation at West Point. (From ''The Long Gray Line'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

On Cambodia: Immoral, and Pointless

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


Why won't the world, even now, recognize reality in Cambodia?

The bloodied little Southeast Asian country has seen its prospects transformed
by two developments. In August, Prince Sihanouk's convoluted maneuvering toward
a coalition collapsed. In September, Vietnamese troops ended their 10-year
occupation. The pro-Vietnamese Hun Sen regime and Chinese-supported Khmer Rouge
rebels now struggle in a desperate military showdown.

Yet how does the world, including the Bush Administration, respond? With
policies conceived years ago which are worse than stagnant; they are repugnant.
The cynical idea was to tacitly cooperate with the Khmer Rouge in order to expel
the Vietnamese. Now the Vietnamese are gone. Only Hun Sen's army stands between
the Khmer Rouge and their former killing fields. And that approach has become
pointless as well as offensive.

Last week, a huge United Nations majority, including the United States,
shamefully endorsed a diplomatic formula that would invite Khmer Rouge killers
into an interim Cambodian government. To make this more palatable, the diplomats
coupled their invitation with a polite warning against a return to the
''universally condemned policies and practices of the recent past.''

The words ''Khmer Rouge,'' ''Pol Pot'' and ''genocide'' were discreetly avoided.
But no one should be fooled. The world community has decided to close its eyes
to the real possibility of a second Cambodian holocaust.

Even as diplomats debated in New York, Khmer Rouge troops pressed their steady
advance from sanctuaries along the Thai border toward Phnom Penh. On the
battlefield, only two armies count: that of the Vietnamese-installed Hun Sen
regime, and that of the Chinese-supported Khmer Rouge. A third force, of
non-Communist guerrillas backed by Asian countries and the U.S., plays only a
spoiler's role, distracting Hun Sen's soldiers from the struggle against the
Khmer Rouge.

It's understandable that non-Communist Southeast Asians are unhappy about a
Vietnamese-installed regime in Phnom Penh. And even now, long after the Vietnam
War, many Americans still hope to contain Hanoi's influence in Indochina. China
is never reluctant to harry the pro-Soviet Vietnamese and further hopes to
profit from its long investment in the Khmer Rouge.

Ever since Hanoi overthrew the Pol Pot regime in 1978, Washington has contended
that resistance to the Vietnamese required some degree of cooperation with the
Khmer Rouge, even though these killers murdered a million or more Cambodians.
But the Vietnamese withdrawal and the diplomatic breakdown in Paris demolish any
such justification. By refusing to break with the Khmer Rouge now, the
non-Communist resistance has made itself Pol Pot's pawn.

The Hun Sen government still lacks legitimacy, but is clearly preferable to
another round of Khmer Rouge killing. Some in Congress, and Southeast Asians
like Thailand's Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, now seem to recognize this
point. But the U.N. majority, and the Bush Administration, still do not.

Supervised free elections would be the ideal solution. But to insist, as does
the U.N. resolution, on giving the Khmer Rouge an official role before the vote
guarantees that there will be no elections. For now, the decisive contest for
power is military. A Khmer Rouge victory, increasingly plausible, would be the
worst imaginable outcome.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Japanese Grip the Pentagon in a Chiplock

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 373 words


To the Editor:

I congratulate you on ''Foreign Role Rises in Military Goods'' (front page Oct.
23), a story as important as it is disturbing.

The growing dependency on foreign sources for many component parts of the
American defense machine flies in the face of all responsible military
strategies to the point where I begin to wonder if we have forgotten what
defense is all about. As if building the newest weapon, the biggest weapon, has
become an end in itself.

I am not an expert on defense; my field has been logistics, so I am particularly
aware of the problem of supply. I am also aware that during my tenure as
chairwoman of the Federal Maritime Commission (1969-75) some of the same allies
on whom we depend for key component parts would not allow our defense supplies
to be shipped on their flag vessels to Vietnam. They did not support our efforts
in Vietnam.

Recently, some of these same countries would not allow us to fly over their
airspace when the attack on Libya took place. This lack of support for our
national policy gives me pause when I consider that by withholding parts, a
nation 3,000 to 7,000 miles away can control our defense and our destiny.

In ''The Japan That Can Say No,'' a book of which Akio Morita, president of
Sony, is co-author, Shintaro Ishihara, a member of the Japanese Diet, points
this out. Of the military and computer chips, he states, ''It has come to the
point that no matter how much they continue military expansion, if Japan stopped
selling them the chips, there would be nothing more they could do.'' He
continues, ''If, for example, Japan sold chips to the Soviet Union and stopped
selling them to the United States, this would upset the entire military
balance.''

It is a sad commentary that, after having spent more than $1 trillion for
defense in the last 10 years, we find ourselves not stronger but greatly
weakened, having forgotten Ben Franklin's little homily: ''For want of a nail
the shoe was lost; for want of a shoe the horse was lost; and for want of a
horse the rider was lost; being overtaken and slain by the enemy, all for want
of care about a horseshoe nail.''

HELEN DELICH BENTLEY
Member of Congress, 2d Dist., Md.
  Washington, Oct. 24, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The S & L Scandal's Cruel Truths

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 546 words


Charles Keating and his Lincoln Savings and Loan Association illuminate a
particularly shady phase of the thrift scandal: lavish political contributions .
. . senators meddling in regulation . . . regulators waffling . . . and finally,
a $2 billion bailout. But Lincoln is just one chapter in a sorry history that
discredits all involved - the industry, regulators, Congress and the Reagan
Administration. Unless the lessons of that history are fully grasped, the rot
will persist and another crisis will explode.

Mr. Keating, scheduled to testify in Congress today, is an Arizona developer and
principal owner of the company that bought Lincoln in 1984. He plunged Lincoln
into speculative investments that attracted the attention of Federal
investigators. Before Lincoln collapsed, he enlisted five Senators to intervene
in the investigation, and even retained the services of the Federal Reserve
chairman, Alan Greenspan, then a consulting economist, who certified that
Lincoln was in good shape. The Senators are now under investigation themselves.

Mr. Keating has sued the Government, charging that Lincoln was scuttled by
wrongheaded regulations and willful harassment. But the Government and Lincoln
customers have sued him for fraud. Whatever the outcome, the greater scandal is
lax regulation and careless legislation.

The principal mismanagers were officials of the Reagan Administration and
complacent, if not duplicitous, Congressmen who let the crisis balloon. But the
roots go back to the 1960's when President Johnson, hiding the cost of Vietnam,
refused to hear of higher taxes; his stubbornness helped fuel the double-digit
inflation of the 1970's, and the double-digit interest rates that spelled doom
for thrifts.

The thrifts were limited by Depression-era interest rate ceilings on deposits
and couldn't compete with banks and money-market funds. Justifiably, Congress
lifted the ceilings in 1980. But the thrifts' income still hinged on mortgages
made at lower rates, so losses soared. In 1982 they prevailed on Congress to let
them diversify their investments. Thanks to well-funded industry pressure on
individual lawmakers, the new law also relaxed accounting rules and failed to
strengthen supervision. The result was wild speculation and outright plundering.

Signs of trouble arose right away, but the Reagan Administration and Congress
did nothing. By the time President Bush proposed reform and a massive rescue,
the bailout cost was astronomical.

With new regulations and regulatory agencies now in place, it already appears
that the rescue cost may quickly exhaust the authorized $50 billion. The Office
of Thrift Supervision estimates that almost a third of the 2,500 S & L's may
show insufficient funding when stiff new capital standards take effect next
month.

Underfunded thrifts will have to retrench, or will be shut down and bailed out.
Bickering over how to raise more bailout money, and how much, has already begun.
The S & L reform law rightly gives the regulators some leeway in judging which
thrifts are hopeless and which can survive. But if marginal thrifts are again
kept open only because of inadequate funds to close them, the lessons of this
scandal will have been lost. American Continentald(Lincoln Savings and Loan)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Times Among First Against Vietnam War

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 167 words


To the Editor:

With regard to Michael Straight's accusation (letter, Nov. 9) that The New York
Times gave its ''half-hearted endorsement'' to the Vietnam War: The Times was
one of the first major American newspapers -if not the first - to criticize the
political corruption of the Ngo Dinh Diem regime, the increasing American
military involvement in Vietnam, the escalation of American forces and the
conduct of the war - years before all that became popular to do.

As I had reason to know, neither Lyndon Johnson, Dean Rusk nor any other high
official in Washington thought we were giving any kind of endorsement,
half-hearted or otherwise, to the war. Mike Straight must know this too. It is
saddening to see that in justly defending his courageous former associate,
Gilbert Harrison, from a ''distortion'' of the record, he should indulge in a
distortion of his own.

JOHN B. OAKES
New York, Nov. 14, 1989
  The writer was editor of the editorial page of The New York Times, 1961-76.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Savings Unlikely to Be Spent Elsewhere

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 21


The reduction in military spending being contemplated by the Bush Administration
will not provide much new money for domestic programs over the next several
years, Government officials and economists say.

Many years from now, they say, the cuts could mean additional resources in areas
like education, child care and environmental protection. But for the time being,
in their view, nearly all the money saved at the Pentagon must be used to reduce
the Federal deficit.

In the next fiscal year alone, they say, the problem in meeting the deficit
level required by law is so daunting that the relatively modest cut planned for
the military will be little help. The deficit is expected to be $110 billion
this fiscal year, and the balanced-budget law mandates that it be no more than
$64 billion in the next one.

''Let's not sell it short,'' said Robert D. Reischauer, director of the
Congressional Budget Office, speaking of the Administration's long-term military
plan. ''It's very substantial. But we shouldn't look at this as providing us
with the wherewithal to meet all our problems.''

President Bush's budget director, Richard G. Darman, declined today to discuss
the military cuts. But addressing the deficit for the fiscal year 1991, which
begins next Oct. 1, he said the problem was ''every bit as big as anyone has
ever suggested it might be.''

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has directed the military services to identify
ways that the Pentagon budget can be cut by $180 billion below the expanded
levels the Administration had originally planned for fiscal years 1992-94. That
would mean an actual reduction averaging about 5 percent in each of those years
after inflation is taken into account.

Closing the Budget Gap

The military budget for the fiscal year 1991 is now being put in final form, and
officials expect Pentagon spending to be cut by less than $10 billion after
accounting for inflation.

That is less than one-fourth of the more than $40 billion in budget reductions
across the Government that must be made to cut the deficit to the ceiling set by
the balanced-budget law for the next fiscal year. The gap can be closed only
through deeper military cuts, which are thought unlikely, tax increases,
reductions in domestic spending or a combination of those.

The law requires the deficit to be cut further in succeeding fiscal years until
the books are balanced in the fiscal year 1993. After that, the Administration
and lawmakers in both parties believe further spending cuts or tax increases
will be necessary to offset money raised in Social Security taxes that is used
to meet expenses outside the Social Security system.

Some scholars looking far down the road see an eventual shift from military to
domestic spending as dramatic as the change after Ronald Reagan took office,
when taxes and domestic spending were cut and military expenditures mushroomed.

''There could be a tremendous change in society, a change in what the Government
supports and doesn't support,'' said Richard A. Stubbing, a professor of public
policy at Duke University and an expert in the military budget.

No Fundamental Realignment

But most experts believe that prospect is barely on the horizon. ''We're not
talking about a fundamental realignment of Government,'' said Charles L.
Schultze, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institution, who was
chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers in the Carter Administration.
''Most of the money must go for deficit reduction.''

In Congress, a few conservatives like Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas,
believe that lower spending by the military should lead to tax reductions. ''I
don't think the benefits from winning the cold war should go to the
Government,'' Mr. Gramm said.

Some liberals, mostly Democrats, would use the money to immediately expand
social programs. ''It isn't communism that's threatening us,'' said
Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan. ''It's our failure to
deal with the problems of our cities.''

But the prevailing view is that the deficit overarches all other problems.
''We've got a fire-breathing monster staring at us,'' said Representative Les
AuCoin, Democrat of Oregon. ''There's just not going to be much of a dividend
here to be spent elsewhere.''

The economists and Government officials said the way the money was ultimately
spent would depend in many respects on the political and economic climate. If
international tensions continue to ease, they said, more military cuts might be
in the offing. If there is a recession, more spending on unemployment insurance
and other social programs might be needed.

In any event, the actual money that would become available in any particular
fisal year from the Pentagon cuts is far from certain. In large part, it depends
on what parts of the military budget are cut and when.

Military budgets are normally expressed in terms of the amount of money Congress
allocates each year to the Pentagon. That ''budget authority'' is different from
actual spending.

In some areas, like salaries and training, almost all the money is spent in the
year that Congress makes it available. But in weapons procurement, for example,
less than 15 percent of the money is typically spent in the year that Congress
approves it, and the rest is spent over several years.

Parallel to After Vietnam War

By looking back about 20 years, when the Vietnam War was winding down, experts
can track what happened the last time that military spending was sharply
lowered. In constant dollars, the military budget was cut by 22 percent between
1968 and 1975.

Almost all that money was spent to expand social programs, especially Social
Security payments and Medicare. The economy went into a recession, but almost no
one blamed it on the military cuts.

Military contractors did not lose as much business then as might have been
expected, because they were able to expand their sales abroad, particularly to
Saudi Arabia and other oil-producing countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Shuttle Team for a Military Mission

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 591 words


For the flight of the space shuttle Discovery, the space agency chose three
military officers and two civilian astronauts. Here are sketches of the five
astronauts.

Frederick D. Gregory Mission Commander

Colonel Gregory, of the Air Force, who logged 168 hours in space before
yesterday's flight began, piloted a mission of the space shuttle Atlantis that
completed 110 earth orbits in April 1985. He is the first black to command a
shuttle mission.

The 48-year-old colonel was born in Washington, D.C., received a bachelor of
science degree from the United States Air Force Academy in 1964 and attended the
Naval Test Pilot School in 1970. He also received a master's in information
systems from George Washington University in 1977.

Colonel Gregory and his wife, Barbara, have two children.

John E. Blaha Pilot

Colonel Blaha, of the Air Force, who will be making his second shuttle flight,
was the pilot of the March 1989 Discovery mission, which deployed a tracking and
data relay satellite. He has logged more than 5,000 hours of flying time on 33
types of aircraft.

Colonel Blaha, 46, was born in San Antonio, and earned a bachelor's in
engineering sciences from the United States Air Force Academy in 1965. He
received a master's from Purdue University in 1966.

He has completed over 360 missions in Vietnam. He attended the Air Force Air
Command and Staff College in 1976.

Colonel Blaha and his wife, Brenda, have two sons and one daughter.

F. Story Musgrave Mission Specialist

Dr. Musgrave, who has logged 312 hours in space on two previous space missions,
served as a mission specialist on the maiden voyage of the shuttle Challenger in
April 1983 and as a mission specialist on Spacelab 2, which was launched in July
1985.

Dr. Musgrave, 54, was born in Lexington, Mass., and received a bachelor of
science degree from Syracuse University in 1958 and a doctorate of medicine from
Columbia University in 1964.

In 1958 he was employed as a mathematician by the Eastman Kodak Corporation. He
served a surgical internship at the University of Kentucky Medical Center in
Lexington from 1964 to 1965.

He is a veteran of the Marine Corps and a graduate of the Naval Airman
Preparatory School.

Dr. Musgrave and his wife, Carol, have two daughters and three sons.

Kathryn C. Thornton Mission Specialist

Dr. Thornton, 37, is making her first shuttle flight. After graduating from
Auburn University in 1974 with a bachelor's degree in physics, she received a
master's in physics from the University of Virginia.

In 1979 she was awarded a NATO Postdoctoral Fellowship to continue her research
at the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg, West Germany. Dr.
Thornton became an astronaut in 1985.

Dr. Thornton, who was born in Montgomery, Ala., and her husband, Stephen, have
two daughters. Dr. Thornton also has two stepsons.

Manley Lanier Carter Jr. Mission Specialist

Captain Carter, of the Navy, 42, is making his first shuttle flight.

He was born in Macon, Ga., received a bachelor's degree in chemistry from Emory
University in 1969 and a doctorate of medicine from Emory in 1973. From 1970 to
1973 he was a professional soccer player for the Atlanta Chiefs of the North
American Soccer League.

He entered the Navy in 1974, completed flight surgeon school in Pensacola, Fla.,
and in 1978 was assigned as the chief medical officer of the aircraft carrier
Forrestal. He graduated from the Naval Pilot School in 1984.

Captain Carter and his wife, Dana, have two daughters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Rebels Offer Gold

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 23


A Cambodian guerrilla leader is offering $1,000 to $40,000 in gold to Cambodian
soldiers who defect with Soviet fighter jets or other military hardware or
deliver a Vietnamese soldier wearing a Cambodian Army uniform. The rebel leader,
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, who commands one of three guerrilla groups fighting
the Vietnamese-installed Government, announced the reward offers in a broadcast
over the resistance radio Wednesday. The guerrillas assert that tens of
thousands of Vietnamese remain in Cambodia, some of them disguised in uniforms
of the Cambodian Army.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
A 'Job' In Salvador

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 727 words


Suppose a secret cabal of United States military men routed six priests out of
their beds, murdered them, then faded back into clandestine silence. Suppose,
say, President Mitterrand of France called up the White House and asked
President Bush if he had ordered the killings, or knew anything about them.

President Bush certainly could and would say that he had not and did not;
moreover, that he would do everything he could to bring the killers to justice.

Would Mr. Bush, the Bush Administration, its law enforcement officials, and the
officers Mr. Bush had put in charge of the U.S. military therefore be relieved
of any responsibility for the killings?

Not by any standard applicable in a democracy.

Might not President Mitterrand, in this hypothetical case, plausibly decide that
civilian control of the military and enforcement of the rule of law were not
working in the United States as effectively as they should in a democracy? He
could hardly think otherwise. Would he therefore be justified in withholding
whatever support he might have been extending to the United States armed forces,
at least until President Bush had rooted out the murderers and punished them
according to law?

Yes, and that actually might help Mr. Bush catch the culprits; it certainly
would notify them and others that a price had to be paid for death-squad
tactics.

But suppose the killers actually were leftists masquerading as military men, a
suggestion being raised in the actual murder of six priests in El Salvador? That
possibility would make the withholding of aid an even sharper spur to President
Cristiani to discover, expose and punish the murderers, and salvage what is left
of his unhappy country's good name.

President Bush and Congress, however, have passed up the opportunity to put that
kind of pressure on Mr. Cristiani. They rejected an amendment that would have
withheld only 30 percent of scheduled U.S. aid to El Salvador (about $25 million
out of $85 million) until March 31, 1990 - or, as it could have been worded,
until the priest-killers were identified and punished.

Surely that would not have been unreasonable, in view of the fact that the U.S.
already has sent more than $4 billion in aid to El Salvador, despite the
numerous violations of human rights and death-squad executions that have been
traced to the military and to Arena, the right-wing party in power. That
historical record caused Bernard Aronson, the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, to say that his ''gut feeling'' was that the six
priests, their female cook and the cook's daughter had been murdered by the
Salvadoran right.

President Bush, having no such gut feeling, will not hear of any real pressure -
like the withholding of American taxpayers' dollars - being brought on Arena,
the Salvadoran military or President Cristiani. Why? Because in his fatuous
view, El Salvador ''had certifiably free elections; President Cristiani is
trying to do a job for democracy, and the left-wing guerrillas must not take
over El Salvador.''

This repeats a consistent fallacy of U.S. policy since World War II - that
''free elections,'' which we can always find someone to certify, make for
indisputable democracy - as, say, in Chile, or years ago in South Vietnam. But
not, of course, in nations regarded by Washington as unfriendly - for instance,
Nicaragua, where ''certifiably free elections'' have been and will be dismissed
as fraudulent. Free elections, in fact, often have merely ratified the power of
dictators and murderers (whether of the right or of the left, as George Bush
might say).

If, moreover, Mr. Cristiani is trying ''to do a job for democracy,'' in Mr.
Bush's imprecise and un-Presidential phrase, that will be news to Roberto
d'Aubuisson, who dominates Arena, and the Salvadoran military, neither of which
ever has shown the slightest interest in democracy in El Salvador. They and Mr.
Cristiani, their front man, actually are doing a job for the privileged
oligarchy of wealthy landowners that traditionally has exploited El Salvador's
suffering and poverty-stricken people.

In view of the bloody record of those who have governed El Salvador, moreover,
it rings hollow for Mr. Bush to say the left ''must not take over.'' How could
any other rulers make things worse? Or more blatantly dishonor the United States
for its aid?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

7 Protesters Join Parade

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 190 words


Seven people received summonses for disorderly conduct yesterday after they
briefly joined the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade with a black balloon shaped
like a bomb that read, ''Stop U.S. Bombing of El Salvador'' on one side and ''No
Vietnam War in El Salvador'' on the other.

The seven inflated the balloon and joined the parade at 62d Street and Central
Park West about 10 A.M., a police spokesman, Sgt. Raymond O'Donnell, said. He
said police officers pulled the group off the parade route at 61st Street.

The summonses carry fines and up to 15 days in jail, he said. The seven were
scheduled to appear in court on Jan. 16.

One of the demonstrators, Conor Walsh, 23 years old, of 45 West 11th Street in
Manhattan, said the group wanted to call attention to United States support of
the Government of El Salvador in that country's internal war. Yesterday's
demonstration was sponsored by the New York chapter of the Committee in
Solidarity with the People of El Salvador, which supports Salvadoran rebels.

''We feel there's a real danger of a larger conflict developing in El Salvador
and of a new Vietnam War,'' Mr. Walsh said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clamor in the East;
Thatcher Confers With Bush and Is Reassured About Alliance

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 24


President Bush met Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at Camp David today and
reassured her that there would be no abrupt changes in American foreign policy
when he meets in Malta next week with Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

''I don't see problems and I don't expect great, unusual pronouncements from
this meeting,'' Mrs. Thatcher said at a news conference at a Washington hotel
after a two-and-a-half-hour meeting with the President and a lunch with the
Bushes.

She added, ''It's very important to Mr. Gorbachev that the meeting is held and
it's also important that it is successful,'' so she is not expecting ''a great
deal of difficulty or sudden surprises.''

Talks With Mitterrand

To the discomfort of startled British officials, who thought they had the
American spotlight to themselves today, the White House announced that Mr. Bush
would meet with President Francois Mitterrand in the Caribbean on Dec. 16.

The meeting with Mr. Mitterrand, who is currently the president of the European
Community, will be a further reassuring signal to allies concerned about the
changes in Europe and fearful that the United States and the Soviet Union might
bypass them in making important decisions.

The meeting will take place after Mr. Bush's meeting with Mr. Gorbachev on Dec.
2 and 3 and after Mr. Mitterrand's meeting with the Soviet leader in Kiev on
Dec. 6. White House officials said today that the Caribbean site would be the
island of St. Martin.

Administration officials also said that Defense Secretary Dick Cheney would meet
with NATO defense ministers in Brussels next Tuesday and Wednesday about the
changes in Eastern Europe and an agenda on cost sharing, the relationship
between arms control and military planning and conventional arms negotiations.

Purpose of Thatcher Visit

The trip by Mrs. Thatcher was seen by American foreign policy experts as her way
of shoring up the British-American alliance, a partnership that the British
leader fears may be diminishing as Mr. Bush's allegiance with the West German
leader, Helmut Kohl, grows.

Mrs. Thatcher had a close bond, both personally and ideologically, with former
President Reagan, and she is eager to establish a closer rapport with Mr. Bush.

The Prime Minister was asked whether the West might not regret cutting back on
military forces if Mr. Gorbachev is overthrown or forced, by a negative reaction
at home, into a crackdown.

She seemed unfazed by the prospect, proclaiming that the Soviet leader was
''very firmly in the saddle'' without any serious rivals, and said she thought
''he will get through.'' She said that the discontent in the Soviet Union is not
so much a dissipation of euphoria as it is ''a greater realism and an assessment
of the enormous magnitude of the task.''

Warning on Disarmament

But Mrs. Thatcher warned that the two superpowers should not ''disarm too
fast.''

''Every single step on disarmament has to be agreed with the Soviet Union so
that neither their security nor our security is in jeopardy,'' she said, adding
that the structure of agreeing on security arrangements through NATO and the
Warsaw Pact should be maintained.

Mrs. Thatcher said she did not think Mr. Cheney was asking for serious or
immediate cuts in military spending, adding that she was not afraid that the
Atlantic alliance would be hurt by the level of arms reductions or that the
American negotiating strength at the summit meeting would be undermined.

''I am quite certain that neither Mr. Cheney nor Mr. Bush would do anything to
fundamentally undermine the defense posture,'' she said. She stressed that ''we
must always safeguard our freedom and justice, and we must always do it within
the NATO framework.''

Caution on Czechoslovakia

Asked about the resignation today of the Communist leadership in Czechoslovakia
in the face of pro-democracy protests, Mrs. Thatcher said starchily that ''the
wish is not the deed'' when it comes to shifting from a Communist government to
a democracy.

''It does take quite a long time to get all the democratic structures into
place, and they must be genuine structure and not just a facade,'' she said.

Mrs. Thatcher, who was greeted at the Sheraton Carlton Hotel by about 20
Vietnamese demonstrators protesting the repatriation of Vietnamese boat people
from Hong Kong, said she told President Bush that 13,000 ''genuine refugees''
would not be sent back to Vietnam, but that ''Hong Kong simply cannot go on
taking'' people she called ''illegal immigrants.''

''They will have to be repatriated as are other illegal immigrants,'' she said.

As Mr. Bush and his wife, Barbara, welcomed Mrs. Thatcher to the snow-glazed
Presidential retreat in the Maryland mountains this morning, he told reporters,
''I'm just very interested in the views of the Prime Minister on the rapid
changes in Eastern Europe and the strength of the alliance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Bush driving Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to a meeting at
Camp David, Md. Going the other way was Millie, his dog. (The New York
Times/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Delays Decision on Agent Orange Pay

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 24


The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Edward J. Derwinski, announced today that he
was delaying a decision on whether any Vietnam veterans could receive disability
pay for exposure to the defoliant Agent Orange.

Earlier this month, having received a report from a scientific advisory
committee that had reviewed more than 30 studies on Agent Orange, Mr. Derwinski
said he would make such a decision by the end of November.

But in a statement issued today, he said he had decided to wait for results due
next spring from a five-year-long study by the Federal Centers for Disease
Control on cancer risk for Vietnam veterans.

He said the advisory committee had told him that its review of Agent Orange
studies had found no significant statistical link between non-Hodgkins lymphoma,
a rare form of cancer, and chemicals in defoliants sprayed in Vietnam.

But he said that the committee had been unable to rule out such a link and that
several members had told him the cancer study due next spring would influence
their recommendations.

In that study, epidemiologists for the Centers for Disease Control are analyzing
several thousand health records to determine whether Vietnam veterans are at
greater risk than other people of developing any of five kinds of cancers:
lymphoma, soft tissue sarcoma, nasal cancer, nasopharyngeal cancer and liver
cancer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
Reminded Of Elvis

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


What went wrong with the cold war? One minute it seemed it would last forever,
then suddenly it was old hat, high-button shoes, buggy and horse collar. James
Bond seemed an antique, Rambo a tedium in oiled pectorals.

Maybe it just aged out, the way big-band music did, Goodman, Dorsey and all
those fine outfits suddenly shelved by new people with no emotional investment
in them, no memory of a time when they were part of the life's essential fabric.

The new people, delirious with rock, suddenly made you feel ancient if you
remembered when B. G. could drive the old folks right up the wall.

Now it was Jerry Lee Lewis and Elvis, and you who had used Goodman to drive the
old folks up the wall were now the old folks, and worse was to come: Rolling
Stones, for screaming out loud! And you couldn't understand a word they sang,
only you didn't call that singing, did you, because you were really out of it,
old-timer.

Maybe the cold war, like the big bands, was doomed by demographics. So many new
people have come along since 1945. Here's an exercise for people old enough to
remember the end of World War II: Think back to that year, 1945. Remember how
remote you felt from the year 1901.

I am old enough for this game and well remember that the 44 years separating me
from the dawn of the century seemed long as eternity. Things and people
associated with that age - high-button shoes, buggys, horse collars, Teddy
Roosevelt, gaslight - seemed quaintnesses of an antique age, which had nothing
to do with me.

Forty-four years is the gap now separating us from 1945 and the cold war's
start. How quaint and antique 1945 must seem to the vast human majority born too
late to remember the Kennedy Presidency, much less the Truman era, Stalin as a
living terror, the Berlin blockade, the Marshall Plan, Dean Acheson, the great
Red hunts, ''I Was a Communist for the F.B.I.,'' Cohn and Schine, ''twenty years
of treason,'' pinkos and radic-libs, ''Yankee Go Home,'' the Rosenbergs, Iron
Pants Molotov, the Hungarian revolution, John Foster Dulles, the pumpkin papers,
Judith Coplon, ''Who promoted Peress?'', ''Point of order, Mr. Chairman, point
of order . . .''

This start on an infinite list to summarize the history of the thing may make
the mind reel in despair if you weren't there. And most people now living
weren't.

If you were there, it is hard to realize there are now millions of Americans who
never heard of the Dean Acheson speech that excluded Korea from the United
States' Pacific defense perimeter. What is worse, millions probably know nothing
of that murderous cold war byproduct, the Korean War.

The Vietnam War is better known, but what fraction even of those who went to it
ever understood the explanation that we had to fight the Vietnam War because we
had learned the lesson of Munich? Now of course, we avoid fighting wars because
we have learned the lesson of Vietnam.

Old-timers who were there when things were vital tend to amazed disbelief when
the big bands cease to interest new people or when a cold war runs out of steam
and the Communist monolith (that multilith was always a ''monolith'' in
coldwarspeak) buckles before a Polish electrician.

My theory is that the new people who are forever trashing old-timers' treasures,
like big bands, create these upheavals not because of an insolent, rebellious
dislike for old folks, but because they come into the world with new gifts.

The new people of the 1920's, for instance, were born understanding the internal
combustion engine, and this understanding was what enabled the Allies to win
World War II. Today's new people are born almost totally incompetent to fix
internal combustion engines, but with an eerie grasp of electronic computers.

Same for music. The new people of the 1950's were born with ears deaf to both
melody and lyrical grace, but able to hear and compelled to move to music in
which the old folks could hear only an assault on the peace.

Maybe the world is now finally under the control of new people who were simply
born without the need for cold war. Gorbachev seems typical. Maybe he just
couldn't see the point of spending his life trying to keep that old rust bucket,
the 1917 Marxmobile, on the road. Maybe Lenin made no music he could hear.

Maybe we had birthed a whole generation of new people, this side and over there,
who are deaf to the cold war golden oldie but tuned to a new sound that makes
them passionate to throw the old-timers over the wall, and then dance on it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
Listen, We've Got Another Homer Story

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 783 words


Homer Bigart looked out the window of the New Hampshire country house that has
been his home for nearly two decades. Trees he planted himself bended in the
wind coming down off the Pawtuckaway Mountains.

The attention of the man who many consider this century's greatest American
reporter was given to deflecting a slobbering dachshund. Homer, as everyone
knows him, became a two-time Pulitzer Prize winner, in part, by fending off
similarly inclined shills, politicos and frauds.

''The cat I appreciate,'' allowed the 82-year-old legend, ''being as she's
almost mute.''

Homer's was a time before computers, reporters with graduate degrees and
newsrooms resembling insurance offices. His newsrooms - those of The New York
Herald Tribune and this newspaper - were raucous places punctuated by the
clatter of typewriters, shouts for copy boys and laughter. You walked on a
carpet of butts. Not a few kept a hidden bottle, and there were card games -
bridge in the afternoon and poker later.

But those were places from which a small-town boy with keen mind and burning
ambition could witness history. ''I felt as though I had to be pushed out in the
world,'' Homer said, then paused, worried about sounding pretentious. ''That
sounds pretty corny, doesn't it?'' he said. ''Melodramatic?''

From the late 1930's through the 1960's, Homer's was a larger-than-life career.
Aboard a bomber attacking World War II Germany. On to Africa, Sicily, the great
battles of the Pacific. Korea. The Hungarian revolt and Suez crisis. The
Eichmann trial. Very early realizing the folly of Vietnam. Civil rights and the
shame of hunger in the fattest nation.

Homer wrote about all this (and St. Patrick's Day parades) for New York papers,
and it is old-time Gotham news hounds who will give him ''a special honorary
award'' on Tuesday.

The Society of Silurians - the self-described oldest press club in America,
named for the geologic period in which life emerged from water - will honor a
man it calls ''a journalistic giant.''

It is easier to say what makes a tolerable dentist than a great journalist. An
editor who worshiped Homer when the editor was a young reporter speaks of his
idol's independence, craftsmanship, sense of proportion.

The editor tells a story. At a time when journalists were descended on a
troubled South, a minister he was interviewing complimented his style. ''A
couple weeks ago, a guy was here saying he was from The Times, but he didn't
seem to understand things,'' the minister said of Homer. ''I had to explain the
tiniest details to him.'' (Oh.) Things didn't come easy for Homer. In 1929 he
started at The Herald Tribune as a copy boy at age 22 for $12 a week, then
waited longer for promotion than any copy boy in Tribune history. Were it not
for the huge eclairs the Automat sold for a dime and extra pay for covering
Sunday sermons ($3 minus an expected contribution to the offering), he mightn't
have made it. It was the quality of his writing - and the death of two
correspondents - that finally made him a war correspondent in 1943.

He was terrified on a bombing mission that killed two colleagues, but would have
volunteered for another. ''I was that dumb,'' he said. ''I was grateful to be
earning $85 a week.'' Homer filed great yarns, including one about a bellicose
New Guinea tribe whose members made music by grinding their teeth in harmony. At
historic moments, like Japan's surrender, he was peerless: ''Japan, paying for
her desperate throw of the dice at Pearl Harbor, passed from the ranks of the
major powers at 9:05 A.M. today.''

The nondescript looking chap loathed big shots. Once a young reporter on the
scene at a Harlem riot called Homer, who was pulling together the story in the
office and fending off editors. When rioters began shaking the phone booth,
Homer advised the young man, ''At least you're dealing with sane people.''

''You're no Bigart,'' is used less often now to put down journalistic buffoons.
But Homer stories are still told by aging (make that seasoned) scribes.
Favorites concern Homer's rivalry with a female war correspondent. When told she
was pregnant, Homer said, ''If she had a baby, she'd eat it.''

But this is not a man who lives in the past. New York seems distant, and Homer
hopes never to see another skyscraper. He and his wife, Else Holmelund Minarik,
the children's book author, are now savoring Trollope. He can no longer
snowshoe, but plows through a stack of newspapers.

He is fascinated by the changes shaking the Eastern bloc, which he thinks
television covers best. ''The shots are worth thousands of words,'' the great
newspaper reporter said. ''And I've never been able to take a photograph.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Homer Bigart (NYT, 1973)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

18th-Century Law Snares Vietnamese Fishermen

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 23


Each morning, hundreds of Vietnamese-born fishermen cast off in refitted wooden
boats from piers here and in the harbors of Monterey and Los Angeles to sail far
out into the Pacific to cast their nets for kingfish and rock cod.

Most are continuing the trade they began as teen-agers in South Vietnam before
fleeing to this country. Their boats have been purchased by pooling the funds of
three or four families, and they bring each man a hard-earned income of about
$20,000 a year.

Now, after a decade of such work, the sudden enforcement of a 200-year-old law
requiring the owners and pilots of most commercial fishing vessels to be United
States citizens may force these fishermen to sell their boats and to try to find
work with non-Vietnamese employers or to learn another trade.

In recent months - until a Federal court stopped it on Nov. 7 - the Coast Guard
had boarded fishing boats and begun citing Vietnamese-born owners, who as
refugees are legal United States residents. Some stopped fishing, but others
paid the $500 fine and continued to fish. Some say that after citing them
several times, the Coast Guard threatened to confiscate their boat-registration
documents, without which their vessels cannot be legally operated.

National Security Is Cited

While neither the Justice Department nor the Coast Guard would answer questions
about the dispute, the Government contended in court papers that the concerns
about national security that helped lead to passage of the law in 1789 remain
valid today.

The papers said, ''In this modern age, rife with terrorism and threats to United
States citizens from foreign extremist groups, the presence in United States
coastal waters of foreign-owned and operated vessels has the potential to
present a clear and present threat to the national security.''

But the fishermen say the Government has no grounds for that argument and
contend that they are being discriminated against.

''The law is the law, I know,'' said Chieu Pham, the executive director of the
Vietnamese Fishermen Association of America. ''We have an old law, and the
intent was for the national defense and to prevent foreigners from fishing in
U.S. waters. But we are not illegal aliens. This is our country now, and in this
case the law should be looked at because it was made a long time ago.''

He said he knew of no other citations, before the recent ones in the Bay Area,
of Vietnamese or other non-citizen fishermen under this law.

In its legal papers, the Government said: ''It is simply not true that the Coast
Guard has engaged in stepped-up enforcement efforts. Plaintiffs' allegations to
the contrary rest solely on the fact that they have successfully evaded
detection until recently.''

In the papers, the Government argues that the fishermen are responsible for
knowing in advance all the legal requirements of their trade, including ''the
citizenship requirements for ownership and captaincy.''

But Mr. Pham said the fishermen believed that the Coast Guard had suddenly begun
to enforce the law in response to complaints from non-Vietnamese fishermen. Some
of the Vietnamese cite clashes between fellow refugees and Texas shrimpers and
the Ku Klux Klan in the early 1980's as evidence of resentment they have faced.

Suit Challenges Law

In a civil lawsuit filed against the Coast Guard on Sept. 27 in Federal District
Court here, Mr. Pham's association and a group of Vietnamese-born fishermen who
are permanent resident aliens have challenged the law on behalf of all such
aliens, arguing that it violates the Constitution's guarantee of equal
protection of the law and the fundamental liberty to earn a livelihood.

The suit does not charge that the law is being selectively enforced against
fishermen of Vietnamese origin. But papers filed in the case and research by
fishermen's organizations nationwide have found no Coast Guard citations for
violations against non-Vietnamese aliens before the filing of the lawsuit.

Neither the United States Attorney's office, the 11th Coast Guard District
headquarters here nor Coast Guard headquarters in Washington would comment on
any aspect of the case, including whether there had been previous efforts to
enforce the law. A Justice Department spokesman in Washington, Michael Robinson,
said, ''We don't selectively enforce anything,'' but he declined to elaborate.
All said they would not comment on pending litigation.

On Nov. 7, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit here granted
the fishermen an emergency injunction barring the Coast Guard from enforcing the
law pending a full hearing. Is Law's Purpose Outdated?  The plaintiffs do not
deny that they owned and piloted fishing boats for years, even though they were
aware that the requirement of citizenship existed. But they say they believed
that it was like many old laws that remain on the books but are not enforced.

The 18th-century law, the Jones Act, requires that vessels of five or more tons
be owned by United States citizens and specifies that only citizens may command
or serve as masters on such vessels. The Government argues that Congress passed
the law to assure that privately owned boats would be available to assist the
military at times of war and to protect the domestic fishing industry from
foreign competition.

''Implicit in the Government's argument is the idea that citizens can be trusted
and permanent resident aliens cannot,'' said Dennis W. Hayashi, a lawyer with
the Asian Law Caucus in Oakland, Calif., which is representing the fishermen
along with the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation of Northern California
and lawyers from two private firms.

''All the plaintiffs are working toward citizenship,'' Mr. Hayashi said. ''They
were welcomed as political refugees. It is noxious to me that because they have
not yet sworn allegiance to America there is an implication that they are
untrustworthy.''

Different Tastes in Fish

The Government's papers argue that alien fishermen are free to work on smaller
boats that work close to shore. But the fishermen say that solution is not as
simple as it sounds.

Mr. Pham said few Vietnamese-born fishermen fish for salmon, halibut and crab,
which are popular in restaurants and fish shops catering to non-Asians. Instead,
they concentrate on ''underutilized species'' like kingfish and hagfish, which
are sold to Asian restaurants and markets and are caught in nets that catch fish
by entangling their gills in the meshes.

In 1982, a measure outlawing gill netting in less than 60 feet of water was
signed into law in California. It was aimed at protecting thousands of migratory
birds and marine mammals that were dying after being trapped in the gill nets
used by Vietnamese-born fishermen close to shore.

''The anti-gill-net law placed the Vietnamese in the position of having to fish
farther offshore, and that requires the bigger boats that must be documented,''
said William Grader, executive director of the Pacific Coast Federation of
Fishermen's Associations, a coalition of 26 groups, including the Vietnamese
Fishermen Association.

Mr. Pham said the lawsuit was brought only after negotiations with the Coast
Guard failed to resolve the issue.

''We come from a culture that avoids confrontation at any cost,'' he said. ''If
we could, we would never bring somebody to court. But if we don't do this, I
don't know how we're going to tell our children that we just let this thing
happen to us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: With the Coast Guard suddenly enforcing a 200-year-old law,
Vietnamese-born fishermen, including Hai Le, who works out of San Francisco, are
seeing their livelihoods threatened. (NYT/George Olson) (pg. 36)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Salvador War: Errors on Both Sides

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 986 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Nov. 25


The Salvadoran Army defeated the guerrillas in the battle for the cities but
missed an opportunity to destroy a decade-old enemy.

During the two weeks of fighting, Government forces were so preoccupied with
pushing the guerrillas out of the cities that they made no attempt to cut off
their line of retreat and destroy them.

In the battle for this capital city, the guerrillas were driven into a pocket in
a northern suburb. On the fifth day of the battle the rebel forces began to
retreat into the unpopulated countryside to the north.

Guerrillas Not Blocked

The army had the mobility and fire power to surround and crush the guerrillas if
it moved quickly, but the Salvadoran high command was content to simply reoccupy
the abandoned suburbs. Only three under-strength infantry companies, numbering
fewer than 200 men, were sent to block the guerrillas, and that attempt failed.
Thereafter, attacks on them were limited to air strikes and artillery
bombardments.

The high command's inaction was in part due to the guerrillas' reputation for
doing the unexpected. The spectacular but militarily insignificant raid on the
Hotel El Salvador last Tuesday caught the Government forces by surprise and
added to that reputation.

The commander of the brigade defending San Salvador said most of his forces were
being kept in the city as insurance against renewed insurgent attacks similar to
the one against the hotel, previously the Sheraton.

Although the armed forces missed the chance to score a stunning victory, they
dealt a serious blow to the guerrillas.

Rebels Aimed at Five Cities

The pattern of guerrilla offensive, which was set off on the night of Nov. 11,
indicates that the rebels hoped to seize control of five cities in the central
part of the country. Had they succeeded they would have split the country into
three parts, effectively destroying Government control.

The cities under attack were Santa Ana, San Salvador, Zacatecoluca, Usulutan and
San Miguel, all of them accessible from guerrilla strongholds in the mountains
of northern El Salvador.

It is still unclear if the guerrillas thought they could capture all of the
cities or if they hoped for just enough success to touch off a popular uprising.
The guerrillas brought significant amounts of weapons and ammunition with them
to support such an uprising.

More than likely their strategy included a hierarchy of objectives, which at
best included toppling the rightist Government of President Alfredo Cristiani
and at the very least increasing their political leverage.

The strategy's success depended on catching the army by surprise.

Attack on a Holiday Night

In an offensive reminiscent of the North Vietnamese offensive against the Saigon
Government during the Tet holiday in 1968, the guerrillas attacked the five
target cities on a holiday night when a large percentage of the army was
scheduled to be on weekend leave.

But Salvadoran intelligence services learned in advance that some form of attack
would take place over the weekend. All leaves were canceled, and military units
were placed on alert. The guerrillas lost strategic surprise.

The ferocity and extent of the insurgents' offensive sent the army reeling in
the first hours of the fighting.

San Salvador came under attack from four directions, and troops from outlying
areas had to be rushed to the capital. The attack on San Miguel also threatened
to overrun major points in the city, and there, too, reinforcements were rushed
in from outlying areas to help the local garrison contain the guerrillas.

The attacks on Santa Ana and Zacatecoluca were weak and easily repulsed, but
they tied down Government units that could have reinforced San Salvador. The
Usulutan attack was to be a major one, but it never fully developed, because the
rebel timetable was upset when a Government patrol ran into the guerrillas on
the way to attack the city.

Within a day the outcome of the rebel offensive turned on the fighting in San
Salvador and in San Miguel 100 miles to the east.

Reinforcements Got Through

In both cities the guerrillas had a chance of victory if they prevented
reinforcements from reaching the cities and neutralized the Salvadoran air
force.

But for reasons not yet clear, the guerrillas made no attempt to prevent or
delay reinforcements from rushing to the two cities. Neither did they conduct
effective attacks against Salvadoran military air fields.

These errors sealed the fate of the guerrilla offensive from the outset. It was
a matter of time before the armed forces brought their superior firepower to
bear against them.

The only other hope of success lay in a popular uprising. But here, too, the
guerrillas were disappointed. Many people living in the working-class
neighborhoods where the fighting took place helped the guerrillas, but there was
no uprising and most Salvadorans remained away from the fighting, seeking only
to avoid the gunfire.

Both Sides Fought Well

Despite serious strategic errors made by leaders on both sides, the army and the
guerrillas fought equally well. The Government soldiers, long weary of fighting
an elusive enemy who ambushed them and set booby traps on jungle paths, welcomed
the opportunity to meet the guerrillas head on.

Although the Government soldiers had no training in urban combat, they adapted
quickly and fought aggressively.

The guerrillas, for their part, fought intelligently against their
better-equipped foes. They used the protection of the buildings they occupied
and made the Government forces pay for every block they recaptured. Salvadoran
officers were unanimous in saying that guerrilla snipers were highly effective
and the major cause of Government casualties.

When the guerrillas withdrew from the cities, they did so in good order and with
such secrecy that in most cases soldiers were unaware that the enemy facing them
was gone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Leonard Boudin, Civil Liberties Lawyer, Dies at 77

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 45, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 661 words


Leonard B. Boudin, a civil liberties lawyer who in more than 50 years of
practice defended a number of controversial clients, including Julian Bond, Paul
Robeson, Benjamin Spock and Daniel Ellsberg, died at St. Vincent's Hospital in
Manhattan late Friday after a heart attack. He was 77 years old.

''Leonard was a role model for many lawyers not just because of his education
and scholarship but because of his incredible curiosity and interest in matters
of history and politics that transcend the law,'' said Leonard I. Weinglass,
another lawyer specializing in civil rights cases.

Mr. Boudin was born in Brooklyn. He went to City College and received his law
degree from St. John's Law School in 1936. A year later, he married Jean
Roisman, a poet, and he was taken into legal practice by his uncle, Louis
Boudin, a well-known constitutional lawyer and an influential figure in the
Socialist Party.

''He was a powerful figure for Leonard,'' said Jamie Kalven, a journalist
working on a biography of Mr. Boudin.

Much of Mr. Boudin's work for his uncle involved union law, and in the late
1940's he and another young lawyer from the firm, Victor Rabinowitz, started
their own labor law firm. They ventured into civil liberties law when an early
provision of the Taft-Hartley Act forced union leaders to swear under oath that
they were not Communists.

Won Passport Case

Mr. Boudin later defended a number of controversial clients who were involved in
civil liberties issues, including Mr. Robeson, the singer and actor.His
best-known legal victory came in 1958, when the Supreme Court ruled in Kent v.
Dulles that passports cannot be withheld by the State Department for political
reasons.

''Boudin's great contribution came during the McCarthy era during the 1950's,
when he kept his constitutional bearings and acted as a guardian of important
public values at a time of general institutional default,'' Mr. Kalven said.

Mr. Boudin defended Mr. Ellsberg, who was charged with theft in connection with
the Pentagon Papers, a large collection of classified Government and military
papers documenting the history of the United States' involvement in Vietnam.

He represented Mr. Bond, who was denied a seat in the Georgia House of
Representatives because of his opposition to the Vietnam War, and Dr. Spock, an
antiwar leader who was charged with conspiracy to violate the Selective Service
Act.

He served as lawyer for Jimmy Hoffa when the one-time union leader was banned
from labor activities as a condition of his prison release. And he represented
Cuba's interests in the United States for the last 30 years and the Central Bank
of Iran during the Iran hostage crisis.

Daughter Imprisoned

Mr. Boudin was the father of Kathy Boudin, 46, a member of the radical Weather
Underground, who pleaded guilty to a murder charge for her involvement in the
1981 robbery of an armored truck in New York's Rockland County in which a guard
and two police officers were killed. She is serving a 20-year term in the state
prison in Bedford Hills, N.Y.

Before the robbery, Ms. Boudin was wanted by the police for questioning about a
1970 bomb explosion at a Greenwich Village town house. Three members of the
Weather Underground, a militant offshoot of the Students for a Democratic
Society, were killed.

Mr. Boudin ''was very by saddened'' by his daughter's imprisonment. ''There is
no more to say than that,'' said Mr. Boudin's son, Michael, 49, a deputy
assistant attorney general in the antitrust division of the Justice Department
and a lecturer at Harvard Law School.

Mr. Boudin, who lived for the last 50 years on St. Marks Place in the East
Village, was a visiting lecturer at Harvard Law School, Stanford Law School and
Boalt School of Law at the University of California at Berkeley.

In addition to his wife, son and daughter, Mr. Boudin is survived by a brother,
Arthur, a marketing consultant in Ridgewood, N.J., and four grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Elizabeth O'Brien Married in West

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 69, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


Elizabeth Larkin O'Brien and John Charles Paxton were married yesterday in San
Francisco by the Rev. Richard Fowler at the Episcopal Church of St. Mary the
Virgin.

The bride, 34 years old, is the daughter of Mrs. William A. Dreher of New York
and East Hampton, L.I., and John L. O'Brien Jr. of Bristol, R.I. Her husband,
39, is the son of Charles Paxton of Encino, Calif., and the late Anna Louise
Chaney Paxton.

Debra E. Kaye was the matron of honor, and James Arce was the best man.

Mrs. Paxton is an independent consultant in equipment lease financing. A
graduate of the Ethel Walker School and Brown University, she is the chairman of
the volunteer legal services committee of the San Francisco Junior League. Her
father, an architect, is a consultant for the Department of State. Her mother,
Karen Cassard Dreher, an official of the United Nations Development Program in
New York, heads a procurement program financed by the Japanese Government for
West and Central Africa and is a director of the African Medical and Research
Foundation.

Mr. Paxton, who heads a real-estate consulting concern in San Francisco,
graduated from the University of California at Berkeley, where he also received
an M.B.A. He served with the Navy in Vietnam. His father, who is retired, was an
aeronautical engineer with the Hughes Aircraft Company in Los Angeles and a rear
admiral in the Naval Reserve.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Elizabeth Paxton (Scott Sibley)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Correction

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 23 words


A chart last Sunday about Vietnamese refugees arriving in three Asian countries
was incorrectly labeled. The numbers were in thousands.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 26, 1989

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1430 words




$

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Fiction

 1                                    2          2           DADDY, by Danielle
                                                            Steel. (Delacorte,
                                                            $19.95.)
                                                             Unexpected crises
                                                            wreck the safe
                                                            world an elderly
                                                             man has built for
                                                            himself and his two
                                                            sons.

 2                                    1          4           THE DARK HALF, by
                                                            Stephen King.
                                                            (Viking,
                                                             $21.95.) After a
                                                            writer of horror
                                                            tales kills off his
                                                             pseudonym, the
                                                            deceased goes on a
                                                            murderous
                                                             rampage.

 3                                    4          2           CARIBBEAN, by
                                                            James A. Michener.
                                                            (Random
                                                             House, $22.95.)
                                                            The history of the
                                                            sea islands told in
                                                             fictional form.

 4                                    3          13          CLEAR AND PRESENT
                                                            DANGER, by Tom
                                                             Clancy. (Putnam,
                                                            $21.95.) The
                                                            C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                                                             fights Colombian
                                                            drug lords.

 5                                    5          6           FOUCAULT'S
                                                            PENDULUM, by
                                                            Umberto Eco.
                                                             (Wolff/Harcourt
                                                            Brace Jovanovich,
                                                            $22.95.)
                                                             Ancient documents
                                                            and arcane codes
                                                            produce
                                                             astonishing
                                                            results when thrown
                                                            into a computer.

 6                                    6          6           TALES FROM
                                                            MARGARITAVILLE, by
                                                            Jimmy
                                                             Buffett. (Harcourt
                                                            Brace Jovanovich,
                                                            $16.95.)
                                                             Short stories set
                                                            on a mythical
                                                            Caribbean island.

 7                                    7          10          JIMMY STEWART AND
                                                            HIS POEMS, by Jimmy
                                                             Stewart. (Crown,
                                                            $9.95.) Verses by
                                                            the venerable
                                                             motion picture
                                                            star.

 8                                    8          11          THE PILLARS OF THE
                                                            EARTH, by Ken
                                                            Follett.
                                                             (Morrow, $22.95.)
                                                            The lives of men
                                                            and women
                                                             whose fortunes are
                                                            linked by the
                                                            construction of a
                                                             cathedral in
                                                            12th-century
                                                            England.

 9                                    9          5           SOME CAN WHISTLE,
                                                            by Larry McMurtry.
                                                             (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $19.95.) A
                                                            middle-aged writer
                                                             meets the daughter
                                                            he has never seen.

10 *                                                      1  THE RENEGADES OF
                                                            PERN, by Anne
                                                             McCaffrey. (Del
                                                            Rey/Ballantine,
                                                            $19.95.) Three
                                                             clans struggle to
                                                            survive outside the
                                                            huge stone
                                                             fortresses in the
                                                            fantasy world of
                                                            Pern.

11                                   10          11          OLDEST LIVING
                                                            CONFEDERATE WIDOW
                                                             TELLS ALL, by
                                                            Allan Gurganus.
                                                            (Knopf, $21.95.) A
                                                             99-year-old woman
                                                            reflects on her
                                                            past.

12                                   11          11          CALIFORNIA GOLD,
                                                            by John Jakes.
                                                            (Random
                                                             House, $19.95.) A
                                                            young man from
                                                            Pennsylvania
                                                             makes his fortune
                                                            in 19th-century Los
                                                            Angeles.

13                                   15          6           FOREVER FIFTY: And
                                                            Other Negotiations,
                                                            by
                                                             Judith Viorst.
                                                            (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $12.95.) Poems
                                                             celebrating the
                                                            pains of growing
                                                            older.

14 *                                                     33  THE JOY LUCK CLUB,
                                                            by Amy Tan.
                                                            (Putnam,
                                                             $18.95.) The
                                                            tensions and bonds
                                                            shared by Chinese-
                                                             American women and
                                                            their immigrant
                                                            mothers.

15                                                        1  STRAIGHT, by Dick
                                                            Francis. (Putnam,
                                                            $18.95.)
                                                             After the
                                                            accidental death of
                                                            his brother, a
                                                             steeplechase
                                                            jockey inherits
                                                            property and a
                                                             mysterious enemy.
                                                            $

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Nonfiction

 1                                    2          4           MY TURN, by Nancy
                                                            Reagan with William
                                                            Novak.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $21.95.) The former
                                                            First Lady's
                                                             memoir of her
                                                            White House years.

 2                                    1          56          ALL I REALLY NEED
                                                            TO KNOW I LEARNED
                                                            IN
                                                             KINDERGARTEN, by
                                                            Robert Fulghum.
                                                            (Villard,
                                                             $17.95.)
                                                            Inspirational
                                                            essays about
                                                            everyday
                                                             matters.

 3                                    3          10          IT WAS ON FIRE
                                                            WHEN I LAY DOWN ON
                                                            IT, by
                                                             Robert Fulghum.
                                                            (Villard, $17.95.)
                                                            A new collection
                                                             of inspirational
                                                            essays.

 4                                    6          13          AMONG
                                                            SCHOOLCHILDREN, by
                                                            Tracy Kidder.
                                                             (Todd/Houghton
                                                            Mifflin, $19.95.) A
                                                            year in the life
                                                             of a fifth-grade
                                                            teacher in Holyoke,
                                                            Mass.

 5                                    4          4           EDUCATION OF A
                                                            WANDERING MAN, by
                                                            Louis
                                                             L'Amour. (Bantam,
                                                            $16.95.) The author
                                                            recalls the
                                                             places he visited
                                                            and the books he
                                                            read in his youth.

 6 *                                  5          7           ROSEANNE, by
                                                            Roseanne Barr.
                                                            (Harper & Row,
                                                             $18.95.) The
                                                            autobiography of
                                                            the television
                                                             comedian.

 7                                   10          3           DRIVE, by Larry
                                                            Bird with Bob Ryan.
                                                            (Doubleday,
                                                             $17.95.) The
                                                            autobiography of
                                                            the Boston Celtics
                                                             basketball star.

 8                                                        1  ALL MY BEST
                                                            FRIENDS, by George
                                                            Burns with
                                                             David Fisher.
                                                            (Putnam, $17.95.)
                                                            Reminiscences
                                                             about show
                                                            business
                                                            acquaintances over
                                                            the past 86
                                                             years.

 9                                   11          3           LIAR'S POKER, by
                                                            Michael Lewis.
                                                            (Norton,
                                                             $18.95.) Wall
                                                            Street's tumultuous
                                                            1980's, as
                                                             witnessed and
                                                            participated in by
                                                            a young bond
                                                             trader.

10                                    7          6           CONFESSIONS OF AN
                                                            S.O.B., by Al
                                                            Neuharth.
                                                             (Doubleday,
                                                            $18.95.) The
                                                            experiences of the
                                                             founder of USA
                                                            Today.

11                                    9          84          A BRIEF HISTORY OF
                                                            TIME, by Stephen W.
                                                             Hawking. (Bantam,
                                                            $18.95.) A
                                                            scientist reviews
                                                             efforts to create
                                                            a unified theory of
                                                            the universe.

12                                    8          7           I WANT TO GROW
                                                            HAIR, I WANT TO
                                                            GROW UP,
                                                             I WANT TO GO TO
                                                            BOISE, by Erma
                                                            Bombeck.
                                                             (Harper & Row,
                                                            $16.95.) Fifteen
                                                            stories of children
                                                             surviving cancer.

13                                   14          2           THE LONG GRAY
                                                            LINE, by Rick
                                                            Atkinson.
                                                             (Houghton Mifflin,
                                                            $24.95.) The lives
                                                            of members of
                                                             West Point's class
                                                            of 1966, from cadet
                                                            years
                                                             through Vietnam to
                                                            the present.

14 *                                                      1  PETE ROSE: My
                                                            Story, by Pete Rose
                                                            and Roger
                                                             Kahn. (Macmillan,
                                                            $18.95.) The
                                                            autobiography of
                                                             the former
                                                            National League
                                                            player and manager.

15 *                                 12          2           CALL HER MISS
                                                            ROSS, by J. Randy
                                                            Taraborrelli.
                                                             (Birch Lane,
                                                            $21.95.) The life
                                                            of the singer Diana
                                                             Ross. $

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Advice, How-to and
                                                            Miscellaneous

 1                                    1          4           MARTHA STEWART'S
                                                            CHRISTMAS, by
                                                            Martha
                                                             Stewart. (Potter,
                                                            $18.95.) Advice
                                                            about cooking,
                                                             decorating and
                                                            entertaining during
                                                            the holiday
                                                             season.

 2                                    2          44          WEALTH WITHOUT
                                                            RISK, by Charles J.
                                                            Givens.
                                                             (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $19.95.) A Florida
                                                             entrepreneur's
                                                            advice about how to
                                                            make a
                                                             personal fortune.

 3                                    4          20          THE WAY THINGS
                                                            WORK, by David
                                                            Macaulay.
                                                             (Houghton Mifflin,
                                                            $24.95.)
                                                            Explanations in
                                                             pictures and text.

 4                                    3          23          THE T-FACTOR DIET,
                                                            by Martin Katahn.
                                                             (Norton, $18.95.)
                                                            A new regimen for
                                                            weight loss.

 5                                                        1  THE WAY TO COOK,
                                                            by Julia Child.
                                                            (Knopf, $50.)
                                                             More than 800
                                                            recipes from ''the
                                                            French chef.''


 These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics, by
Roger Penrose. (Oxford University, $24.95.) Finding both computer theory and
physics as yet incapable of explaining human intelligence, a mathematician
boldly strides toward a new understanding of the brain.

THE PEOPLE: And Uncollected Stories, by Bernard Malamud.

Edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) This intriguing
collection includes 16 stories plus the title piece, a novel that was left
unfinished (and unpolished) when Malamud died but that reaffirms his skills as a
fabulist and mythmaker.

THE AMBITION AND THE POWER, by John M. Barry. (Viking, $22.95.) A chronicle of
the rise and fall of former Speaker of the House Jim Wright draws a portrait of
a man who exercised power daringly but who was brought down by his own
weaknesses.

THE TEMPTING OF AMERICA: The Political Seduction of the Law, by Robert H. Bork.
(Free Press, $22.50.) Judge Bork's powerfully argued book examines what he calls
the ''hysteria'' that greeted his unsuccessful nomination to the Supreme Court.

RICHARD MILHOUS NIXON: The Rise of an American Politician, by Roger Morris.
(Holt, $29.95.) The first of a projected three volumes provides absorbing and
insightful detail on Mr. Nixon's early life and phenomenal rise to Vice
President.

NIXON: Volume Two. The Triumph of a Politician, 1962-1972, by Stephen E.
Ambrose. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) This evenhanded treatment of the middle
years is the second volume of three.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF ANDY WARHOL, by Victor Bockris. (Bantam, $21.95.) Mr.
Bockris's efficient biography is the one to read for knowledge of the famous,
secretive artist himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 26, 1989

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 940 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2    THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon.
            (Warner, $5.95.) Four nuns become pawns in a
            struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque
            separatists.

 2       5  MIDNIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $4.95.)
            Inexplicable deaths and strange horrors take over
            a once-idyllic California town.

 3       9  BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler.
            (Berkley, $5.50.) The many facets of a 28-year
            marriage are revealed during a drive to a funeral.

 4     4    KOKO, by Peter Straub. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.
            Three Vietnam veterans on the trail of a friend
            who may be responsible for a series of murders.

 5     3    MITLA PASS, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $5.95.) A
            writer's struggles with his heritage and two loves
            reach a climax during the 1956 Sinai war.

 6     3    WISHES, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $4.50.) A
            handsome stranger from Maine excites the
            passions of two Colorado sisters.

 7     3    ANYTHING FOR BILLY, by Larry McMurtry.
            (Pocket, $5.50.) The exploits of Billy the Kid.

 8     3    ONE, by Richard Bach. (Dell, $4.95.) A husband
            and wife find themselves in a fantasy world where
            the possibilities of their pasts still exist.

 9     3    DEMON LORD OF KARANDA, by David
            Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.95.) The third
            volume in the ''Malloreon'' fantasy saga.

10 *   3    SINS OF OMISSION, by Fern Michaels.
            (Ballantine, $5.95.) Two World War I veterans
            inadvertently find romance in a French chateau
            and excitement in glittery Hollywood.

11     9    SO WORTHY MY LOVE, by Kathleen E.
            Woodiwiss. (Avon, $10.95.) The abduction of a
            woman leads to romance in Elizabethan England.

12     8    FINAL FLIGHT, by Stephen Coonts. (Dell, $5.95.)
            Colonel Qazi, an ''international terrorist,'' plots to
            steal American nuclear weapons.

13     13   TREVAYNE, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $5.95.)
            A President's aide probes a corrupt ''secret
            government'' within the Government.

14     41   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher.
            (Dell, $4.95.) A woman and a painting tie together
            three generations of an English family.

15     19   THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
            races to the rescue of an American secret agent.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     1    ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED
            IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy,
            $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     9    BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss. (Signet/NAL,
            $5.95.) The family tragedy that came to light after
            the 1984 murder of a Toms River, N.J., woman.

 3     1    THE BLOODING, by Joseph Wambaugh.
            (Bantam, $5.95.) The murder of two girls in an
            English village is solved through genetic clues.

 4    318   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 5     2    GRACIE, by George Burns. (Penguin, $7.95.) The
            life of the comedian Gracie Allen, recalled by her
            widower and show business partner.

 6     79   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
            Siegel. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The
            importance of a patient's mind and emotions.

 7     33   CHAOS, by James Gleick. (Penguin, $8.95.) A
            science that sees order in what appears erratic.

 8 *   26   BITTER BLOOD, by Jerry Bledsoe. (Onyx/NAL,
            $4.95.) Nine murders in three families connected
            by obsessive love and custodial conflicts.

 9     29   SMALL SACRIFICES, by Ann Rule. (Signet/NAL,
            $4.95.) Murder and incest in an Oregon town.

10     9    CHILD STAR, by Shirley Temple Black. (Warner,
            $5.95.) The autobiography of the former actress.

11 *   14   THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by
            Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $6.95.) A self-styled
            curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.

12 *   18   PERFECT VICTIM, by Christine McGuire and
            Carla Norton. (Dell, $4.95.) The capture and
            seven-year enslavement of a woman hitchhiker.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     8    THE PREHISTORY OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary
            Larson. (Andrews & McMeel, $12.95.) The
            cartoonist's sketches and notes from the past 10
            years.

 2     8    THE CALVIN AND HOBBES LAZY SUNDAY
            BOOK, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews & McMeel,
            $9.95.) A new collection of cartoons.

 3     70   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie.
            (Hazelden/Harper & Row, $8.95.) Solving your
            own problems while caring for other people's
            afflictions.

 4     4    THE OLD FARMER'S ALMANAC 1990. (Yankee
            Publishing, $2.95.) The 198th annual edition.

 5     12   THE NIGHT OF THE MARY KAY
            COMMANDOS, by Berke Breathed. (Little,
            Brown, $7.95.) Selections from the comic strip
            ''Bloom County.''


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Veteran Is Helping Others to Get Benefits

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 14, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


WHETHER he is helping them find jobs or cutting through red tape to expedite
benefits long overdue, Bill Howard says that New Jersey veterans today are in
need of extraordinary help.

In good health and bad and often on his own time, he has been there just doing
his job, he says. His clients and superiors say he goes above and beyond the
call of duty.

As deputy director of Mercer County's Jobs Partnership Training Program, he
helps people establish new careers through education and specialized training.
Many, Mr. Howard said, are veterans with skills unmarketable in the private
sector.

''I just kind of steer them in the right direction and provide a sympathetic
ear,'' said Mr. Howard, 62 years old, of Hightstown, an Army Signal Corps
veteran of 24 years who saw service in World War II, Korea and Vietnam.

Michele Kent, the county's director of human services, said Mr. Howard has
helped many of the area's 37,000 veterans.

'A Terrific Guy'

''Bill's unique and a terrific guy because not only does he develop a one-to-one
relationship with people that he serves, but he also knows how to ease their
anger and frustration because he's been there himself,'' Ms. Kent said. ''He
also comes up with creative ways to get things done, and getting things done is
what his job is about.''

Mr. Howard said: ''If a guy was hurt in the service, a lot of times upon his
discharge he wouldn't claim any injury because it would involve an examination
and hospital stay. And many of these guys just wanted to get back home to their
wives and families.''

Many veterans in long-time careers find that service-related injuries are
returning to haunt them. ''A lot of vets, their eyes go, their hearing goes and
so does their job security,'' he said. For some, limitations mean finding new
careers. Some veterans seeking benefits must produce exhausting documentation.
And that, Mr. Howard said, is where his detective work comes in.  ''One day I
get a call from a Navy veteran of World War II who's in trouble,'' he recalled.
''This guy couldn't get up out of the bed one morning because of his back.''

A Fall From a Ship

He said the veteran had fallen from his ship in 1944 onto a landing barge and
had fractured his spine. Since no X-ray machines were available on board ship, a
medical officer at the time had assigned the man two weeks of bed rest, and when
his pain had ceased he was given light duty.

Upon his discharge at war's end, he had not made a formal disability claim,
''because he wasn't having any problems,'' Mr. Howard said. ''But 40 years
later, he has problems.'' The veteran, seeking out his own family physician, was
advised to make a service-connected disability claim with the Veterans
Administration in Newark, but was turned down by that Federal agency because of
a lack of evidence dating back to his enlistment.

''Then he came to me, and after I made a note of what ship he served on and what
campaigns he'd been in, I made a few phone calls,'' Mr. Howard said. Getting in
touch with the Department of Naval Archives in Washington, Mr. Howard was able
to trace the reported injury through the ship's daily logbook.

''There it was,'' he said, ''in black and white - the guy's name, a report filed
by the medical officer detailing the injury and what treatment was prescribed.
We had copies of that made, resubmitted the paperwork to the V.A. and the fellow
wound up getting an 80 percent disability rating and monthly payments to help
him out.''

A Prisoner of War

For Jerome Ennis, 68, of Titusville, Mr. Howard's help was invaluable. A former
Army Air Corps fighter pilot, Mr. Ennis was shot down on his 38th mission after
strafing a munitions train in occupied Europe and spent nearly three years in a
German prisoner of war camp north of Berlin.

''The war ended, I was repatriated and I put the war behind me,'' said Mr.
Ennis, a spokesman for the United Cerebral Palsy chapter of Mercer County. ''I
never bothered to look into what benefits I was eligible for, and then I decided
that I should.''

With Mr. Howard's help, he obtained a copy of his military transcript and
applied for health benefits - particularly those applying to former prisoners of
war - which had recently been increased after the Iran hostage crisis forced a
re-examination of outdated benefit packages.

In addition, through Mr. Howard's urging, Mr. Ennis became one of some 800 New
Jersey veterans presented with the American Prisoner of War Medal. The award,
authorized by Congress in 1986, seeks to honor former prisoners of war dating to
World War I.

Aid for a Burial

''Bill is one of those county guys that makes a difference, because he thinks
with his heart as well as his head,'' Mr. Ennis said.

Last year Mr. Howard, a native of Emmett, Ohio, received a call from a friend
telling him that a destitute man who had died might have been a veteran. Funeral
arrangements had already been made, ''and the guy was going to be interred in a
local potter's field,'' Mr. Howard said.

''But by checking his name against records,'' he said, ''we were able to
establish that he was a vet and entitled to a more fitting burial.''

The interment was held up until official records were formalized, and the man
was buried at the Veterans Cemetery in Indiantown Gap, Pa. ''The guy had served
his country and he was entitled to something more than an anonymous piece of
earth,'' Mr. Howard said.

Even though he enjoys his work, stress has taken its toll. In January, Mr.
Howard underwent complicated cardiac bypass surgery, but he is now back at work.

''I wouldn't have it any other way because a lot of people are still depending
on me,'' he said.

Mr. Howard earned a high school general equivalency diploma and an associate's
degree in science while in the Army. He and his wife, Helen, have been married
for 33 years and are the parents of three children: Stephen, 30, Anne, 23, and
John, 18.

Mr. Howard has also tried to reach out to the homeless - he believes that nearly
40 percent of the state's homeless are veterans - to aid in housing and
employment.

''When a vet's down on his luck,'' Mr. Howard said, ''we just want him to know
that there is help out there for those who want to help themselves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bill Howard, chairman of Mercer County's Jobs Partnership
Training Program (NYT/Robert J. Salgado)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRAFTS;
Diversity of Works In Clay and Glass

BYLINE: By BETTY FREUDENHEIM

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 29, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: NEWARK


ADVICE to museumgoers: When you visit the exciting new skylighted atriums and
expanded gallery space of the renovated Newark Museum, do not miss the two
outstanding craft exhibitions.

One show, ''The New Jersey Arts Annual: Clay and Glass,'' fulfills the adage
that less is more. There are only 49 works by 45 New Jersey crafts people, but
they encompass broadly varied styles. Approaches are as diverse as conservative
and audacious. Traditional vessels, ceramic tiles and stained glass are
juxtaposed with sculptural works that just happen to be made of clay or glass.

''Our goal was to show all aspects of clay and glass, and to judge each piece
for its own esthetic, visual and emotional impact, regardless how it may or may
not fit into some specific tradition,'' said Ulysses G. Dietz, curator of
decorative arts at the museum and one of the three jurors who selected the
works.

Another juror, Mark Del Vecchio, the director of the Garth Clark Gallery in New
York City, said: ''The diversity was impressive. There is much that pertains to
New Jersey people and their surroundings.''

The third juror was Dr. Jerry Raphael, board member of the Creative Glass Center
of America.

But the overall effect is not a jumble of disparate styles and visions. Cohesion
is attained through harmonious melding of colors and forms. Fortunately,
strident colors and bizarre shapes that typify much of the current work being
done nationally in these media are absent here.

The teapot by Terry Plasket of Elmer could grace a country kitchen. There is an
honest solidity to its sturdy handle, functional spout and hexagonal base. But
''New Dreams,'' a four-inch porcelain vessel by Shellie Jacobson of Skillman,
has an eggshell-thin fragility. Two projections form handles, but it is far too
delicate to contain more than the dreams of her title.

The same exhibit case holds ''Desert Memories,'' a shallow, slightly askew
vessel by Bob Duca of Estell Manor. Its off-white surface bubbles like lava in a
volcanic eruption; some areas are actually porous. Two bold slits provide a
linear counterbalance.

There is a forthrightness to the black porcelain vase by Pamela Skewes-Cox of
Chatham. The form is classical, encircled with evenly spaced horizontal stripes
in tones of pink, yellow, blue and turquoise. The design could fit right into
the Art Pottery movement of the 1920's. Ina Chapler of Englewood Cliffs also
recreates a classic: the broad-shouldered country jugs that were once used to
store vinegar, cider and other liquids in the last century. But hers, all thrown
on a potter's wheel, could never be functional; they are barely one inch tall.

The eight shapes and glazes differ slightly, but each is topped with a minuscule
cork. For this ''Small-Ware Assemblage-Vertical,'' the jugs are arranged, one
above another, on the shelves of a Lucite container.

The hand-built jar of Peg Feudi also has functional antecedents, a vase with a
narrow neck. But across the top, this Mahwah potter has added an arched cord of
fetishes - beads, copper tubes, bells - that imbue it with the evocative power
of a shaman's sacred container.

In contrast, an open-mouthed fantasy fish by Elizabeth Olivella of Englewood
would look right at home, spouting water, in one of Bernini's Roman fountains.
Its exaggerated fish scales, ornamental fins and grandiose swirl of a tail are
worked in the true Baroque spirit.

''Of Light and of Time and Its Parts'' is the title that a Princeton potter,
Susan Sayre Batton, gave her four upright, ocher-toned disks. Their thickness
replicates the dimensions of millstones, but the would-be grinding surfaces are
etched with spirals, a row of dots or symbols resembling Egyptian hieroglyphics.
Two works possess a calculated primitivism. ''Hunched,'' by Marguerite Brennan,
a Fair Lawn ceramist, suggests a prehistoric beast, crouched and waiting. There
are no details; the form is massive and strong. The furnace-formed glass
''Primal Figure'' by Christine J. Barney of Hoboken has the same restraint.
There is an implication of a head and neck that flow into massive legs. It
challenges gravity, poised like a dancer on two points: the nonexistent feet.
Both works achieve a monumentality despite their small scale.

Leonard Dinardo was awarded the Newark Museum's Purchase Award for his
blown-glass bowl entitled ''Ain't No Time to Wonder Why.'' This Parsippany
artist was trained in the Swedish decorating technique at Orrefors. The images
that encircle its surface include a jazz musician and black soldiers fighting in
Vietnam, ''a poignant reflection on the artist's feelings as a native-born
Newarker and a Vietnam veteran,'' Mr. Dietz said. The other craft show is
nearby, in the museum's Contemporary Crafts Gallery, a newly created space that,
along with the renovated galleries, opened to the public last week.

This show focuses on the works of Bennett Bean of Blairstown, a painter,
ceramist and sculptor. His glowing bowls, lined with gold leaf, impart a lyrical
atmosphere to the intimate space. Vibrant rectangles, like color photos cut from
a seed catalogue, seem to float across the outer surfaces. Here is mystery and
joy. The technique is personal: his wood-fired earthenware vessel is first
glazed, then painted and gilded. ''Thus his vessels become both paintings and
pots,'' Mr. Dietz said.  The artist has created granite and metal stands for
some of his pots. These stand tall and dolmen-like in their austerity,
complementing the ceramics with their montages of painterly geometry.

Both exhibitions run through Dec. 31. The museum, at 49 Washington Street, is
open Tuesday through Sunday from noon to 5 P.M. It will closed Thanksgiving and
Christmas Day. There is no admission charge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of work by Elizabeth Olivella; work by Peg Feudi; work by Ina
Chapler

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT Q & A: LIEUT. COL. DAVID R. WALLACE;
'They're Sold on Patriotism'

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 3, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1569 words


DAVID R. WALLACE of New Haven, a lieutenant colonel in the Army and a Vietnam
combat pilot decorated seven times for heroism, has had a new challenge for the
past year, as the Army's chief recruiter in Connecticut.

Lieut. Col. Wallace has just reached the halfway mark in his two-year assignment
as the Recruiting Battalion Commander for Connecticut and western Massachusetts,
and in that time the number of recruits increased to 1,800 from 1,260. The
percentage of high school graduates at the top of their class who join the Army
also increased, the colonel said. And his region is now 26th in recruitment out
of 55 regions nationally, up from last place a year ago.

In an interview at his office in New Haven, Lieut. Col. Wallace talked about the
problems of recruiting in Connecticut. Here are some excerpts from the
conversation:

Q. Has the image of the armed forces changed?

A. Absolutely. Our low point was probably during the latter parts, or just
after, the war in Vietnam. We came back to an Army that was demoralized. No one
wanted to come into it. From that low point, we started building, step by step,
first at the officer corps, and then to our senior noncommissioned officers, and
finally down to our enlisted personnel.

We set very high standards, particularly starting about 1980, which was our
turning point. In 1980, about 54 percent of our soldiers were in the lower
mental categories. By lower mental categories, I mean someone who on a test
where the top score is 100 scores 27 or below. We now have that down to about 4
percent, sometimes 7 percent.

The other thing is, only about half the kids in the early 1980's had a high
school diploma. Today, 91, 92, 93 percent of our kids have a diploma. We are
getting the winners in our society. A young man or woman who drops out of high
school, even in school there is competition, and that's one more gate they
didn't go through. We have more enlisted soldiers today with four years of
college, or a degree, than we have enlisted soldiers without a high school
diploma.

Q. How has your first year gone?

A. For the first time in the battalion's 14 years, in 1989 we not only met our
mission, but we met our mission in every category all across the boards. We were
one of about only 10 battalions in the country to do that. It was a good
feeling. There are 55 battalions, and I can tell you that the entire Army
Recruiting Command met its goal in fiscal year 1989. Obviously, some are doing
better than others.

Since January, for what we call the quality market, we've been No. 1 in the
country. We are graded on the number of quality recruits we put into the
service, as opposed to volume. We could open up our doors today, and in two
days' time fill every vacancy we have. But for either physical or moral or
mental reasons we just can't use them.

Q. Why has Connecticut been such a tough recruiting environment traditionally?

A. I think it stems from two things. Patriotism here is just as good as where I
come from in Arkansas. But there's low unemployment. When only 2.9 percent of
the population is unemployed, you don't have that hunger to get out. So the
recruiting force has to be more, I hesitate to use the word aggressive, but we
have to get out and let people see what we have to offer. The other thing is
salaries here are pretty good. We'll be more of a golden handcuff.

Q. Why have you been successful as a recruiter?

A. I have serving with me the best noncommissioned officers in the country, and
I have delegated to them the responsibility and authority to do their job. I'm
one guy, and I'm from Arkansas and I'm not real smart, but I've got a bunch of
smart guys working for me. And if you sit around and listen to those 200 guys
come up with good ideas, and get a bunch of them together once in a while and
let those good ideas bubble up, and then implement those - that's what we've
been doing, and that's what's been working.

There's a stereotype of one guy giving out all the orders and maybe not knowing
what's going on, but I've never been in that environment. You know the book
''The One-Minute Manager?'' That's the kind of guy I've worked for all my life.

Q. What types of goals do you have to meet as a recruiter?

A. We have about five or six different categories. One is a total number. The
bulk of them will score in the upper half on the mental tests. Roughly 50 to 60
percent of my overall mission will be males in the upper mental categories.
Probably 10 to 15 percent of my mission will be the upper mental categories of
females. We get more female mission here than some of the other battalions
because we seem to do real well here.

The rest of the mission falls into the mental categories that are kind of middle
of the road. We have no lower mental category mission. In fact, the entire
country was just cut off last month. I could not put a non-high school graduate
in.

Q. As a recruiter, what would you think about mandatory military service for all
teen-agers, as is required in some countries?

A. We have, for most of the history of our country, had a volunteer Army. The
draft we always talk about is really, when you look at a long period of time,
only been in place for a very short period of time. I personally think we're
better off having people volunteer to serve their country. We're a free society,
and we're probably freer than any society that's been around this old world for
a long time. I don't think we should do anything to infringe on that freedom.

Q. Do you expect much of an impact after the recent announcements of defense
cutbacks in the Soviet Union because the threat of war with the United States is
at a 45-year low?

A. It's too soon to tell. But I will say, I think it's great. The guys who want
peace the worst are the soldiers who went to combat. I don't ever want to go to
war again. One was enough for a lifetime. I don't ever want my son or my
daughter to go to war. I think it's great the way it's going, and I hope it
keeps going.

Q. Do recruits today favor active duty over the reserves?

A. Active is most favored because of the packages we offer, but a strong second
is the reserve program. A lot of women in their first year of college are
interested in medical training, so they spend one summer going through basic
training, and then they have a part-time job. In October, we set a record for
the number of reserves put in in a single month out of this office.

Q. Do you get a lot of young people who think of the service as the start of a
career?

A. I don't think you identify who a career soldier is until his or her third or
fourth year. When I came in I wasn't sure I was going to be a career soldier.
What we're seeing mostly are young men and young women who are looking for ways
to improve their life. The typical high school graduate goes into a service
industry, such as fast food. After a year or two years, they take a look at that
and wonder where they're headed.

We can offer a young man or woman $25,200 for college, or we can repay their
student loans. We can give them up to an $8,000 bonus. We're one of the few
services that can guarantee you in writing a specific job. I can promise Mike
Jones that he will be a military policeman.

The other person we see, interestingly enough, are people who are affluent.
These people look at the $25,000 we offer for college, and they really don't
need it. We get more Airborne Rangers out of that group of kids than anywhere
else in the country. They're sold on patriotism, and the fact that they will
have a challenge to meet for three years.

Q. High school enrollments have been dropping since the mid-1970s, and are
expected to drop for the next few years as well. What does that mean to
recruiters?

A. We have been fighting the declining market now for the last five years, and
we're winning it. We're winning it not because we're superstars, but because
we've got packages we can offer people that are attractive. I think the
declining market problem has just about bottomed out.

Q. What recruiting techniques work best in an affluent, low-unemployment area
like Connecticut?

A. Getting out and talking to people. You go everywhere you can. There are three
types of prospecting we do; telecommunications, get on the phone and call them;
go out and meet them face to face, out in the malls and the schools, and the
third kind is referrals. Now referrals are the best kind. If you're a good
recruiter and you have a satisfied customer, he'll bring more people to you.

Q. Has your budget for recruiting been increasing to help you meet the special
challenges of recruiting during prosperity?

A. It's gone down. What it costs me today to put a young man in the service is
about $2,200. Twelve years ago, it cost $1,900, so if you play inflation in,
we're working with a lot less. But the difference is 12 years ago, who wanted to
go in. Now, our image has turned around.

Q. What are the most popular choices of careers for teen-agers signing up these
days?

A. The career choices don't center around jobs so much, such as M.P.s or
infantrymen, as they do around vocational training. You see a lot of young
people interested in medical training, in mechanics, aviation, truck
maintenance, which directly leads to a career after two or three years in the
service. Communications, and the high technology areas are popular, and language
training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David R. Wallace

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Again They Drink From the Cup Of Suspicion

BYLINE: By ARTHUR MILLER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2006 words


''The Crucible,'' written in 1953 by Arthur Miller, is produced constantly all
over the world. On Thursday the play, which links the Salem witch trials of the
1690's to McCarthyism in the 1950's, will open at the Long Wharf Theater in New
Haven, where Arvin Brown will direct a cast that includes John Braden, Charles
Cioffi, Frank Converse and Virginia Downing. In March the Roundabout Theater in
New York will also stage a production, directed by Gerald Freedman. In this
essay the playwright discusses the origin and nature of his work.

I did not write ''The Crucible'' simply to propagandize against McCarthyism,
although if justification were needed that would have been enough. There was
something else involved. I'll try to explain.

A writer friend was recently telling me about a Moscow theater producer who is
interested in putting on a play about the Vietnam War. Why Vietnam? It turns out
that what he would really like to illuminate is the Russian defeat in
Afghanistan, but with feelings about Afghanistan still running so high he felt
he needed a metaphor that would go to the dilemmas underlying such a war rather
than attempting an outright confrontation with the thickets of feeling
surrounding Afghanistan itself.

That approach reminded me of my decision to write about the 1692 Salem witch
trials rather than trying to take on Joseph McCarthy and his cohorts directly.
In the early 50's McCarthyism, so-called, began as a conservative Republican
cavalry charge that in the name of anti-Communism helped scatter the
left-liberal coalitions of Democrats and union people who had held together the
only recently faded New Deal. But this was no ordinary political campaign. This
time the enemy was not merely ''The Democrat Party,'' as McCarthy sneeringly
renamed it, but the hidden foreign plot which, naively but often knowingly, it
shielded. Thus a certain sublime gloss - national security - was varnished over
a very traditional grab for domestic political power.

With amazing speed McCarthy was convincing a lot of not unintelligent people
that the incredible was really true, and that, say, General of the Army George
Catlett Marshal was a Communist sympathizer, or that Senator Millard E. Tydings
of Maryland was a buddy of Earl Browder, head of the American Communist Party.
(A photo of both of them standing happily together would only much later be
proved to have been a fake manufactured by Roy Cohn, McCarthy's right-hand
bandido.) For a time it began to seem that Senator Joe was heading straight for
the White House, the more so when the sheer incredibility of his claims appeared
to be part proof that they were real; if the Communists were indeed hidden
everywhere, it followed that they would certainly be found where common sense
indicated they could not conceivably be.

The case being circular, it was finally all but unarguable. Worse yet, you could
not rely on the too-trusting police, the naively legalistic courts or even the
slow-moving F.B.I. to root out the conspiracy. As for the press, it was all but
sold to Moscow, secretly, of course. Who then was absolutely reliable? McCarthy,
naturally, and those who had his blessing.

This was colorful and fascinating stuff for the stage, but a play takes a year
to write and months to see through production, and I could not imagine spending
so much time on what seemed to me so obvious a tale. But as the anti-Communist
crusade settled in, and showed signs of becoming the permanent derangement of
the American psyche, a kind of mystery began to emerge from its melodramas and
comedies. We were all behaving differently than we used to; we had drunk from
the cup of suspicion of one another; people inevitably were afraid of too close
an association with someone who might one day fall afoul of some committee. Even
certain words vibrated perilously, words like organize, social, militant,
movement, capitalism - it didn't do to be on too familiar terms with such
language. We had entered a mysterious pall from which there seemed no exit.

Returning around that time to my alma mater, the University of Michigan, to do a
story for Holiday magazine, I discovered that students were avoiding living in
the co-op rooming houses because the very idea of a nonprofit organization was
suspiciously pro-left. The F.B.I. was paying students at Michigan to report
secretly on teachers' political remarks, and teachers to report on students.

Why was there so little real opposition to this madness? Of course there was the
fear of reprisals, of losing jobs or perhaps only bad publicity, but there was
also guilt, and this seemed to me the main crippler, the internalized cop.

No doubt instinctually, McCarthy and Roy Cohn were handing around full plates of
guilt which were promptly licked clean by people who in one way or another had
brushed the sleeve of the Communist movement in the 30's - some by joining the
party or supporting one of its front organizations, a left-wing union or
professional guild, or in whatever manner had at some point in their lives
turned to the left. Of course such people were used to being guilty - why else
would they have bothered to worry about the poor, the blacks, the lynch victims,
the Spanish Republicans and so on when real Americans were only remotely aware
of such inequities around them?

It was a charm, a kind of spell. McCarthy could call the Roosevelt New Deal ''20
years of treason'' with hardly a rejoinder from the vast multitude of Americans
for whom New Deal measures, hardly more than a decade before, had meant the
difference between living on the street or in their own homes, between hunger
and real starvation. It was a sort of benighted miracle that just about anything
that flew out of his mouth, no matter how outrageously and obviously idiotic,
could be made to land in an audience and stir people's terrors of being taken
over by Communists, their very religion in danger.

I had known the Salem story since college, over a decade earlier, but what kept
assaulting my brain now was not the hunt for witches itself; it was the
paralysis that had led to more than 20 public hangings of very respectable
farmers by their neighbors. There was something ''wonderful'' in this spectacle,
a kind of perverse, malign poetry that had simply swamped the imaginations of
these people. I thought I saw something like it around me in the early 50's.

The truth is that the more I worked at this dilemma the less it had to do with
Communists and McCarthy and the more it concerned something very fundamental in
the human animal: the fear of the unknown, and particularly the dread of social
isolation.

Political movements are always trying to position themselves as shields against
the unknown - vote for me and you're safe. The difference during witch hunts is
that you are being made safe from a malign, debauched, evil, irreligious,
wife-swapping, deceitful, immoral, stinking conspiracy stemming from the very
bowels of hell. In Wisconsin in the early 50's, a reporter went door to door
asking residents if they agreed with certain propositions, 10 in number, and
discovered that very few people did, and that most thought the first 10
amendments to the United States Constitution, unnamed of course in the inquiry,
were Communistic. To propose that we should be free to express any idea at all
was frightening to a lot of people.

The Colonial government in the 1690's saw itself as protecting Christianity
(while unknowingly propagating a thrilling counter-religion of Satan worship) by
seizing on the ravings of a klatch of repressed pubescent girls who, fearing
punishment for their implicitly sexual revolt, began convincing themselves that
they had been perverted by Satan. There were economic and social pressures at
work, but the nub of it all as it appeared to the locals at the moment was that
the arch-fiend had been sneaked into the spotless town by an alien who, even
better, was black, the Barbadian slave of the Lord's very own man, the church
minister himself. Authority quickly converted the poor girls back to the true
religion and made them celebrities for their agonizing bravery in pointing out
likely adherents of the Devil.

But were there not really Communists, whereas there never were any witches? Of
course. And there are also paranoids who are really being followed. There was a
very real military face-off in the 50's between America and the Soviet Union,
and we had only recently ''lost'' China, but were these grounds for blacklisting
actors and writers in Hollywood, or destroying professionals in many other
fields, and for turning the country into a whispering gallery? What research
showed me, and what I hoped the play would show the country and the world, was
the continuity through time of human delusion, and the only safeguard, fragile
though it may be, against it - namely, the law and the courageous few whose
sacrifice illuminates delusion.

In the 35 years since the play was written it has become my most produced work
by far. I doubt a week has gone by when it has not been on some stage somewhere
in the world. It seems to be produced, especially in Latin America, when a
dictatorship is in the offing, or when one has just been overthrown.

There is so often a telltale social sidelight connected to its production. Years
ago in South Africa, black Tituba had to be played by a white woman in
blackface, but the director, Barney Simon, terrified though he was of attack,
wanted the white audience to contemplate the story. Last year I happened to meet
Nien Cheng, the 70-year-old author of ''Life and Death in Shanghai,'' an account
of her six-year imprisonment during the Cultural Revolution. Tears formed in her
eyes when she shook my hand, tears as it surprisingly turned out, of gratitude.

Released from prison, she had spent months recuperating when a director friend,
Huang Tsolin, invited her to see his production of ''The Crucible'' in a
Shanghai theater. She said she was astounded: ''I could not believe the play was
not written by a Chinese because the questions of the court were exactly the
same ones the Cultural Revolutionaries had put to me!''

I saw the play in Tbilisi, Soviet Georgia, where John Proctor wore 17th-century
Turkish pantaloons and a gorgeous wide moustache and was chased through a forest
by a crowd waving scimitars. At Olivier's fabulous 1965 National Theater
production, with Colin Blakely and Joyce Redman, I overheard a young woman in
front of me whispering to her escort, ''Didn't this have something to do with
that American Senator -what was his name?'' I have to admit that it felt
marvellous that McCarthy was what's-his-name while ''The Crucible'' was ''The
Crucible'' still.

Simone Signoret and Yves Montand did a stirring French film, a version of their
Paris stage performance, with a screenplay by Jean-Paul Sartre in which the New
England farmers were, inexplicably, Roman Catholic. The Long Wharf Theater in
New Haven is about to open it under Arvin Brown's direction - it was Long
Wharf's first production 25 years ago - and the Roundabout Theater will be doing
it later this season. An HBO film of it is to be made this winter for both
television and theatrical distributon. In Glasgow recently, two productions were
running at the same time, one by a young Soviet company. The Schiller Theater in
Berlin will have it on in a few months.

I have wondered if one of the reasons the play continues like this is its
symbolic unleashing of the specter of order's fragility. When certainties
evaporate with each dawn, the unknowable is always around the corner. We know
how much depends on mere trust and good faith and a certain respect for the
human person, and how easily breached these are. And we know as well how close
to the edge we live and how weak we really are and how quickly swept by fear the
mass of us can become when our panic button is pushed. It is also, I suppose,
that the play reaffirms the ultimate power of courage and clarity of mind whose
ultimate fruit is liberty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In 1953 Arthur Miller's ''Crucible'' opened on Broadway at the Martin
Beck with, front, Jennie Egan and Arthur Kennedy and, in back from left, George
Mitchell, Cloris Leachman, Madeleine Sherwood, Barbara Stanton, Walter Hampden
and Fred Stewart (Alfredo Valente) (pg. 5); Pippa Pearthree and Frank Converse
in the Long Wharf revival of ''The Crucible'' (T. Charles Erickson)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-14

Prague's caretaker prime minister, Ladislav Adamec, met for the first time with
opposition leaders and then joined Alexander Dubeck at another rally of 500,000
people demanding democratic changes.    Page A1



News analysis: Most Czechoslovaks are dissatisified with the pace of change,
even as the Communist Party's power wavers. But the question is: who will lead?
    A1



If the Party has its back to the wall, it's a wall with new posters on it    A10


Pride of the new leader's hometown    A11



Hungary's first free vote since 1947 began as Hungarians went to the polls for a
referendum on the sequence of elections for a President and Parliament. Contrary
to pessimistic predictions, they did so in enough numbers to make the referendum
valid.    A1



Marxism will be revived in Moscow under the leadership of the Communist Party,
said a manifesto published by President Mikhail Gorbachev. The document was
apparently intended to reassure the party faithful.    A12



Moscow urged to further reduce conventional arms    A14


East German youth organization severs ties to Communists    A12



The West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, has watched in frustration as the
limelight of history passes him by.    A12



India's ruling party lost its majority in Parliament, according to early results
in the national election. Both Prime Minister Gandhi's Congress Party and the
opposition National Front are claiming the right to form a coalition government.

    A1



India looks to its president after an indecisive election    A8



San Salvador suspended relations with Nicaragua and accused the Sandinista
Government of instigating the recent rebel offensive. An American peace
campaigner was arrested and charged by Salvadoran police with hoarding a huge
cache of weapons.    A3



Abuses by the Salvadoran Army, including torture and murder, arebeing distorted
by the White House in an effort to cover up the involvement of the Salvadoran
Government, a human rights organization says.    A3



Elections were held in Uruguay, one of Latin America's most deeply rooted
democracies. A moderate lawyer, Luis Alberto Lacalle, was strongly favored to
win the presidency over 11 other candidates.    A6



Honduras votes for a leader to tread between two wars.    A6



The new Lebanese President, Elias Hrawi, threatened to use force against Gen.
Michel Aoun. General Aoun, who has refused to recognize Mr. Hrawi's presidency,
said he would order troops against Mr. Hrawi's supporters.  A14



Equipment to make computer chips may be acquired by a Japanese company trying to
buy Perkin-Elmer Corp.'s semiconductor business. The sale could leave the United
States almost entirely dependent on Japanese tools needed to produce chips.
A1



An American takes the sumo wrestling title, shaking Japan.    A4


British to return boat people to Vietnam despite U.S. plea    A14



Global expansion of small companies reflects an evolution unthinkable a decade
ago. Small American businesses must compete internationally to be successful,
experts say.    D1



NATIONAL    A15-16, B8-10

The nation's first liver transplant from a living donor will be performed today
by surgeons at the University of Chicago. If successful, the procedure could
usher in a new era in transplantation.    A1



The idea of legalizing drugs has gained surprising force in recent months, even
though the Bush Administration, Congress and the majority of American people
reject it.    A15



A legal right to die and let die? A Missouri couple awaits the Supreme Court's
decision on whether they can discontinue life-supporting medical treatement for
their 31-year-old daughter, who lies in a coma with no hope of recovery.    B9



Proposed troop and weapon cuts by the Pentagon may be motivated as much by
budgetary constraints as consideration of strategic needs dictated by the
political upheaval in Europe, Congressional officials say.    A16



Washington at Work: For Soviet Ambassador, these are the best of times    B8



Signs of drought in the Plains are causing concern among growers of winter
wheat, the principal American bread grain. Farmers in the region face their
second straight disastrous harvest.    A15



The lower Mississippi River delta, gripped by some of the nation's worst
poverty, is the focus of a Congressional commission. Nearly a year old, the
commission is the first to address the problems of the delta on a regional
scale.    B10



Hours before scheduled return, shuttle landing is delayed a day    B9


Jews leaving Miami, and a piece of history    A15



REGIONAL    B1-7

Federal money for welfare hotels for homeless people is being channeled into
creating permanent low-cost housing by state and county officials in New York
City's suburbs.    A1



Train and subway fare increases will be discussed at three public hearings this
week, and a taxi fare increase goes to a final vote.    B1



No gunshot wounds - just another relatively quiet night for one New York City
ambulance crew, feeding more victims into the city's crowded hospitals.    B1



New Jersey schools' ''report cards'' have prompted less dialogue and more
controversy than state educational officials intended.    B1



Writing poetry lifts spirits of children in hospital school    B3


Nazi refugee to return to Germany for Ph.D. final    B2



Decent baby sitters are a commodity in ever-shrinking supply in the New York
metropolitan region. Competition for sitters has become ''dog eat dog,'' says
one mother.    B1



Panel warns of failings in efforts to halt AIDS    B3



NEEDIEST CASES    B4


Out of sight does not mean out of mind for those who give to Neediest Cases

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

British Will Return Exiles to Vietnam Despite U.S. Plea

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 26


Despite strong objections by President Bush, British Government officials said
today that they planned to go ahead with the forced repatriation of Vietnamese
boat people from Hong Kong, probably starting within the next few months.

Mr. Bush and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain discussed the issue
when they met on Friday at Camp David, Md., but reached no agreement. While Hong
Kong will give temporary asylum to ''genuine refugees,'' thousands of ''illegal
immigrants'' will have to be sent back, Mrs. Thatcher said.

''Hong Kong simply cannot go on taking them, and they will have to be
repatriated as are other illegal immigrants,'' Mrs. Thatcher said at a news
conference here on Friday. About 200 have returned voluntarily, and Mrs.
Thatcher said she understood that ''they have been well treated.''

About 57,000 Vietnamese boat people are being held in camps in Hong Kong, a
British colony that is to be handed over to China in 1997. Thirty thousand have
arrived since January. One man was killed and 14 people were injured in rioting
at one camp in September. There have been reports of outbreaks of cholera and
malaria in other camps.

'We Have No Alternatives'

A British diplomat said today that Britain did not like the idea of returning
boat people to Vietnam against their will. But he said, ''Unless everybody
volunteers, which is inconceivable, we will have to do the unpalatable thing of
returning them because we have no alternatives.''

A Bush Administration official said today that the United States was
''unalterably opposed to forced repatriation to Vietnam unless and until
dramatic improvements occur in that country's economic, political and social
life.''

British diplomats would not discuss the timing of the forced repatriation
program. Michael Hanson, the colony's refugee coordinator, said last month that
he hoped the program would be ''in place by the end of this year.'' Other
British officials say the program should begin by February, when the new
''sailing season'' starts for Vietnamese boat people.

At the height of that period this year, Hong Kong was receiving 1,000 Vietnamese
a day, British diplomats said. The repatriation program is designed, in part, to
deter such an influx, American officials said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Outracing Death Aboard Ambulance 18-Y

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words


Numbed by a long night of drinking, Carlos Williams seemed hardly fazed early
Saturday by the knife slash opening up the left side of his face.

''You need some stitches, man, you need serious stitches,'' Charley
Hintermeister, a paramedic from the city's Emergency Medical Service was telling
him as he swiftly, carefully wrapped his head in bandages. ''You'll need plastic
surgery. Now, have you got any other medical problems?''

''Naw, I'm like a little baby,'' Mr. Williams mumbled.

''Carlos, who did this?'' asked one of the two fresh-faced young policemen in
the blood-spattered bedroom at 445 West 153d Street.

''Ramon,'' he said. ''Ramon from Santo Domingo.''

Another weekend night in Harlem for Charley Hintermeister, his partner, Ray
Harvey, and the rest of ambulance crews from the E.M.S., another night of
feeding more victims into the city's already choking hospitals. It was, all
told, a relatively quiet night, except for one traffic fatality in which the
victim was beyond help by the time the crew reached him - no gunshot wounds or
other major injuries where the paramedics could make the difference between life
and death. This cutting was just routine.

'He Has an Attitude Problem'

''Carlos, when was the last time you had a tetanus shot?'' Mr. Hintermeister
asked.

''Three weeks ago,'' said his girlfriend, Rosalyn Hamilton, to general
amazement.

''He beat me up, so my sons came over and beat him,'' she confided later.
''Carlos, he has an attitude problem.''

The initial shock was wearing off, and Mr. Williams was sagging by the time he
and Miss Hamilton were on ''the bus'' - Ambulance 18-Y - for the short drive to
Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.

''He's going to get the same doctor,'' the woman said with a rueful smile. ''And
he'll say, 'What are you doing back here?' ''

The Emergency Medical Service mounts 470 ambulance tours of duty a day on three
eight-hour shifts from 18 stations around the city. Five years ago the
ambulances made about 450,000 runs a year; this year the number is nearly
900,000, and next year it is expected to pass a million. The calls come in at
the rate of 2,500 a day, more than 100 every hour.

There are two kinds of ambulance crews: emergency medical technicians, trained
in basic techniques and transporting victims to hospital emergency rooms, and
the more highly skilled paramedics, who can, among other things, dispense a
number of drugs. There are about 1,200 emergency medical technicians in the
E.M.S. and roughly 300 paramedics, who are supplemented by paramedic teams from
the private, voluntary hospitals.

The voluntary hospitals, however, primarily serve the wealthier neighborhoods,
and the city's paramedics are stretched thin in the poorer districts. North of
96th Street in Manhattan, a mostly black and Hispanic area of nearly 250 square
blocks, there are only four paramedic crews on duty at night.

''Paramedics do for patients right there what would be done in the emergency
room,'' said Mr. Hintermeister. ''It's only about 5 percent of the cases where
we make the vital difference, but that's a lot. That's one every other day. When
we do, its really gratifying.''

''A 'good job' to us is somebody else's misfortune,'' said his partner, Mr.
Harley, recalling with relish how the team had saved a patient in cardiac arrest
the day before.

Drug Abuse Takes a Toll

Harlem, where the ambulances line up at the emergency room doors of St. Luke's,
Columbia-Presbyterian and city-run Harlem Hospital, is one of the city's busiest
districts, its problems sharply compounded in recent years by the spread of AIDS
and crack.

''Practically everything here is drug-related,'' said Lieut. Adelaide
Connaughton, a night-shift supervisor, driving through streets where drug deals
were being conducted openly and there were clumps of people on the corners at
all hours.

'' 'Just say no,' doesn't work here, because no one wants to say no,'' she said,
referring to Nancy Reagan's anti-drug slogan. ''The kid who can make $100 a
night running drugs so he can buy his white sneakers and new Adidas suit, he
doesn't want to say no. And his mother, with no male income coming in, she
doesn't want him to say no either. That's the culture. ''We have crack babies
overflowing Harlem Hospital - they can't handle them all,'' she said. ''We have
crack overdoses, with the heart going up to 300 beats a minute. These guys are
raving lunatics - they're so strong, its amazing. They'll kick, scratch and
kill.''

Caution on the Job

In their dark green uniforms, the ambulance crews are seen, they say, as a
benevolent force in the often-violent world uptown. Still, like police officers,
when they knock on a door, they do it with an extended arm, standing well to the
side.

''When I worked at Bellevue, it was nearly a year before I got my first gunshot
job,'' said Mr. Hintermeister. ''Here we could get three a day.'' The paramedics
work out of elaborately equipped ambulances, complete with a new computer
terminal by the dashboard that spells out the details of the calls. They carry
22 different medications, some of which require consultation with a doctor by
telephone before they are administered, oxygen, advanced cardiac life-support
systems, breathing tubes that can be inserted down the throat and a set of
inflatable pants, developed during the Vietnam War, to force blood back up into
the body's trunk in a technique called auto-transfusion.

Typically the crews listen to police radios, as well as to their own dispatcher.
With AIDS, much of the equipment is now disposable after one use; the paramedics
wear disposable plastic gloves to protect themselves against contaminated blood.


The Fear of AIDS

''AIDS has changed the way we work,'' said Barbara Taylor, a paramedic based at
Metropolitan Hospital and an organizer for the union of E.M.S. crews, Local
2507. ''Years ago, if you had a baby that stopped breathing, you put your mouth
to its lips -you didn't even think about it. Now, no way.

''And with hospitals overcrowded with increasing numbers of AIDS patients, more
people coming in with acute crises, like crack overdoses, it's rough. The whole
system's in crisis. Sometimes when the nurses hear the beep of the ambulance
backing up, they look like they're going to cry.''

Ambulance 18-Y's tour - paramedic units are designated by the last few letters
of the alphabet - ran eight hours, with three hours of overtime tacked on to
that. The tour illustrated many of the system's problems.

Even as the crew took their first ''job'' - a homeless woman, infected with AIDS
who said she could not walk - into St. Luke's Hospital, officials there were
requesting ''diversions'' of serious adult cases.

A ''diversion'' means that ambulances are requested, as a courtesy, not to take
patients to a given hospital because its resources are overstrained, although
hospitals are required to accept emergency cases. Throughout the night the radio
announced diversion requests from various hospitals. Harlem Hospital has nearly
constant diversions of obstetric cases.

A Zero-Prognosis Case

There were two other stabbing calls and a heart-pounding race through traffic,
sirens screaming, with paramedics working frantically on a man run down on the
Harlem River Drive.

''His prognosis is zero,'' said Mr. Hintermeister as the man was wheeled into
Columbia-Presbyterian. A few minutes later, doctors declared him dead.

A major complaint of the paramedics is that dispatchers send them to minor cases
that should be handled by the emergency medical technicians, thus taking them
out of service so that they may miss the critical case where they might make a
difference.

Some of this is abuse of the system by people who exaggerate their symptoms,
others are what is known as ''up-triaging,'' in which the dispatcher elevates
what is probably a minor problem in order play it safe, or to clear calls
faster.

Abuses by Patients

Thus, grumbling, the two men handled such cases as a homeless alcoholic who
reported internal bleeding in a subway station less than 100 yards from the door
of Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, and a teen-age girl who swooned
melodramatically and said she was unable to get out of bed, although she was
wearing lipstick and full makeup and whose Dominican mother wailed and beat her
head against the wall of the hospital.

''It's very satisfying, it's exciting when you can take a tragedy and turn it
around,'' said Mr. Harvey, who, like his partner, has been a paramedic for two
and a half years, about the time many people burn out in the tough job.

''I love this job,'' agreed Mr. Hintermeister, who is studying to go to medical
school. ''I just love to come to work.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Charley Hintermeister (NYT/Angel Franco) (pgs. B1 & 7)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Music;
Arlo Guthrie: A Holiday Gathering

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 330 words


A couple of years ago, Arlo Guthrie announced that he was retiring his most
famous song, ''Alice's Restaurant,'' from his concert repertory. The long and
winding story of how his arrest for littering in Stockbridge, Mass., prevented
him from being drafted is a quintessential Guthrie composition in the way it
turns a true story into an amusing folk tale, using roughly four parts narration
to one part music.

On Friday evening at Carnegie Hall, where he gave his annual post-Thanksgiving
solo concert, Mr. Guthrie surprised everyone by performing ''Alice's
Restaurant'' after all. He had changed his mind, he said, because he realized
that the events it recounts were now 24 years old and that there were people in
the audience who hadn't been born then. Even though Mr. Guthrie has performed
the song hundreds of times over the years, he was still able to deliver it with
a buoyancy that made it seem fresh.

Mr. Guthrie's annual concerts have always had the feel of ritual family
gatherings and Friday's was no exception. What's changed is that Mr. Guthrie
today is more like a senior statesman of the folk movement than the fresh new
kid on the block. At the age of 42, he wears his shoulder-length graying hair so
that it almost covers his eyes. And when he talks politics, the smug certainties
of the late 60's are gone. The recent song that underscores his mellowing the
most emphatically is a ballad that compares the hostile reception Soviet
soldiers received on returning home from Afghanistan to America's treatment of
its Vietnam veterans.

At Friday's concert, Mr. Guthrie spent more time talking than he did singing and
playing. Long, whimsical monologues were appended to familiar songs like ''Inch
by Inch.'' To his credit, Mr. Guthrie is a polished raconteur, a kind of
post-hippie, East Coast folk answer to Garrison Keillor. But he is also a superb
folk singer from whom one could have wanted a bit more music and a bit less
rambling, no matter how amusing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Arlo Guthrie

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
The Twilight of 'America's Century'

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 631 words


''America's Century,'' Lewis H. Lapham's dour and dire view of the decline of
American power and confidence over the last 100 years, comes to its gloomy
conclusion tonight with a litany of events that have shaken the nation's sense
of itself.

With the support of a few like-minded journalists and think-tankists, Mr. Lapham
probes traumas like the loss of the war in Vietnam, the economic competition
from Japan and West Germany, the Iranian hostage crisis, the killing of United
States marines by terrorists in Lebanon and the Iran-contra revelations. He
arrives at a diagnosis of terminal malaise.

The six-part series, which ends tonight at 8 P.M. on Channel 31 and at 10 P.M.
on Channel 13, is as close to a personal essay as television has given. If you
tuned into the earlier programs, you know by now that Mr. Lapham, the editor of
Harper's Magazine, sees American history in this century as a compound of
pretensions to power, affectations of ideology, and a naive idealism about the
workings of the world and the motives and interests of the United States itself.
And so the nation has plunged from triumph to disarray.

Much of tonight's hour, produced by Peter Bate, is given to the Presidencies of
Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, and Mr. Lapham and his cohort really give it to
them. Mr. Carter is presented, not without sympathy, as a feckless leader,
altogether out of his depth in Washington. Even as he was trying to incorporate
ideals of human rights into foreign policy, he is shown toasting the Shah of
Iran: ''We don't fear the future when we have friends like this great country.''
The Administration, by this account, was totally unprepared for the advent of
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Mr. Carter's response to the taking of American
hostages in 1979 is written off as ''weak, indecisive, sentimental.''

The treatment of Mr. Carter is kindness itself compared with the treatment of
Mr. Reagan, who is credited here with having accomplished the ''Hollywoodization
of politics.'' Mr. Lapham, who can seem supercilious even when he means to be
pleasant, lets loose his scorn for the former President for upholding ''the
sanctity of myth against the heresy of fact.'' He is blunter about Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North, whom he calls ''a treacherous and lying agent of the national
security state.''

It is that state, represented most formidably by the Pentagon, that Mr. Lapham
and most of his guests, who are not very helpfully identified but speak mainly
from the left, see as the Great Satan. President Eisenhower's warning against
the power of the military-industrial complex is hauled out as a prophecy come
true. The Pentagon and the defense industry are pictured as clinging to past
threats and future profits, while present threats and opportunities go unmet.
Instead of working with other nations to safeguard the environment and help the
impoverished, Washington, in the Laphamian view, is frozen in its obsession with
military power.

At the very end, Mr. Lapham, who delivers his messages while strolling among
international sites and sights like a figure out of Henry James, turns slightly
upbeat, offering the possibility that the hopes of the American people will
prevail over the ambitions of the American state. Given all that has gone
before, this seems like pro forma condescension toward the People. It runs smack
against the strong current of the series.

But you don't have to buy Mr. Lapham's entire stock of goods to be stimulated by
this effort to provoke thought, concern, debate. And whatever one's reservations
about the quality of the history offered by ''America's Century'' and the
opinions advanced with such assurance, at the very least - and it is not so
little - they are phrased with an elegance not common to television.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 981 words



International    A3-14



Czechoslovakia ground to a halt as millions of workers walked off their jobs and
into the streets in a powerful demonstration of popular support of free
elections.    Page A1



Czechoslovakia's striking workers are now united with students and intellectuals
in their attempt to break the 40-year Communist hold on the nation.    A1



News analysis: Replay in Prague

    A12



Hungary's opposition defeated a plan by the ruling party to elect the Republic's
first president while it still controls the Government. The vote delays the
choice of a president until after parliamentary elections next spring.    A1



Moscow rebuked Lithuanian leaders for failing to contain the republic's drive
for independence. The criticism came as the Soviet legislature was approving a
law granting the Baltics some economic autonomy.    A14



The future of U.S. and Soviet troops in Europe may be discussed by President
Bush and the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev when they meet this week off
Malta, White House officials said.    A7



Alliances to oust India's ruling party were considered by opposition parties
vying to form a coalition government as vote-counting in the nation's election
came to an end and the President dissolved the existing parliament.    A1

Abu Nidal is under house arrest in Libya, P.L.O. and Arab sources said. Libya's
move against the suspected terrorist is believed to be a result of Arab pressure
to end his terrorist activities, which have been an obstacle to peace efforts.
    A1

Troops loyal to Gen. Michel Aoun, who refuses to recognize the presidency of
Elias Hrawi, were ordered to mobilize in Christian sectors of central Lebanon.
    A3



U.S. threatens to halt U.N. payments

    A3



President of Comoro Islands is assassinated

    A9



A witness to the slaying of six priests in San Salvador has provided the first
sworn evidence linking the killers to the Salvadoran armed forces.    A8



U.S. issues protest to Soviets on arms to Salvador rebels    A8



Uruguay's leftists and centrists won important victories in national elections
on Sunday, setting the stage for what many see as a sharp ideological conflict.
    A6



All 107 aboard killed as Colombian jet explodes    A10



A Ford Motor factory in Britain, once an inefficient and strife-ridden plant,
has been turned around during the 1980's, a microcosm of the transformation of
British industry.    A1



National    A16-23



In a rare move, the Supreme Court failed to accept a single new case. While
there was some argument whether this had ever happened before, experts agreed it
was highly unusual and may reflect a decreasing caseload.    A1



The nation's intelligence agencies are under increasing pressure to absorb a
share of Pentagon budget cuts. A changing world situation will be used as
justification for both increasing and decreasing spending.    A18



C.I.A. history tells of debates on covert actions

    A18



A law to stop housing discrimination against families with children is causing
concern at retirement communities and adult condominium complexes where many
senior citizens have built their own world.    A1



The election of L. Douglas Wilder as Governor of Virginia was certified by the
State Board of Elections. But Mr. Wilder must still await a recount, expected to
be finished during December.    A21



A billionaires' battle over hogs has broken out along the South Platte River in
Colorado. A $50 million farm now under construction has raised concerns about
pollution and the quality of meat.    A16



The face of Vietnam's victims? A Vietnamese woman, forced by war to help the
Vietcong and dabble in the black market and prostitution, has written a
controversial book that offers a victim's memories of the war.

    16



Chinese-owned steel plant is accused of bias in hiring

    A16



Disputed nuclear nominee gets lower post

    A19



Federal Reserve Board signals no easing of monetary policy    D1



Regional    B1-8



The Chancellor of CUNY will resign as soon as a successor can be found, probably
by next fall. Joseph S. Murphy has headed the nation's third-largest university
system for seven years.    B1



Police Commissioner Condon rarely has a predictable day leading the nation's
largest police force. Named last month to fill out the term of Benjamin Ward, he
is among those under consideration for the next five-year term.    B1



A law to preserve S.R.O. hotel rooms lost its final battle. The Supreme Court
refused to hear a New York City appeal of a ruling that overturned the city's
moratorium on conversion or demolition of single-room-occupancy hotels.    B1



How does one preach about AIDS? The Rev. James Forbes of Manhattan's Riverside
Church has made an eloquent appeal to other ministers for compassion.    B3



Manhattan's third-oldest building may yet be saved. It has been auctioned for
$325,000 to two real-estate investors who said they hoped to renovate the
200-year-old house on the East River waterfront.    B3



Governor-elect James Florio showed his influence, Democrats said, when the
incoming Democratic Assembly majority passed over its current leader and backed
Mr. Florio's choice for Speaker of the Assembly.    B1



Opponents of fare increases dominate M.T.A. public hearing    B3



Panel replaces Senate counsel investigating D'Amato H.U.D. case    B3



Civic groups press for new ethics rules

    B3



Neediest Cases    B8



Donations to Neediest Cases are as diverse as the givers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Different Kind of Vietnam Veteran, and Her Healing Mission

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: ESCONDIDO, Calif.


Le Ly Hayslip, a Vietnamese woman who was forced by the hardships of war to
collaborate with the Vietcong, dabble in the black market and sell her body, is
now presenting hersin a book and perhaps a movie as the face of her country's
victimized peasantry.

Her message, directed particularly toward American veterans, has drawn criticism
from Vietnamese here. But it has also tapped a well of feelings among former
American soldiers, and they have written her about their sense of guilt and
nostalgia for Vietnam.

Mrs. Hayslip's memoir, ''When Heaven and Earth Changed Places'' (Doubleday,
$18.95), was published earlier this year. American reviewers said it filled a
need to hear from the millions of Vietnamese who suffered in the war.

Into the Netherworld

The story, which is now being adapted for a possible film to be directed by
Oliver Stone, is about a village girl who like many Vietnamese gives her
allegiance to the Communist army by night and the South Vietnamese Government by
day.

Danger and poverty forced her into the urban netherworld, where many learned to
thrive in an atmosphere of black marketing and prostitution. Like some other
Vietnamese women, she found escape by marrying an American. And now Le Ly
Hayslip lives here in a ranch-style house on a rolling Southern California
hillside.

Mrs. Hayslip has returned to Vietnam six times since 1986 and has formed a
nonprofit relief group, East Meets West, which has sent medical supplies to
Vietnam. Last month, she opened a clinic in Ky La, the village of her birth,
just south of Da Nang.

That clinic was financed by Mr. Stone, who directed ''Platoon,'' the 1986 movie
that depicted the Vietnam War from the perspective of Americans who fought and
died in it. Mrs. Hayslip said she hopes he will be able to film her life story
on the dirt paths and in the small thatched houses of her own village, with her
relatives and friends there participating.

Her book, written with the help of Jay Wurts, a California writer and editor,
was greeted with some hostility in Vietnamese emigre newspapers. They questioned
her story and voiced suspicions about her sympathies. The reaction reflects the
highly factionalized and politicized nature of the Vietnamese community in the
United States.

Mrs. Hayslip says her story speaks for itself and is not unusual. Her politics,
she says, are the politics of reconciliation and healing after decades of
division.

Fourteen years after the war ended, she said, Vietnamese may have had more
success than American veterans in coming to terms with the hardships that some
of those veterans inflicted.

Back in Vietnam

Back in Vietnam, talking quietly with her family in the meager light of an oil
lamp, she asked, ''What did you get out of all this war?''

''They turned around and said, 'We are happy,' '' she went on. ''I told them,
'You are all poor.' They said: 'It seems poor because you come from a rich
place. This is the same house you were born in and you are eating the same fish
from the same pond.' ''

American veterans are less at ease with their experiences and their feelings,
she said. A man in prison wrote that he had entered ''a life in crime'' after
serving in Vietnam. Another man, divorced and at loose ends, offered to take his
skills as a bomb-disposal expert to Vietnam to sweep for unexploded ordnance.

A third man, who fired artillery from a hilltop at people he never saw, recalled
in a letter to Mrs. Hayslip his daily view of his target.

''I often sat on a bunker and with a pair of field glasses looked at the people
planting and transplanting and harvesting rice,'' he wrote. ''In the morning the
mist would settle in the valleys, the sun's rays would reflect the mist and we
would be surrounded by 1,000 lakes.'' Bertelsmannd (Doubleday)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Le Ly Hayslip, whose book on the Vietnam War, ''When Heaven
and Earth Changed Places,'' touched feelings of former American soldiers.
(NYT/Michael Tweed)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Pressure Grows for Cuts in Intelligence Spending

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 27


Senior Pentagon officials' decision to consider substantial cuts in the military
budget over the next few years has intensified pressure on intelligence agencies
to take an equal share of the reductions.

Although the issue has not yet been directly joined, Administration officials
and members of Congress say the battle lines are already forming between those
who view a diminishing Soviet threat as a reason for reducing intelligence
spending and those who believe that more extensive intelligence information will
be needed to keep abreast of rapidly changing developments abroad.

''In my recent conversations with senior intelligence officials, many have been
privately concerned that the United States intelligence community will have to
take a 'proportional hit' -that is, be reduced by the same percentage the
defense budget is being cut,'' said Kenneth E. deGraffenreid, former head of
intelligence programs in the Reagan White House. ''There is no question that
many in the Office of Management and Budget and the money side of the Defense
Department intend to go that way.''

Current and former officials said the budget pressures would likely prompt a
reassessment of whether to shift money now spent on monitoring Soviet military
movements in Eastern Europe to regions and topics that historically accorded
less emphasis.

American officials said it was possible to achieve savings on intelligence
operations in Europe as the NATO nations pulled back from their posture of
preparing for an all-out war in Central Europe. The United States spends
billions on eavesdropping and satellite photography to collect intelligence on
Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces.

Spending Is Buried in Budget

Intelligence spending is not publicly disclosed; it is hidden in the Pentagon
budget by overstating the amount of money needed for various military programs.
Government officials said it represents less than 10 percent of the $300 billion
Pentagon total.

Because their financing is part of the Pentagon budget, any effort to exempt
intelligence programs from cuts will mean greater reductions in military
programs.

Intelligence spending grew as much as four times as fast as the Pentagon's
overall budget in the early years of the Reagan Administration. And in the past
five years as the Pentagon budget has actually declined once inflation is
accounted for, intelligence spending has continued to grow at a modest rate.

In recent weeks the military services, at the request of Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney, have identified $180 billion in possible cuts in spending for 1992-94.

Officials said the prospect of tightening, or even flat budgets, could force
some hard choices for the intelligence chiefs, causing them to define more
carefully what is truly needed by the President and his aides.

One Government official summarized the predicament this way:

''If you've had an intelligence requirement that says, 'I want to be prepared to
go to war on a moment's notice; I want to know when this Soviet commander turns
on his radar within seconds,' the question is: In a peacetime environment do you
need to collect and report that information on daily basis?''

Senator Sees New Soviet Threat

Senator David L. Boren, the Oklahoma Democrat who is chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, said through a spokesman, ''Now is not the time to
reduce the intelligence budget; it's just the opposite.''

Senator Boren says that as the Soviet Union cuts military spending, it will put
greater emphasis on the theft of Western technololgy, his spokesman said, and
this will increase the pressure on counterintelligence agencies. Senator Boren
also contended that the anticipated signing of new arms control treaties will
place costly requirements on the intelligence agencies for verification.

In the House, the intelligence panel's chairman, Representative Anthony C.
Beilenson, Democrat of California, said that if present trends continue in
Europe, he foresees a slow, steady decline in intelligence spending over the
next few years.

''One could argue that the intelligence budgets should be cut more carefully and
slowly than defense,'' Mr. Beilenson said. ''But if we continue to believe the
Soviet threat is diminishing, then I think the intelligence budget will be cut
into over the years to come.''

At best, Administration officials said, the intelligence agencies can plan on
flat budgets while they are being asked for better reporting on trends in
Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union, Central America, China and the economic powers
of the Pacific Basin.

The agencies are also being pushed to develop better capabilities for supporting
the war on drugs, and some consumers of intelligence - including President Bush
- have complained about a lack of solid reporting from human sources.

Administration officials said no decisions had been made on the intelligence
budgets, and one official said, ''This is not the sort of thing that is going to
happen over one year; it's something that will develop over five years.''

Separate Budget Is Considered

The uncertainty has prompted some Administration officials to consider -and one
prominent former intelligence officer to advocate - the idea of separating the
intelligence budget from the Pentagon's, thus allowing Congress for the first
time to vote on a publicly announced total figure for intelligence.

''My worry is that as we start a new cycle of draw-down in the Pentagon, we will
once again incrementally take a slice off intelligence,'' said Adm. Bobby Ray
Inman, former Deputy Director of Central Intelligence. ''There is much less
hazard in letting people know how much money we spend on intelligence then in
letting the cuts get made almost accidentially.''

Admiral Inman said history shows that the intelligence agencies suffered lasting
damage in periods of reduced Pentagon spending. As a former director of Naval
Intelligence and head of the National Security Agency, Admiral Inman traced the
pattern of intelligence spending as it grew through the 1950's, was altered by
the Vietnam War and sharply reduced in the 1970's.

After World War II, he said, Government leaders concluded that ''never again
should we be so ill-informed about the outside world.'' This meant better
intelligence than simply counting an opponent's military forces.

The intention, Admiral Inman said, was to create a ''classified Encyclopedia
Brittanica'' of the world's countries. Financing for the Central Intelligence
Agency rose steadily throughout the 1950's, hitting a peak in 1958. It stayed
flat from 1958 to 1964, when he said a decision was made to move analysts on
other subjects to work on the Vietnam War.

''We gave up on analytical efforts judged not to be problems, beginning in the
Western Hemisphere and then to Europe, Africa and later Asia,'' Admiral Inman
said.

Embassy Shrinkage Cuts Data

In 1967, as a way of improving the nation's trade balance, the Johnson
Administration cut the number of people in American embassies, a move that
Admiral Inman said reduced intelligence collection.

In 1971, he said, costly new technology was discovered that greatly expanded the
potential of overhead surveillance. Nixon Administration officials decided to
buy it and absorb the cost by cutting manpower from other technical areas.

As President Richard M. Nixon withdrew American forces from Vietnam and began
reducing the Pentagon budget, ''all those cuts went straight across the
intelligence budget,'' the admiral said.

In 1973, when the intelligence agencies failed to predict the 1973 war between
Israel and Egypt, William Clements, Deputy Secretary of Defense, ordered a 25
percent reduction in intelligence agencies under direct Pentagon control, which
included the National Security Agency but not the C.I.A.

By the end of the 1970's, he Admiral Inman said, intelligence employment was
down 40 percent from the level of 1958.

When new issues arose in the 1980's, like strife in Central America or
terrorism, American intelligence was not effectively covering countries
involved. ''We would see things, and couldn't tell what they meant,'' the
admiral said. ''We didn't know what the norm was.'' To correct the problem,
President Reagan ordered large increases in intelligence spending, starting ''a
slow process to begin covering not just the Soviet Union,'' Admiral Inman said.
''The buildup has been broad-based, including human intelligence, clandestine
collection and overt collection as well as broad increases in the analytical
side.

''It was possible largely because the executive branch was prepared to let
intelligence budgets grow at a faster rate than the rest of the defense budget
and because of bipartisan support on the intelligence committees and enough
support on the armed services committees.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Sen. David. L. Boren (NYT); Rep. Anthony C. Bellenson (Teresa
Zabala)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

New Answer Proposed for Tektites: a Comet

BYLINE: By WALTER SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 541 words


A SOVIET scientist has concluded that the small glassy tektites strewn across
much of the Eastern Hemisphere fell far more recently than had been thought,
throwing doubt on timing of the great catastrophe responsible for their
deposition.

The Soviet scientist, Emil P. Izokh a geologist at the Soviet Academy of
Sciences in Novosibirsk, studied specimens collected at 120 sites throughout
Vietnam. He has put the date of their arrival at about 10,000 years ago, whereas
the popular view has been that the event occurred 700,000 years ago, at about
the same time that the earth's magnetic field made a dramatic shift.

The explanation by Dr. Izokh and his Vietnamese colleague, Le Duk An, is that
the tektites originated 700,000 years ago in one or more volcanic explosions on
another celestial body, like a moon of Jupiter. A colossal eruption, they
propose, hurled them into space, embedded in icy material that traveled as a
comet until it fell to earth relatively recently Most geologists have long
thought the tektites were terrestrial material thrown into the sky when a comet
or asteroid struck earth and streamlined by their flight through the atmosphere
while still molten.

Dr.Izokh and Dr. Le Duk An, writing in the Soviet journal Current Problems in
Siberian Meteorites, based their estimate on the age of the layer in which the
Vietnam samples are found. Also Found in U.S. The tektites they studied were
part of the Australasian strewn field, extending from the Philippines and
Southeast Asia through Indonesia to Australia and Tasmania. What many believe
are microscopic fragments of the same shower are found in ocean bottom sediment
across the Indian Ocean almost to Africa.

Tektites or microtektites have also been found in the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of
Mexico, equatorial regions of the Pacific Ocean, off the coast of New Jersey, in
Texas, Georgia and, possibly, Martha's Vineyard. Tektites in the North American
field are believed to be about 35 million years old.

The Soviet scientist's argument for an extraterrestrial origin has been welcomed
by Dr. John A. O'Keefe of the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., who
for many years has argued that the tektites came from eruptions on the moon.
This idea has been challenged by those who argued that the composition of
tektites was like that of the earth's crust, rather than of lunar samples
brought back by astronauts. In reply Dr. O'Keefe has proposed that they came
from deep inside the moon.

The widely accepted age for the Australasian field was obtained by two forms of
analysis. One measured the extent to which radioactive elements in the sample
have decayed since the sample cooled. The other was by microscopically
determining to what extent the glassy object had been scarred by particles
ejected by radioactive decay in the sample.

For many years a group of Australian geologists has argued that the tektites
there lay far too near the surface to have originated 700,000 years ago. They
put the age at about 10,000 years. Dr. Brian Mason, emeritus curator of
meteorites at the Smithsonian National Museum in Washington, said last week that
studies that he and his colleagues had conducted indicated that they are about
5,000 years years old.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

300 Vietnamese Leave Hong Kong for West

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 180 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 28


More than 300 Vietnamese refugees who had waited two years in this British
colony boarded a plane today for their journey to the West.

Most of the Vietnamese will go the the United States after six months in the
Philippines to study English and learn about life in the United States Others
were sent to Sweden and Australia. Government statistics showed that was the
largest one-day resettlement of Vietnamese refugees in seven years. About 12,700
Vietnamese refugees still are waiting in Hong Kong to be resettled in the West.

More than 5,000 are to be resettled in mid-1990, said Alfred Kottek, the
regional representative of the Intergovernmental Committee for Migration who
organized the refugees' transportion.

The refugees in Hong Kong either arrived before June 1988 or were classified as
refugees under a screening policy.

In June 1988, the Government adopted a policy that treats all Vietnamese boat
people as illegal immigrants unless they prove they are fleeing persecution.
Those deemed to be as illegal immigrants face repatriation to their Communist
homeland.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hero's Ashes Scattered at Sea

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 183 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Nov. 28


The crew of a Navy frigate named for a Vietnam War hero, Lieut. Comdr. Wilmer
Paul Cook, performed a solemn mission Monday, scattering the commander's ashes
at sea 22 years after he died in battle.

The Cook left port Monday morning and paused off the coast for the 20-minute
service before resuming maneuvers, said Comdr. David Dillon, a Navy spokesman.

Commander Cook, an A-4 Skyhawk pilot, was shot down three days before Christmas
in 1967 while leading an air strike over North Vietnam. He was listed as missing
for more than 20 years before his remains were returned to the United States
last year and later identified.

''It's nice that he came home finally,'' said his eldest son, Wilmer Paul Cook
Jr. ''It eased my mind to know where he is exactly. For years, I didn't know
whether he was alive or dead.''

Mr. Cook, who is 31 years old, and his younger brother John, 26, and their
uncle, John M. Cook Jr., 65, of Titusville, N.J., attended a portside memorial
service on Friday.

The family requested that Commander Cook's remains be scattered at sea from the
ship that bears his name.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Asks Britain to End Cambodia Plan

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


The United States has asked Britain to lay aside its plan to send a diplomat to
Cambodia to supervise the distribution of British aid, American and British
officials said today.

The Bush Administration contends that the diplomat's presence would send the
''wrong signals'' to Cambodia, suggesting that the Phnom Penh Government had won
a degree of international acceptance.

The State Department complained to Britain that Cambodia was likely to exploit
the presence of the British official to argue that ''the British Government was
giving a degree of legitimacy to the Phnom Penh regime,'' a British diplomat
said.

The United States regards the Phnom Penh Government as illegitimate because it
was installed by a Vietnamese invasion in 1979. The diplomat said London agreed
with that view.

A British official said that London would take note of Washington's views, but
would probably carry out its plan.

No Means of Verification

In the last few weeks, Britain has taken a somewhat more accommodating stance
toward the Phnom Penh Government while the United States still refuses to have
anything to do with the Government, headed by Prime Minister Hun Sen.

On Nov. 8, Britain became the first Western country to acknowledge publicly that
Vietnam had withdrawn its combat troops from Cambodia. Vietnam said that it had
removed the last of its troops from Cambodia in September, but the United States
says it is impossible to verify their departure.

Experts on Southeast Asia say the statements and actions of British officials
this month reflect an implicit criticism of American policy toward Cambodia.
Following a recent British television documentary on Cambodia, members of
Parliament were inundated with letters protesting British support for a
Cambodian coalition that includes the Khmer Rouge as its most powerful
component.

Partly because of such pressure, the British Government has been more willing
than the United States to reassess its policy and to send a diplomat to Phnom
Penh and aid to Cambodia. Now that Vietnam's occupying force has apparently left
Cambodia, the governments of Australia and other Asian countries are also coming
under pressure from constituents to deal with the Phnom Penh Government.

The new British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said on Nov. 8 that Britain was
sending more than $390,000 of humanitarian aid into Cambodia. None of the money
is being given to the Cambodian Government.

A Million Cambodians Died

The sole purpose of sending a British diplomat to Phnom Penh is ''to insure that
this aid is properly disbursed,'' a British official said today.

From 1975 through 1978 the Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, ruled Cambodia in a
brutal regime during which more than a million Cambodians died. American
officials say it is essential to prevent a return to power by the group. But the
United States strongly supports Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who wants to include
the Khmer Rouge in a coalition government.

Twenty-six United States Senators and 177 members of the House of
Representatives have signed a letter asking the Bush Administration to reassess
its policy toward Cambodia.

''The fact that the Khmer Rouge remains a powerful, menacing force in Cambodia
is not in itself a justification for inviting them to participate in a
government of national reconciliation,'' the letter said.

The letter was drafted by Representatives Chester G. Atkins of Massachusetts and
Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, both Democrats. Among those who signed it were the
House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri; Anthony C.
Beilenson of California, the chairman of the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence; Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, the ranking Republican on the
committee, and Jim Leach of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the Foreign Affairs
subcommittee responsible for East Asia.

The letter to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, says the Administration
should not promote ''a power-sharing role for the Khmer Rouge.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bush 'Talking Points' at Malta

BYLINE: By Richard Perle; Richard Perle was Assistant Secretary of Defense in
the Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When President Bush sits down with Mikhail Gorbachev on Saturday, he will have
in his briefcase a set of ''talking points'' from his top advisers suggesting
what issues to raise and how to raise them. Here are proposed talking points
that could help him seize the initiative from Mr. Gorbachev:

We continue to be concerned by your willingness to pour vast sums into military
forces. Military spending is draining the Soviet economy, threatening your
perestroika program and creating unecessary and most unwelcome tension between
us.

We are particularly troubled by your continuing support for some of the world's
most repressive and violent regimes: North Korea, Afghanistan, Nicaragua, Cuba,
Vietnam. In Afghanistan, you spend $250 million a month to prop up a regime that
cannot gain popular support. It is Moscow that ultimately is at the end of the
supply line reaching the guerrillas in El Salvador. This must stop.

There is a great deal of discussion in the West about how we might help your
program to reform the economy. The best thing I can do for you is remind you of
how much of your national wealth is devoted to military spending and conflicts
abroad. (Note to President Bush: Since financial assistance for the Soviet Union
would rightly infuriate many Americans, this approach will head off criticism at
home.) We have made a good start toward the goal of sharply reducing
conventional and nuclear weapons, but we could go further.

We should be prepared to reduce strategic nuclear forces below the levels
originally proposed by President Reagan to Leonid Brezhnev. Since those
negotiations got under way, the number of weapons that would be allowed under a
strategic arms treaty has actually increased. Surely, we can do better today. If
you are prepared to agree in principle to even deeper reductions in strategic
weapons, I propose that we state in our communique that our negotiators in
Geneva will be instructed to explore further reductions. We are also prepared to
consider deeper cuts in conventional forces. Our proposals in Vienna call for
sharp reductions in armor, artillery, aircraft and personnel. But why not reduce
forces by, say, 20 percent beyond what is now under discussion? We both need
relief from unnecessary military spending. Here's a way to accomplish that
without risk to security on either side. If you agree, the communique could
reflect our desire to move in this direction.

We have been watching with great interest as events have unfolded in Eastern
Europe. I want you to know that we approve of the process of change taking place
there. We have always believed in self-determination for the people of Eastern
Europe and we are pleased that you appear to have accepted this principle. The
people of Poland, Hungary, East Germany and Czechoslovakia are demanding
freedom. They should have it. They are demanding new leadership. They should
have that, too. And, finally, they are demanding a new political and economic
system. This too must be allowed.

I want to assure you that we have no desire, no intention, to exploit in any way
the changes in Eastern Europe. We do not see the rejection of socialism as an
opening to threaten Soviet security.

You should understand that the people of Eastern Europe believe socialism has
failed them. That is their judgment to make. If they wish to establish free
markets along with free political institutions, that is their right. I trust
that when you were quoted as warning against the ''export of capitalism,'' you
did not mean the Soviet Union would seek to interfere with the free choice of
the countries concerned. We would view with grave concern any action to block
their choice.

As you know, the Jackson-Vanik amendment denies most-favored-nation status to
nations that deny their citizens the right and opportunity to emigrate freely. I
have the authority to waive that restriction but only if I have received
assurances that doing so will lead to substantially freer emigration. If you are
prepared to give me those assurances, I would ask for a waiver under the
amendment's conditions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clamor in the East;
On Course for Malta: Three Decades of Statecraft

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 546 words




September 1959: President Eisenhower and Nikita S. Khrushchev meet at Camp
David, Md. The talks result in the ''Spirit of Camp Daivd,'' an effort to press
for scientific and cultural exchanges and disarmament.

May 1960: Eisenhower and Khrushchev go to Paris. But the Soviet leader, angry
after his country sights and downs an American U-2 spy plane over the Soviet
Union, cancels the meeting.

June 1961: Khrushchev and President Kennedy have heated exchanges in Vienna.
There are no formal agreements. A year later, the Soviets send nuclear missiles
to Cuba; the United States forces their removal.

June 1967: President Johnson meets in Glasboro, N.J. with Alesksei N. Kosygin to
discuss the Middle East, the Vietnam War and nuclear arms. They come to no terms
on those issues.

may 1972: President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev, in Moscow, sign the first
treaties setting limits on strategic nuclear arms, known as SALT I, and on
curbing anti-ballistic missile systems. They agree to keep negotiating on arms,
but regional issues divide them.

June 1973: Nixon and Brezhnev meet in Washington. They agree to try to complete
a new arms treaty by 1974.

June-July 1974: Nixon and Brezhnev meet in Moscow and Yalta. They agree to a
treaty banning underground nuclear-arms tests with yields exceeding 150
kilotons, and they arrange a 10-year economic accord.

November 1974: President Ford and Brezhnev, in Vladivostok, reach a tentative
deal limiting missile launchers and bombers and lay a base for a second
strategic arms treaty. The treaty is not completed before President Carter takes
office.

June 1979: Carter and Brezhnev, in Vienna, sign the second treaty limiting
strategic arms, or SALT II. Although the Senate never approves the treaty
because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December of 1979, both sides
agree informally to observe the limits.

November 1985: President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev meet in Geneva for
wide-ranging talks on arms control and other subjects. They agree to revive
cultural exchanges and to enhance air safety, but no arms-control agreements are
acheived.

October 1986: Reagan and Gorbachev meet in Reykjavik, Iceland, to provide
momemtum to arms-control talks. The two sides speak of vast cuts in strategic
arms and medium-range missiles, but the accord falls through because of
disagreements over the American plan for a space-based missile defense system,
or Star Wars, and over Moscow's insistence on putting all arms issues in one
package.

December 1987: Reagan and Gorbachev meet in Washington. They sign a treaty to
destroy intermediate-range nuclear forces, known as I.N.F., and agree to seek a
treaty cutting long-range nuclear arsenals. But Star Wars remains a sticking
point.

may-June 1988: Gorbachev and Reagan, in Moscow, ratify the intermediate-range
weapons treaty but make no breakthrough on cutting long-range nuclear forces.
Reagan says important work has been accomplished but Gorbachev complains of
''missed opportunities.''

December 1988: Gorbachev says farewell to Reagan and greets President-elect
George Bush at a two-hour luncheon on Govenors Island in New York harbor. Reagan
assures Gorbachev of continuity under Bush.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Nikita S. Khruschev and Pres. Eisenhower in '59; Aleksei N.
Kesyon and Pres. Johnson in '67; Leonid I. Brezhnev and Pres Carter in '79

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Britain Sticks to Cambodia Plan

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 348 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 30


Britain still intends to send a Bangkok-based diplomat on an aid-related visit
to Cambodia despite an American request that it lay the plan aside, Western
diplomats here said today.

The diplomats said the news of the American request, reported in The New York
Times today, had not reached the British Embassy here and that the British
diplomat, Andrew George, expected to leave for Phnom Penh in the next two weeks.

His trip, announced by the British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, on Nov. 8,
has been delayed only because London decided it would also send a senior
official of the Overseas Development Administration with Mr. George.

The aid official, Dr. Penelope Key, a senior medical adviser, is traveling in
the Pacific and is expected in Bangkok soon, diplomats said.

Limit on Discussions

They said Mr. George had instructions to limit his discussions with the
Cambodian Government to aid-related issues and that he was making a visit only,
not establishing a permanent office in Phnom Penh.

The trip would nonetheless represent the first time in some 11 years that a
Western diplomat has made a formal visit to Phnom Penh. The Cambodian Government
of Prime Minister Hun Sen has been diplomatically isolated since it was
installed by the Vietnamese after their invasion of Cambodia in December 1978.

The Vietnamese drove out the Khmer Rouge Government that transformed Cambodian
society into a huge agricultural labor camp. The Khmer Rouge presided over the
deaths of more than a million Cambodians through killings, starvation,
malnutrition and disease.

Troops Believed Gone

The Vietnamese say the last of their troops left Cambodia at the end of
September. While that assertion has not been verified by any international
supervisory body, Western nations increasingly believe that for all effective
combat purposes, Vietnamese troops are gone.

In his statement, Mr. Hurd voiced an increasing concern in the West that the
withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, though requested by the West, had removed a
major obstacle to a return to power by the Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Defining the Western, and Two Current Examples

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 897 words



Come Winter
By Douglas C. Jones
418 pages. Donald Hutter Book/Henry Holt. $19.95

Outlaw
By Warren Kiefer
518 pages. Donald I. Fine Inc. $19.95.

To get into the right frame of mind for a couple of westerns - normally not my
patch of sagebrush - I reread ''The Virginian'' by Owen Wister. The 1902 novel,
ancestor of the classic western, turned out to be not only corny and flag-waving
but also intolerant and reactionary by today's standards. The story includes
sentimental lectures on Americanism that sound like a jingoist speech by
Theodore Roosevelt, to whom the book is dedicated. It does have two scenes -of
the toe-kicking cowpoke meeting the pretty New England schoolmarm and the
traditional walk-down with pistols in the last reel - that have often been
copied and, of course, one enduring line: ''When you call me that, smile!'' It's
hard to disagree with Alexander Woollcott, who branded him ''Owen Wisteria.''

Westerns have come a long way since Wister. As with other genre fiction, the
best are really full-fledged novels and not strictly western except in their
locales. In ''Come Winter,'' Douglas C. Jones proves himself a strong
storyteller who knows the territory - in this case, rural Arkansas, where he
lives. In this novel he has created a family drama set against national events
at the end of the 19th century, when clashing views about Reconstruction still
existed between traditionalists and freebooters moving into the Western
territories. ''Come Winter'' is the last of several novels in a saga, but the
story stands on its own. Among his previous books - not part of the saga - are
''The Court-Martial of George Armstrong Custer'' and ''Arrest Sitting Bull.''

The family patriarch is a man named Roman Hasford, a former cavalryman with
memories of chasing the Cheyenne in Kansas. The novel swings from the end of the
Civil War to the Spanish-American War. The wealthy Hasford, a banker and
political power broker, has a childhood friend who is black. Hasford insists
that his friend be entitled to hold property, which does not sit well with many
of his neighbors. Nor do they appreciate Hasford's employment of a Jewish
bookkeeper at his bank. A confrontation builds between Hasford and the
narrow-minded proprietor of the local newspaper, who - in those days of
free-swinging, libelous journalism - calls Hasford money-grubbing and a turncoat
who believes in racial mixing.

After the black man is murdered, the town, including the local prostitute, clams
up. Hasford decides to get to the bottom of the case in his own way. From Kansas
he imports a professional killer, a cool one-armed veteran who knows how to make
people talk. In one of the most dramatic scenes in the novel, the hired killer
tosses a roll of greenbacks on the prostitute's table and then takes out his
sheath knife and plunges it into hot coals. Hasford's man gets the evidence he
needs to avenge the black man's murder.

''Come Winter'' includes a townful of characters, with women as tough as the
men, building fortunes in new businesses where the railroads reach. Mr. Jones
has created real people in a sympathetic story that covers an authentic corner
of the West.

Warren Kiefer's ''Outlaw'' is a western, an eastern and a few other points on
the compass of adventure. Its central character, Lee Garland, roams all over the
place and inserts himself in the midst of historic events, from the end of the
19th century almost up to the present.

Looking back on his picaresque life, Garland recalls his beginnings in New
Mexico, after an Apache raid that killed his parents. He develops from a cattle
thief into a rancher and an oil baron. During the Spanish-American War, he
enlists with Col. Teddy Roosevelt's Rough Riders. Again and again, Mr. Kiefer
places his character among the big names without quite fully engaging them.
Naturally, he encounters Richard Harding Davis and Stephen Crane serving as war
correspondents. Of course, he charges up San Juan Hill.

''Roosevelt's already cantering into the water ahead of us on his horse, yelling
at everybody to get a move on, and waving a saber to get our attention,''
Garland remembers. ''Roosevelt's crazy, but we ain't going to heaven where we
are so we might as well try the hill.''

After spending time in as many houses of prostitution as he can find, Garland
marries, acquires a mistress and keeps on running into the rich and notable. He
goes off to fight Pancho Villa in Mexico. The author's central character is
always ready to voice his opinions in crude language: ''After Colonel Roosevelt
and the Bullmoosers lose the Presidential election to that nitwit Wilson, the
new Democrat Administration decides to cuddle up to the Mexicans. That was just
the first in a long list of mistakes the Wilson crowd made in foreign affairs.''

The ''Ragtime'' effect of blending historical and fictional people is evident in
''Outlaw,'' whether the author is putting his character in the midst of the
Teapot Dome scandal or having him say about President Franklin D. Roosevelt,
''He's got a great gift of gab, and his New Deal pitch is very clever
politics.'' In the end, the story returns to New Mexico, where the author brings
the reader up to date on, among other obvious things, Vietnam and the
military-industrial complex before his hero bows out nobly in a modern
equivalent of a Western walk-down.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Douglass C. Jones (Bob's of Fayetteville); Photo of Warren
Kiefer

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Joseph Campbell Mixed Bigotry and Inspiration;
His Anti-Semetism

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 477 words


To the Editor: I am deeply grateful to Brendan Gill for detailing in public what
many of us at Sarah Lawrence College privately knew all along about Joseph
Campbell. Because Campbell has been proposed as a sage for our times, it is
particularly important for those of us who have a different estimate of the man
and his work to speak up. Mr. Gill's account of Campbell's scholarship, his
politics and his views seems to me accurate. I offer a single anecdote from my
experience by way of verifying his anti-Semitism.

I joined the literature faculty at Sarah Lawrence in 1968. With other younger
faculty members, I was strongly opposed to the war in Vietnam, and I considered
myself - as I do today - to be on the left. Campbell tended to keep his distance
from this group, whose values he more or less correctly perceived - and
disliked.

It was my good or ill fortune, however, to find that Campbell was disposed to be
friendly to me. One reason for this was that I had, in 1967, completed a
doctoral dissertation that, he had been told, made substantial use (I am
embarrassed to confess it) of his book ''The Hero With a Thousand Faces.'' But I
think Campbell was also disposed to be friendly to me because, in those days, I
usually wore a coat and tie to teach, and this was not the costume he associated
with leftists and war protesters; and because, when we happened to meet at some
faculty function, I usually had a drink in my hand, and he had the notion that
leftists and war protesters had sworn off alcohol for the relentless consumption
of marijuana.

At one faculty function, in 1969 or '70, I found myself drinking with Campbell
and another, older, equally right-wing teacher. At some point in the evening,
Campbell, responding to a remark I can't recall, said something to the effect
that he could always spot a Jew. I, a Jew, said, ''Oh?'' Whereupon Campbell went
into a description of how the New York Athletic Club had ingeniously managed for
years to keep Jews out. He went on and on, telling his story in the most
charming and amiable fashion, without any self-consciousness about the views he
was expressing and, indeed, without any overt animus - for all that he obviously
relished the notion of keeping Jews out of anywhere any time, forever. As soon
as I could, I said goodnight, and Campbell and I never had much to do with each
other again.

Subsequently, in my many years at Sarah Lawrence, I heard over and over again
that Campbell was contemptuous of women and that he missed few opportunities to
disparage black people.

As in the similar case of Ezra Pound - an infinitely more talented man than
Joseph Campbell - we cannot entirely separate the views of the individual from
the views expressed in his texts. And some of Joseph Campbell's views were
decidedly repugnant.

ARNOLD KRUPAT
  Bronxville, N.Y., Nov. 8, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How Taiwan Wins Friends and Miffs Beijing

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: TAIPEI, Taiwan, Dec. 2


Armed with a new flexibility and immense reservoirs of foreign exchange, Taiwan
is struggling for a seat at the international table, and in the process new
tensions are surfacing between the rival Governments in Taipei and Beijing.

The Government here is aggressively cultivating developing countries, with
considerable success. So far this year, four more countries have recognized the
Republic of China, as Taiwan calls itself, bringing the total to 26.

''I'm hopeful more will come forward,'' Foreign Minister Lien Chan said in an
interview, adding that contacts are under way with other nations.

China has been particularly upset because the recent diplomatic successes by
Taiwan run counter to the previous trend. Until about two years ago, Taiwan was
growing increasingly isolated. One by one, countries switched their diplomatic
ties from Taipei to Beijing, and two of the more important nations still
recognizing Taiwan - Saudi Arabia and South Korea - seemed to be preparing to
switch to Beijing as well.

Then this pattern was abruptly reversed, partly because Taiwan no longer
required other nations to cut their ties to Beijing before establishing ties
with Taipei. Dual recognition was tolerated.

Even more important than diplomatic flexibility was money: Taiwan's per capita
income is about $7,500, more than 20 times the level on the Chinese mainland.
More important, Taiwan has foreign exchange reserves of more than $75 billion,
highest in the world after Japan. Taiwan made it clear that it would offer aid
to its ''friends.''

Beijing has reacted with indignation to Taipei's courtship of developing
nations. The annoyance in Beijing is doubly strong because third world countries
used to be its allies, and because it is apprehensive about a bidding war with
Taipei for diplomatic support.

''Taiwan has been using its silver-bullet diplomacy to buy people's minds and
hearts,'' People's Daily complained in October.

President Yang Shangkun, Prime Minister Li Peng and other top mainland officials
have strongly criticized Taiwan's diplomatic policy, and the official New China
News Agency suggested that dual recognition was aimed at establishing Taiwan as
an entity independent from China.

So far the four countries that have recognized Taiwan this year are the Bahamas,
Grenada, Liberia and Belize. Except for the Bahamas, which had not had
diplomatic relations with either capital, each country previously had recognized
Beijing. The Chinese responded by suspending relations with each of these
countries, a step just short of severing relations.

Taiwan is offering the prospect of technical and economic aid, particularly a
new Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, endowed with a $1.2 billion this year.
There has been some domestic criticism of the diplomatic offensive, on the
ground that it is silly to buy friendships with tiny states, but many others
back the policy.

''Now that we have money and now that we have declared to the world that we want
to share our international responsibilities, when deciding who to give it to
naturally we give it to countries with which we want to promote relations,''
said Tsai Chengwen, chairman of the political science department of National
Taiwan University.

About a dozen countries have opened representative offices here in the last 18
months, and many others have sent trade delegations or relaxed visa restrictions
for Taiwan passport-holders.

The upheavals in Communist countries are also regarded as presenting new
opportunities, particularly since those nations are desperate for capital. Trade
delegations are exploring opportunities with Vietnam, and the Government here
this week eased restrictions on travel to Eastern Europe.

In the interview, Mr. Lien appeared to be wary of saying anything that would
antagonize Beijing. Taiwanese officials used to seize every opportunity to
denounce the Communists.

''To realize our national aspiration of unification,'' Mr. Lien explained, ''we
must above all be rational and realistic. Verbal acrimony and hostile jargon are
only for propaganda value. They serve no purpose.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Backs a U.N. Trusteeship for Cambodia

BYLINE: By SHERYL WuDUNN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Dec. 2


Prince Norodom Sihanouk has endorsed a recent Australian proposal under which
the Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia would be dismantled and the nation
placed under a trusteeship run by the United Nations.

Prince Sihanouk, the leader of the Cambodian rebel coalition, said at a news
conference this week that once such a trusteeship were in place, he would be
willing to have his coalition vacate its seat in the United Nations.

Two non-Communist guerrilla groups, led by Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann, a
former Prime Minister, form a coalition with the Communist Khmer Rouge against
the Government in Phnom Penh.

The plan, first proposed by Australia's Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, calls
for the Cambodia seat to be vacated before the United Nations establishes the
trusteeship. The United Nations would then organize and supervise general
elections in Cambodia.

Even with Prince Sihanouk's backing, the plan faces formidable obstacles. An
Asian diplomat here said, for example, that it was unlikely that the Cambodian
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen would agree to be dismantled. Vietnam says
that it withdrew its troops from Cambodia in late September, but Prince Sihanouk
and his coalition have voiced skepticism that all the troops are gone.

Since then, Cambodian Government forces have been defending themselves against
attacks by the rebel coalition, which is dominated militarily by the Khmer
Rouge.

Sihanouk Sees a Ruse

At the news conference on Monday, Prince Sihanouk repeated assertions by his
coalition that Prime Minister Hun Sen's troops have been bolstered by Vietnamese
soldiers in disguise.

Although he said he supported the Australian plan, Prince Sihanouk emphasized
that he still preferred a four-party provisional Government in which his
coalition would join with the Hun Sen Government in Phnom Penh. The Prince said
this proposal would limit the power of the Khmer Rouge.

Even though Washington supports Prince Sihanouk, the United States and many
other countries oppose a return to power of the Khmer Rouge, which ruled
Cambodia from 1975 through 1978 and, led by Pol Pot, presided over a brutal
remaking of Cambodian society during which more than a million Cambodians died.

The Prince said that under his plan for a four-party coalition, the United
Nations, with peacekeeping forces, would supervise the dismantling of all armed
forces, or all except 10,000 soldiers for each faction. The rival factions would
be banned from entering Phnom Penh and would be confined to barracks designated
by the United Nations.

He added that if certain leaders of the Khmer Rouge were unacceptable to the
other three factions, the leaders should not be appointed to the new Government.
The implication was that Pol Pot and other Khmer Rouge leaders would not be
allowed in the new Government.

'No Consensus'

The Prince admitted, however, that negotiations toward that kind of solution
appeared to be deadlocked.

''There's no consensus,'' he said in an impassioned speech at his residential
compound in Beijing. ''There's no way to get out of the nightmare and the victim
is the Cambodian people.''

''We have to come to a new idea,'' he added. ''And the new idea is a United
Nations trusteeship.''

Prince Sihanouk said he believed that China and the Khmer Rouge probably would
not accept the new proposal, and it is also not clear how Vietnam would react.
But he said he believed that Western nations would support it.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry declined to comment other than to say it had
''taken note'' of the Australian proposal. Officials at the Vietnamese Embassy
also declined to comment.

''I think it was just a posture,'' said a Western diplomat in Beijing.

The diplomat added that the proposal would also entail some technical and legal
difficulties.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

British Group Clears Mines Of Kabul War

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Dec. 2


Two months ago, Guy Willoughby shed the natty suit that he has frequently worn
in Kabul, dropped to his hands and knees off a highway north of here, and worked
his way through a Soviet minefield.

Using a metal detector, a probe and his hands, Mr. Willoughby, a former Guards
officer in the British Army, lifted enough mines to clear a narrow path. That
done, the 29-year-old Englishman and a companion, Paul Jefferson, cleared
another, smaller minefield nearby.

Back in Kabul, Mr. Willoughby, great-grandson of a former viceroy of India,
departed for a vacation in England, where his passions include horse breeding
and polo.

Mr. Willoughby, director of a London-based group that calls itself the Hazardous
Areas Life-Support Organization - the initials are HALO - will be back, planning
for a role in what is likely to be the most complicated mine-clearing operation
ever undertaken.

By its estimates and that of other organizations that have assessed the problem,
including the United Nations, 10 years of war have left at least three million
unexploded mines lying in the mountain gulleys and hardscrabble tracts of
Afghanistan.

Children Are Prominent Victims

More than any other weapon, mines have been the scourge of the war, maiming and
killing tens of thousands of people. The hospitals of Kabul and other cities are
filled to the corridors with victims, many of them children who last limbs and
eyes when they accidentally triggered one of the deadly explosives scattered
across the country by Soviet forces and their Afghan Government allies, or by
the Muslim guerrillas who have opposed them.

Even when the war ends, the dying will not. According to Alexander Blyth, Mr.
Willoughby's assistant here, poor mapping of many minefields - and the failure
to map many of them at all -will create huge problems.

Because of the heavy spring runoff of rain from the Hindu Kush mountains, many
of the mines that have been mapped have moved, perhaps as much as a mile from
their original positions. ''It could be 20 or 30 years before the problem is
under control'' said Mr. Blyth, 28 years old, and like Mr. Willoughby, a former
Guards officer.

For the moment, there is little to be done. The clearing done by the two men
south of the town of Pul-i-Khumri, along the Salang highway that connects Kabul
to the Soviet Union, was to test the accuracy of Soviet mine maps and to show
the Afghan Army's engineering corps how the job is done. The Kabul forces have
little experience in lifting mines, and scarcely any incentive as long as the
war continues, to begin the work. There is also little faith that the job can be
done safely.

''Afghans hate mines,'' Mr. Blyth said.'' Their instinct is to get as far away
from them as posssible.''

Little Soviet Instruction

The mine maps that do exist were delivered to the Afghans by the Soviet forces
48 hours before the Soviet troops pulled out in February, with little or no
attempt, according to Afghan officers, to explain them. Mr. Willoughby has seen
the maps, and photographed many of them, creating an archive that could be
crucial if fighting should threaten the Government's records. But the
indications from the Pul-i-Khumri experiment suggest that many of the maps may
be of limited value.

''It was very much a matter of the diligence of the individual Soviet field
commander,'' Mr. Blyth said. ''Some of them just planted the mines and forgot
about them, without any record at all. Others drew very inaccurate maps, and
there were those who did the job responsibly.''

In laying mines, that involves observance of the Geneva conventions on warfare,
which require combatants to map and mark all minefields, and to surround them,
usually with barbed wire.

Soviet mines account for the majority of those distributed around the country,
and the rebels have made widespread use of them. The result is a hodgepodge of
mine types, from huge Soviet devices that can be hung in trees to American
claymores, Italian plastic mines that have acoustic-detonation mechanisms and
Chinese copies of Soviet devices dating to World War II. Belgian, British and
Swedish mines have found their way here, too.

A Particularly Insidious Kind

As in Vietnam, extensive use has also been made of booby traps in dolls, toys,
pens and matchboxes.

But the biggest problem has arisen from the Soviet practice of airdropping
mines, generally in canisters that exploded in the air and scattered up to 360
tiny ''butterfly'' mines. Many of the mines lacked the timing devices that are
supposed to disarm them after a 24-to-48-hour period, and in others, the timing
mechanisms failed.

Worse, the Soviet forces appear to have kept no maps of the airdropped devices.
Almost every day brings more childern to Kabul's hospitals who have lost limbs
after picking up green-and-brown explosives that are about the size and weight
of cigarette packages.

In Pakistan, American and British experts, among others, are training Afghan
refugees to recognize and disarm mines. But the British organization, so far, is
the only foreign group to have seen the mine maps, and the only one to have
attempted to work through the Kabul Government. With suspicion abounding on
every side, it has faced an uphill battle.

''People see these former British officers heading for the Defense Ministry with
their briefcases, and they jump to conclusions,'' Mr. Blyth said. ''Pity,
really, when all we're trying to do is help.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: Princeton;
Veterans Attend Rally in Protest Of Flag Burning

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 67, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 376 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J.


Responding to a flag-burning episode at Princeton University last month, the New
Jersey Chapter of the Ex-Prisoners of War rallied around Old Glory on the campus
last week.

In a gathering sponsored by The Princeton Tory, a conservative student magazine,
a dozen speakers denounced flag burning as an acceptable form of protest,
criticized Students for Social Responsibility, the Princeton group that
organized the Nov. 8 flag burning, and admonished students to respect their
nation and its symbols.

Daniel Weiss, who served in Vietnam, urged: ''Live within the Bill of Rights and
the Constitution. Go ahead, write your Congressmen and Senators. But don't burn
a flag.''

Another former serviceman went further. Spotting one of last month's flag
burners among nearly 100 people, about a third of them students, at the rally,
he challenged the student to burn a flag again. ''You were protected when you
burned your flag then, but I'll bury you here if you try it now,'' he said.

Surrounded by Veterans

The student, Oleg Urminsky, who by this time was surrounded by jeering
ex-servicemen, was hustled away by friends.

In November, Mr. Urminsky, a Czechoslovak-born junior now living in Hawaii, and
Daniel Delaney, a sophomore from Albany, burned two small American flags as
about 50 other students cheered and some 30 counterprotesters waved a giant flag
and shouted ''U.S.A., U.S.A.''

At one point, Alexandra deCampi, a sophomore from Chester Heights, Pa., stole
one of the flags the students planned to burn and kept it. Participants in last
week's rally praised Ms. deCampi's ''courage and patriotism.''

Daniel Woods, who received the Distinguished Service Cross for service in the
Vietnam War and heads the Forget-Me-Nots, a group concerned with finding
soldiers missing in action, spoke of the emotional pain that many of the
veterans felt when told of the incident. ''It is something very close to my
heart,'' he said.

Mr. Urminsky and Mr. Delaney have neither been reprimanded by the university nor
arrested by the police, although Federal law now treats flag burning as illegal.
One former prisoner, Arnold Schwartz, said: ''We just want justice done. We want
them arrested, and to go through the justice system. We do give a damn.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Last month, Students for Social Responsibility held a flag burning at
Princeton University. Students affiliated with The Princeton Tory joined
veterans last week at a pro-flag rally on campus. (The New York Times/Eddie
Hausner)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Willem Dafoe, Looking for Characters With Possibility

BYLINE: By STEVE ONEY; Steve Oney is working on a book on the lynching of Leo
Frank in 1915.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2328 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Gone now are the striped prison fatigues, the sunken cheeks and the shaved head;
but even so, Willem Dafoe cannot banish the ghosts of Auschwitz. ''Imagine
living in a house where a terrible crime had happened,'' he says. ''Now magnify
that millions of times. How did it feel to be there? I expected to identify with
the horror, to break down, but that would have been obscene. I'd have been
weeping for myself. There was only one response - numbness, a terrific
numbness.''

On a Sunday evening in late November, Mr. Dafoe sits in a hotel room high above
the Sunset Strip. In just a few days - on Friday, to be exact - ''Triumph of the
Spirit,'' the film that took him to a Nazi concentration camp, will open in New
York and Los Angeles. Based on a true story, the picture features the
34-year-old actor in the role of Salamo Arouch, a Greek Jew and boxer who wass
once middleweight champion of the Balkans and survived incarceration by winning
some 200 bouts staged by his captors.

Filmed on location at Auschwitz and neighboring Birkenau in Oswiecim, Poland,
the movie is the first big-budget ($14 million) Hollywood production ever to be
shot in the grim death factories. The barracks, the yards, the infamous
Cellblock 11 where poisonous Zyklon B gas was first used, the camp gate
emblazoned with its sinister legend ''Arbeit Macht Frei'' (''Work Makes You
Free'') - all are captured in the picture. Moreover, the film's every frame is
informed by the authenticating memories of myriad survivors, not the least of
whom is Mr. Arouch, who served as a consultant.

Yet despite the film's deep roots in fact, Mr. Dafoe insists on emphasizing that
''Triumph of the Spirit'' is by no means a literal re-creation of the
Holocaust,'' a tragedy whose enormity may well render it impervious to
straightforward cinematic approaches. ''It's difficult to explain,'' says the
actor, ''but I have to make it clear that what we did was not an illustration of
what happened. Yes, it tries to be true to the spirit of history, but in the end
it's a fiction, one that I hope will encourage audiences to meditate upon
certain philosophical questions concerning death, love and survival.''

For a second, Mr. Dafoe - whose sharply drawn features and pale complexion are
tonight set off by a black T-shirt and Levis - ponders this statement. Then,
lest anyone think that by ''fiction'' he means something along the lines of
Rocky Balboa, he adds: ''This is no Hollywood treatment. I don't wreak revenge
on the SS. The issue here is survival, the very struggle for survival, and I'm
proud to say we approached it as honestly as we could.''

In short, Willem Dafoe has once again taken on one of those roles that seems
destined both to disturb and challenge moviegoers. Indeed, in the six brief
years since the actor made his screen debut in ''The Loveless,'' he has
established himself as one of the few American movie stars consistently willing
to portray characters caught up in piercing moral dilemmas. As the angelic
Sergeant Elias in ''Platoon,'' he fights and dies in a war in which he no longer
believes. As the F.B.I.'s by-the-book Agent Ward in ''Mississippi Burning,'' he
adopts the kind of questionable tactics he abhors in order to avenge the murders
of three Civil Rights workers. And as a Hamlet-like Jesus in ''The Last
Temptation of Christ,'' he doubts his identity as the Son of God even as he
hangs from the cross. Responses to Mr. Dafoe's work have, of course, varied -
''Platoon'' won him an Academy Award nomination, while ''Last Temptation''
sparked a firestorm of protest from evangelical fundamentalists - but whether
critically applauded or publicly denounced, his performances have invariably
stirred deep emotions.

While Mr. Dafoe insists that he doesn't set out to depict tortured souls (''If I
did,'' he says, ''I'd be self-conscious. I simply look for characters rich with
possibility''), he does admit that when considering a role, he always asks the
same question: ''Is this character involved in a struggle?'' And if the story of
how the actor came to be cast in ''Triumph of the Spirit'' is any indication,
he's sometimes willing to grab a potentially controversial part even when it's
not originally intended for him.

By the time Mr. Dafoe first read the screenplay for ''Triumph'' late last fall,
the project had been bouncing around Hollywood for six years. Its journey began
in 1982 when an Israeli film maker named Shimon Arama buttonholed the producer
Arnold Kopelson at a Milan film festival. A neighbor of Salamo Arouch, Mr. Arama
presented the producer with a rough version of a script based on his friend's
Auschwitz experiences.

Though initially resistant, Mr. Kopelson was moved by the idea, and he
eventually agreed to make it. Yet the producer, who was then best known for
''packaging'' a raunchy beach picture entitled ''Porky's,'' quickly learned that
''no one wanted to finance a movie about a concentration camp.

But in Hollywood, yesterday's purveyor of low-budget schlock can, on occasion,
become tomorrow's respected film maker. On a spring night in 1987, this is
exactly what happened to Mr. Kopelson when he strode off the stage of the
Dorothy Chandler Pavilion clutching the best-picture Oscar for his Vietnam war
movie, ''Platoon.'' Not only did the award signify the ultimate industry
validation, it conveyed real power. Before the producer even finished thanking
all his friends, he was thinking to himself: ''Now I can make 'Triumph of the
Spirit.' ''

In the end, Mr. Kopelson's assessment would prove correct. But he would still
have to do some scrambling. The first order of business was the script, which
needed work. For this, the producer hired a relatively unknown screenwriter
named Laurence Heath. Then there was the matter of finding a director. At the
suggestion of an executive at Orion Pictures, Mr. Kopelson sought out Robert M.
Young, whose credits include not only such well-regarded features as ''Dominick
and Eugene'' but numerous Emmy and Peabody Award-winning television
documentaries.

Initially, Mr. Kopelson's courtship of Mr. Young did not go smoothly. ''He read
the script,'' the producer recalls, ''and didn't like it. To top it off, he told
me this was reverential material, that I was a 'Hollywood producer.' '' Despite
this rebuff, Mr. Kopelson continued to pursue the director, eventually winning
him to his cause by assuring him on two vital points - the seriousness of his
own intent and his willingness to hand over almost total creative control.

Enter Willem Dafoe. Mr. Kopelson had formed a friendship with the actor on the
set of ''Platoon.'' Hoping to interest him in a small part in ''Triumph of the
Spirit,'' he sent him a revised draft of the script. ''A week later,'' the
producer recalls, ''Willem called and said he wanted to play the lead. I was
knocked out, but I was also discouraged. I didn't think I could afford him.''

Mr. Kopelson's financial wariness was well advised. Even after signing Mr. Dafoe
and other stars (Edward James Olmos, who plays one of the cursed camp trusties
known as kapos, and Robert Loggia, who plays Salamo's father); even after
receiving an acceptable screenplay; and even with that Academy Award sitting on
his shelf, the producer was again dismissed by representatives of all the major
studios.

Thus Mr. Kopelson turned to independent sources for funding. By licensing
international rights to the picture, he raised $3.5 million: from France's
Credit Lyonnais, he borrowed some $8.5 million more. ''Triumph of the Spirit''
was suddenly in business. For Willem Dafoe, the process of becoming Salamo
Arouch could now begin, and the logical starting place was Gleason's Gym in
Brooklyn. There, under the guidance of the heavyweight champion Mike Tyson's
former trainer Teddy Atlas, the actor embarked on a rigorous regimen of
calisthenics, bag work and sparring, quickly dropping 10 pounds from his already
light, 5-foot, 9-inch frame. But more was going on here than just gut
tightening. ''As an actor,'' Mr. Dafoe says, ''you like to attach yourself to
some physical act. It helps to ground you, helps you find the character or, more
important, find the character in you.''

After two months of daily workouts, Mr. Dafoe was physically ready to leave for
Auschwitz. He also believed he was emotionally ready - between sessions at
Gleason's, he had immersed himself in Holocaust literature. Yet upon arrival at
the death camp last February, he discovered that no amount of preparation could
ever have been adequate. The stark reality of the place was, quite simply,
overwhelming. ''We had to find a new psychology,'' the actor recalls. ''My guess
is that the people who were taken there were transformed into different beings,
and we had to do that by being true to the day-to-day events of camp life. We,
of course, never faced death or starvation, but by doing drills, by constantly
standing in the cold, I did begin to wear down.''

Aside from forcing these inner adjustments, Auschwitz also made other demands.
''One of the things we realized,'' Mr. Dafoe recalls, ''was that much of the
script was overly melodramatic - It seemed like artifice when compared to the
place itself.'' Consequently, cast and crew - principally Mr. Young - began the
always risky job of rewriting on the set. The result: numerous new scenes
depicting everything from the monotony of camp life (morning roll calls, queuing
up for food) to the matter-of-fact omnipresence of death.

From Mr. Young's perspective, Mr. Dafoe's willingness to adapt to the creative
uncertainty the rewriting entailed was just one of the actor's impressive
qualities. ''I wanted to make the character of Salamo a witness to the worst
nightmare of the 20th century, and this meant that during much of the movie,
Willem, regardless of the fact that he's the star, couldn't be at center
stage,'' the director says.

''For instance, there's a scene at the train station when he and the others
arrive at Auschwitz. In it, I wanted to show the confusion, the disarray. As a
consequence, the camera simply couldn't be on Willem all the time, but he never
complained. He just wanted to play the truth.''

For Mr. Dafoe, those three words - playing the truth - became gospel during the
making of ''Triumph,'' a working credo that applied even more on camera than
off. By way of example, the actor points to a scene in which Salamo learns that
he brother, who was also a prisoner at Auschwitz, is dead. ''Now the expected
reaction to that piece of news is grief,'' he says, ''but I don't react like
that. Instead, I'm angry, mad at him because he's gone. The reason I played it
that way was that Salamo is a survivor, and I simply had a strong feeling that
the survivors couldn't indulge their grief.

That Mr. Dafoe had little difficulty in adopting this rigorously searching
approach to his creative labors at Auschwitz is hardly surprising, for his most
basic notions regarding acting grew out of just such exercises.

The youngest son of an Appleton, Wis., doctor, Mr. Dafoe was something of a
''hambone kid. By the time he left high school, he knew what he wanted to do
with his life. Following a brief stint in college, he dropped out to work with
an experimental Milwaukee theater company, and shortly thereafter he moved to
New York with every intention of becoming ''a successful commercial actor.''

Instead, Mr. Dafoe almost immediately gravitated to the Theater Garage in SoHo,
home of the quirky Wooster Group, and soon he found himself covered in a red
sheet playing a rhythmically throbbing chicken heart in a takeoff on an Arch
Oboler radio mystery. Not long afterward, the actor became romantically involved
with the company's artistic director, Liz LeCompte, with whom he still lives
today.

Mr. Dafoe regards his apprenticeship in SoHo - which has really never ended; he
remains a vital part of the troupe even now - as the single most important
influence on his career. ''There are some actors who want to show, and others
who want to do,'' he says. ''These intents are very different. When you show,
you have this notion that you know something you want to express. When you do -
which is what my work with the Wooster Group has taught me to try - you feel
like you know nothing but want to learn. The way you learn is by submitting
yourself to a story, and letting it take you. Then you're really performing.''

Salamo Arouch is not the only character Mr. Dafoe can be seen ''doing'' this
winter. Come Christmas week, he will be visible opposite Tom Cruise in ''Born on
the Fourth of July.'' Though the actor's role in this film version of the story
of Vietnam veteran and paraplegic Ron Kovic is small, he regards it as crucial.
''I play a guy named Charlie from Chicago who lives in a community of whoring
and drinking quadriplegics down in Mexico. At a low point, the Kovic character
shows up, and I force him to confront himself and go back to America and put his
life on a constructive path.''

Mr. Dafoe has also just completed work on David Lynch's new film, ''Wild At
Heart.'' In it, he plays a ''white trash sociopath'' named Bobby Peru. ''The
great thing about this character,'' the actor says, ''is that he's a real rarity
- a psychotic at peace with himself.''

And on this warm November evening, Mr. Dafoe is in California to begin shooting
yet another new picture, John Milius's ''Flight of the Intruder,'' in which he
plays a renegade Naval bombardier whose squadron illegally attacks Hanoi during
the waning years of the Vietnam conflict.

For the moment, though, the actor's mind is still focused on ''Triumph of the
Spirit.'' ''It was a tremendous privilege to film at Auschwitz,'' he says. ''But
it was also a responsibility. You know, I read that Elie Wiesel piece
'Trivializing Memory, Art and the Holocaust,' and I must say that I agreed with
him. But Salamo's story is one we all felt we had to tell, and we tried to do it
with integrity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: William Dafoe as a concentration camp inmate in ''Triumph of the
Spirit''

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: CRITICS' CHOICES;
Vietnam Returns to the Home Screen

BYLINE: By Richard Bernstein

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 404 words


In the sudden surge of films about America's Vietnam experience, 84 CHARLIE
MOPIC, newly released on cassette (1989, RCA/Columbia Home Video, $89.95),
stands out for the originality of its cinematic devices. The writer-director
Patrick Duncan imagines that a six-man patrol, sent into the jungle to pinpoint
the location of enemy troops, is accompanied by an Army cameraman - known as 84
Charlie in Army lingo - assigned to make a training documentary. What the viewer
sees is the war through the lens of 84 Charlie (Mopic stands for motion
picture).

There are moments when Mr. Duncan's cinema verite technique fails to convince
and turns into standard storytelling. But most of the way through, his concept
works beautifully to create a remarkably compelling, intimate, realistic glimpse
into the nature of jungle combat.

The screenplay is blunt and convincing, full of the creative profanity and
gallows humor of soldiers. Mr. Duncan never preaches here. He is not pushing a
political or moral point. ''84 Charlie Mopic'' manages in its unpretentiousness
and simplicity to tell a realistic story, showing what it is really like to be
six ordinary guys from America banded together in that most fundamental
experience of human bonding, the struggle to survive.

A number of other movies about Vietnam are available on videocassette. PLATOON
(1986, Vestron Video, $24.98), Oliver Stone's unsparing award-winning portrayal
of a group of Americans in tragic confrontation with war and, more important,
with themselves, broke new ground. This ''Lord of the Flies'' of the Vietnam War
is as powerful a portrait of the mindlessness and absurdity of war as has ever
been put on the screen. John Irving's HAMBURGER HILL (1987, Vestron, $89.98)
realistically retells one of the most sanguinary and apparently pointless
episodes in the war, an assault by 600 American soldiers on a heavily fortified
hill. Its fascination is not with the spritual or political aspects of the war
but with neutral military technique. FULL METAL JACKET (1987, Warner Home Video,
$89.95), Stanley Kubrick's adaptation of Gustav Hasford's novel ''The
Short-Timers,'' traces a group of soldiers from basic training in South Carolina
to the battlegrounds of Vietnam. The violent, vulgar, supremely irrational
nature of soldiering and war invests every scene, and Vincent Canby called this
a ''harrowing, beautiful'' film of ''very rare imagination.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Richard Brooks in ''Mopic''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS FORUM: WHERE COMPETITIVENESS STARTS;
Values Are the Means and the End

BYLINE: By ROBERT L. DILENSCHNEIDER; Robert L. Dilenschneider is president and
chief executive of Hill & Knowlton Inc.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words


For at least 25 years, we Americans have failed to instill basic values in our
children, in the workplace, in government and in many other parts of our
society. We are simply not getting across such basic ideas as decency, fair
play, courtesy, hard work, scholarship, perseverance, self-confidence, teamwork,
discipline and a host of other character traits.

We have been traveling a path of ethical relativism. Nothing, it seemed, could
be measured. In short, we refused to keep score on values. If people came in
late to work, surely they had a good reason. If research, management development
or cooperation did not measure up, it was probably the system's fault.

American business - and scores of social scientists - gave us every conceivable
reason why we shouldn't measure ourselves, and why we did not have to. Our
wealth seemed inexhaustible and our world position permanently secure. But after
one ''Great Society'' and a war in Vietnam, those convictions have evaporated.

In business, values mean measurement, and measurement means record-keeping. This
does not mean taking names just for the joy of exerting power over someone else.
It is a deadly serious necessity if we are to make society accountable. New
techniques to measure those values that otherwise defy measurement may be the
most important management breakthrough in the coming years. It is already
happening to a limited extent. We are learning to measure customer loyalty,
marketing preference, departmental collaboration, and research ingenuity, for a
start.

In our information age, everything becomes more precise. We can learn a huge
amount of specific information, and we are expected to use it. A major reason
why the Japanese are so successful in business is that they ruthlessly measure
and manage everything they do.

Measurement means developing a real understanding of cause and effect. But
understanding cause and effect, even in employee relations, eludes plenty of
managers. A recent survey of managers found that almost half of them did not
understand that people repeat behavior that is rewarded. When managers don't
understand the connection between action and reinforcement, it is impossible for
an organization to operate with values. Conversely, there isn't a single premier
company in business today that does not recognize, advance, communicate and even
exploit its own strong values.

Values are practical. In the products and services we buy each day, we judge the
values that are offered. I suspect nearly every one of us is a more efficient
values consumer than a values manager. But there is no reason why we should not
apply the terms of such a hard-headed values audit to our management lives too.

What are the values embraced by winning organizations, we might ask. What values
support human cooperation and support? What level of technology will foster peak
performance? What values will reduce stress and stimulate positive excitement?
And how can we achieve the right values with a sensible investment?

How will modern business come to master the values of challenge? Don't today's
companies dart from one management preoccupation to another? If they have a
constant concern, is it about anything that can improve the bottom line? How can
this climate possibly favor the establishment of values - as worthwhile and
sought after as they may be?

I think there are seven steps to installing strong values in an organization:

First, gather reliable data on the values each organization has, needs, and
wants. Do an exhaustive study.

Step two is to formulate a values plan. Ask probing questions: What kind of
values does our company need? Where does the marketplace support our values?
Where are we in conflict? Everything will not come clear in an instant. The
Johnson & Johnson credo, one of the best values statements around, has been the
subject of nearly continual internal debate and refinement for decades.

Step three is to convert the values plan into a communications agenda. Look for
the ways to publicize the key values through the standard communications
channels.

The fourth step is to find the values lessons in unexpected, critical events
that arise. At our company, every time we turn away new business because it
didn't meet our standards, I make sure that fact is publicized throughout the
organization. The bigger the account we reject, the more we celebrate it. It is
like the people who make Steuben glass smashing the crystal they produce that
has even the smallest blemish.

Step five is to set up measuring systems to monitor values performance. This is
a real opportunity for companywide participation. Companies must challenge each
employee to help find ways to measure elusive goals like innovation and
competitive awareness.

The sixth step is to teach management how to harmonize values when they make
decisions. That often means explaining the logic of an organization's
decision-making process, especially key decisions. Let people know what can be
compromised - and when - and what cannot be compromised, ever.

The seventh point of a values program is to make values a continuous concern. It
cannot be a one-year program.

All of this may sound hopelessly corny, but the way world competition is shaping
up we may have a choice between being cynical, sophisticated and poor, or corny,
committed and competitive.

Americans are really just beginning to deal with the fact that values are a
global phenomenon, not just an American one. There are many systems of values
that are both heathy and different from our own. Not all of these systems are
easily compatible. The controversy between Japan and the United States is an
excellent case in point. But we should focus less on how our value systems
differ, and instead make our own values as strong as they can be. In the end, if
we don't do a more vigorous job of managing values in our own companies and in
our own culture, I am certain of this: We will have less of a chance to shape
values on a world stage. But if we do advance values in an aggressive way the
American spirit will rise and make its mark in the world we are about to face.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
On the Same Side

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The test of Malta will be whether George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev have taken
advantage of the sudden new reality in East-West relations. That is the fact
that, in profound ways, the interests of the United States and the Soviet Union
now coincide.

Think of the extraordinary events of the last month in Eastern Europe. For us in
the West they represent the vindication of longings we have expressed for 40
years without ever really believing they could be fulfilled. The freedom of
Czechoslovaks and Hungarians and East Germans and Poles, we would say, is in our
deepest interest.

But President Gorbachev must also have concluded that it was in Soviet interest
to let the revolution go ahead in Eastern Europe. He must have, or it would not
be happening.

How much he anticipated we cannot know. But when the moment came to choose, he
unhesitatingly chose to let the people of Eastern Europe go their own way. He
decided to liquidate the Soviet empire there rather than intervene to maintain
it by force: an intervention that would have destroyed his relations with the
West. He decided that Soviet interests lay in the West rather than in
rebellious, unproductive satellites.

Now both superpowers, and their allies, have a common interest in finding a new
point of repose in Europe. For both sides, there is a tension between the desire
for change and the desire for stability.

To speak of two sides is in fact outdated. There is a common interest among an
extremely varied group of European nations in easing the anxieties that
accompany rapid change. All want fresh reassurance about arrangements for peace
and security.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev know that they cannot impose arrangements on others.
But they also know that they have the power to inspire confidence in the hope of
solutions. That was their challenge on Malta.  There is a common interest too in
a balance of change and stability in the Soviet Union itself. President Bush
recognized that when he finally said, and said forcefully, that the United
States supports perestroika and wants Mr. Gorbachev to succeed.

On the right in the United States there are those who want Mr. Gorbachev to
fail. They would like to see the Soviet Union break up, with most of the
republics as separate states and Russia reduced to the size of the Grand Duchy
of Muscovy in the 14th century.

Do they think the result would be a collection of peaceful democratic states? To
the contrary, we would be likely to see much extremism: fascism, anti-Semitism,
Islamic fundamentalism and so on, posing threats not just to their own people
but to the peace of others.

Another common interest of the United States and the Soviet Union is in reducing
their defense costs. That is Mr. Gorbachev's best hope of making more goods
available at home, and Mr. Bush's of cutting the budget deficit and meeting
domestic social needs.

For both countries, the logical first place to make savings is in troops
stationed on the territory of European allies: 305,000 Americans, 600,000 Soviet
soldiers. Here again stability has its claims along with the pressure for
change. Mr. Gorbachev surely does not want all U.S. forces out of Europe in a
hurry.

Finally, the two parties have a mutual interest of an urgent kind in the third
world. That is to ease the burdens imposed on them by client states.

The Soviet Union has been spending upward of $15 billion a year to support Cuba,
Vietnam and other countries. The United States has its clients in Latin America,
Asia and the Middle East. Some of that money is justifiable economic aid. But
some fuels wars that are overdue for political settlement: in Afghanistan, for
example.

It is not only the money that burdens the U.S. and U.S.S.R.; it is the nature of
some of those clients. Supporting the bloody Colonel Mengistu in Ethiopia
reflects no glory on the Soviet Union. The United States hardly benefits
politically from its association with the right in El Salvador or the Khmer
Rouge in Cambodia.

The two superpowers still have very different viewpoints on those third world
conflicts, and on other matters. Nirvana has not arrived in the last month. But
both countries can approach issues now without, or almost without, ideological
baggage. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev are more like ordinary negotiators,
self-interested but seeing the possibility of mutual benefit in agreements.

The two leaders went to this meeting with another advantage: respect for each
other's restraint. Mr. Gorbachev showed incredible calm during the turmoil of
November; Mr. Bush avoided all temptations to crow. That, too, was part of the
promise of Malta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

And Now, a Few Words From Jenny Holzer

BYLINE: By Grace Glueck; Grace Glueck is art news editor of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4038 words


ONE OF THE MOST UBIQUITOUS PRESENCES ON THE current art scene is a 39-year-old
maverick named Jenny Holzer, a tricky impresario of language who makes words
into visual spectaculars. A writer who doesn't think the printed page is
''enough of a forum,'' Holzer hatches messages that range from deadpanned
aphorisms to dark meditations about the human condition, embosses them on
plaques, engraves them on marble or granite benches and sarcophagus lids and -
with skilled technological choreography - sets them prancing in dazzles of
colored light.

With its accessible texts, her work disputes the traditional notion of art as a
rarefied object, and though some critics are put off by Holzer's prosy
presentations, she is indisputably an art-world star. Her work - which sells at
prices ranging from a democratic $15 to $25 for lettered caps and T-shirts, to a
lofty $100,000 for a sarcophagus and computer-animated sign - is seen in museums
from New York to Tokyo, and it has entered such big-league collections as those
of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, the Pompidou Center in Paris, the
Stedelijk in Eindhoven and the Tate in London. A Holzer retrospective begins
Dec. 12 at the Guggenheim Museum in New York. And next May will see her biggest
honor to date: a solo show in the United States pavilion at the prestigious
Venice Biennale, where she will be the first female artist thus to represent her
country.

She calls her work ''installation art - a totality designed for a particular
space,'' and adds, ''I like to have the whole thing pulse or be animated.''
Though she has cleverly usurped the underused mediums of ''gimme'' caps, tomb
lids and stone benches to get the message out, she is more famous for sharing
her thoughts electronically. She has done computer-animated billboards in New
York's Times Square and in the signage jungle of Las Vegas; teamed up with other
artists during the 1984 election to make public a strong anti-Reagan message on
a giant, mobile electronic screen; and invaded the cable channel MTV with
flashing Holzerisms.

She is at home, too, in more intimate venues. Her ''artiest'' and most
impressive work to date is ''Laments,'' which makes the third floor of the Dia
Art Foundation in New York into a kind of space-age mausoleum.

Holzer's work, like that of a number of her contemporaries - Barbara Kruger,
Louise Lawler, Matt Mullican and Richard Prince - incorporates ''slogans,
symbols and stereotypes that pose questions about the social context in which
words and images operate and manipulate us,'' Richard Koshalek, director of the
Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, has written.

What distinguishes Holzer is that, while most artists of her stripe juxtapose
their words with other imagery, Holzer regards hers as images in themselves. She
has pushed them out of the cozy art-world context to confront the general public
and, mastering the techniques and devices of advertising media, like
light-emitting diode (LED) machines - the electronic signs on which texts flow
in streams of color - she has subversively co-opted them for her own ends. Not
unlike some televangelists, Holzer combines an old-fashioned preacher's zeal for
spreading her gospel with an advertiser's skill at public presentation.

Her work is ''about the end of the 80's'' and ''very American,'' says Ned
Rifkin, chief curator for exhibitions at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington and
a member of the advisory committee that selected Holzer for the Biennale.

If, by his description, Rifkin means Holzer's ease with technology, her
nonelitist approach, her impatience with tradition and her wish to reach
multitudes, then it rings true. Holzer draws heavily on American sign language
for her imagery, from television commercials and tombstones, to what she calls
the ''roadside garbage'' of billboards.

Living high on a diet of moral fiber, she is deeply engaged with contemporary
issues - nuclear holocaust, AIDS, the environment, feminism, the poor, the power
of big business and big government.

''If you're a good artist you need to know what the live stuff is,'' she says.

Her aphoristic advisories to the world can convey the doom-and-gloom of a
soapbox ranter, the angst of a civilized soul in a brutish society, the sardonic
humor of a streetwise adolescent. Her most disquieting sallies are couched in
the matter-of-fact locution of her native Ohio, where people, as she puts it,
''talk common sense.''

''LACK OF CHARISMA CAN BE FATAL,'' she has written. And ''DON'T WATCH THE
UNDERCLASS. IT'S MORE LIKELY THAT THE WARLORDS WILL KILL YOU.'' And ''SPIT ALL
OVER SOMEONE WITH A MOUTHFUL OF MILK IF YOU WANT TO FIND OUT SOMETHING ABOUT
THEIR (sic) PERSONALITY FAST.''

A GRADUATE OF THE Rhode Island School of Design, where she tried her hand at
more traditional art-making, Holzer still occasionally indulges in pencil
drawing, which she now calls ''a private pleasure.'' ''It's very unencumbered,''
she says, ''but it seems too hard to make it do what I want art to do.''

What Holzer wants art to ''do,'' obviously - in common with many artists of her
generation - is to abandon its traditional distance from life and make closer
contact with a larger public. The idea of using public media to bring this about
is an engaging one, and there is a certain cuteness about caps, T-shirts,
electronic signs and granite benches carrying ''alternative public service
messages.'' But as art, these messages wear thin, and therein lies the debate
over what she hath wrought.

In fact, a not-inconsiderable number of viewers, in and out of the art world,
are put off by Holzer's work. Is it really art? Why isn't she content to confine
herself to the printed page, or even, as one wag suggested, the fortune cookie?
Still, what some disdain is precisely what others admire.

The film maker Dennis Hopper, for instance, taken by Holzer's work, used her as
a role model for a recent project, in the improbable screenplay for which a
Mafia hitman falls in love with a contemporary artist. (The project may or may
not eventually reach the screen.) In a recent interview for the magazine Flash
Art, Hopper explained the inspiration: ''I just walked into a gallery show . . .
and the next thing . . . that worked for me was Jenny. I like to watch the
truisms and sort of get dumb watching them. They become an accumulated thing and
you get so dumb that you almost think that you understand.''

Among artists, those involved with the figurative tradition in painting tend to
find her work offputting. ''When I come across one of those plaques she sticks
up, I enjoy it,'' says Eric Fischl, a painter internationally known for his
disturbing views of suburban America. ''But I never go out of my way to see her
work. I think the visual content is stronger than the word content. Her literary
talent is fairly weak.''

Holzer's real admirers among artists tend, naturally, to be those involved with
newer forms. ''Her work is great, a bit ahead of its time,'' says Christoper
Wool, a painter who last year began to make ''word drawings'' that deal with
words as abstractions, and was chosen for this year's Whitney Biennial. ''She
has managed to politicize her art without losing the poetics of it. And she's
made the light-emitting diodes so much her own that no one else can use them
without evoking her work.''

Holzer explains herself this way: ''My legacy from growing up in the 60's is
that I want to make art that's understandable, has some relevance and importance
to almost anyone. And once I've made the stuff, the idea is get it out to the
people. I want them to encounter it in different ways, find it on the street, in
electric signs and so forth. I like fooling with different presentations and
modes. I like to make it turn purple and go upside down.''

She accepts the term ''political'' for her work. ''I hope it's political in the
larger sense, not topical,'' she says. ''It deals with life-and-death issues;
that's supposedly what politics are about.'' An avowed feminist, she is usually
seen as part of a group of other strong female artists - Cindy Sherman, Louise
Lawler and Kruger, among them - who in their work seem concerned about ''real
world'' rather than fantasy subject matter, especially the might of military and
corporate America. Holzer agrees that ''maybe we do use more real-world subject
matter than a lot of male artists, because we're hit on a little harder. Women
still tend to be the underdog.'' Like many artists, Holzer prefers to think of
her work as outside art historical categories. But she is certainly heir to this
era's intensifying use of written language in art, starting in the early 1900's
with the introduction by Picasso and Braque of words and letters drawn from
newspapers, signboards and posters into their Cubist paintings. Forming part of
the elaborate interplay of spatial and formal elements in these artists' work,
the collaged words were meant to reflect their actual presence in the urban
environment. In the 1960's, many artists - influenced by other disciplines and
the proliferation of signs and graphics in the environment - began to explore
the use of words in more aggressive ways. The pre-Pop stars Jasper Johns and
Robert Rauschenberg used them in their work as both visual elements and private
signs, and in the ensuing Pop period, Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, James
Rosenquist and Ed Ruscha actively took their cues from the culture at large,
either mocking or celebrating the cliches of advertising and the media.

An important presence, too, in the 60's and 70's were the Conceptual artists -
among them, Joseph Kosuth, Lawrence Weiner, John Baldessari, Douglas Huebler,
Hanne Darboven and others. Opposed to the ''elite'' concept of art as
collectible object, they ''dematerialized'' it by making language a part of its
formal content. Diagrams, charts, definitions and documentations often
accompanied their - largely photographic - work.

The artist who is perhaps closest to Holzer's own perceptions is Bruce Nauman, a
man of many mediums. Language has always been an important concern of his, and
he has done a number of pieces in neon and, more recently, carved stone, that
play with words having charged or symbolic meaning in American life. ''I started
doing what I'm doing before I knew about Nauman, but I love what he does and
he's a continuing inspiration,'' says Holzer.

Also in Holzer's pantheon are Leonardo; Joseph Beuys, the politically active
German sculptor, performance artist and teacher; Andy Warhol (''an art artist
and a public artist who went for big topics and who knew, from soup cans to
electric chair, how to make perfect American art''), and the playwright Samuel
Beckett who - though Holzer came ''relatively late in life'' to his laconic
style - she feels ''writes better than anyone I've ever read before.''

A TALL, ATHLETIC-LOOKING woman whose cascade of chestnut hair gives her a
still-teen-age appearance, Holzer, whose brisk self-assuredness seems to reflect
her comfortable background, nonetheless considers herself ''something of a
leftover hippie,'' for whom rebellion was part and parcel of growing up.

Born in 1950 in the tiny town of Gallipolis, Ohio, she was raised in Lancaster,
near Columbus, surrounded by Republicans and horse people. Her father was a star
college athlete who became a Ford dealer. Her mother, active in community
affairs, had taught riding before she was married. (The family now lives in the
resort town of Southern Pines, N.C., where Holzer's younger sister is a horse
trader.) Holzer says she was required, like her sister and brother - he was
later killed in a motorcycle accident - to be ''very much of a jock.'' But as a
college student, she sneaked off to participate in anti-Vietnam war
demonstrations in Washington. ''I wanted to go march with the other gang rather
than be a Young Republican,'' she says.

From childhood, when she drew enormous, packed panoramas, Holzer had considered
herself an artist. ''But I never bothered really to prove it until college.'' In
the liberal arts division at the University of Chicago, she finally began to
make art ''instead of just saying I was an artist,'' and continued in her fourth
year, at Ohio University. She started out doing abstractions, influenced by the
luminous canvases of Mark Rothko and some of the early color field painters like
Morris Louis.

Unhappy with the ''third-generation stripe paintings'' she was producing, Holzer
went on to graduate work at the Rhode Island School of Design. To get away from
abstraction, she began ''to make miserable failed paintings with writing in
them,'' she says. There, too, she began to do her first public works, leaving
bits of art outdoors for people to come upon.

''I'd paint long strips of canvas and abandon them on the beach, or put bread
out in geometric patterns for the pigeons downtown,'' says Holzer, who is even
now an eager eavesdropper on others' reactions to her creations. ''I wanted
people to find something nice and intriguing to puzzle over. Then I'd go back to
see if the things were still there, or if anyone would notice. I guess I wanted
to make contact, somehow.''

She was bored by the level of instruction at the school, ''which ran to painting
fish and oranges and apples. At the time, a major influence on me was Duchamp.
He did what he wanted to do and used his brain. So I thought you could make any
kind of art you wanted to, and I was surprised that my instructors were
surprised.''

She considers her crowning achievement at RISD the painting of her entire studio
- every surface in it - a dazzling white stained with blue acrylic wash. ''It
was spatially quite disconnecting - you'd walk into the room and kind of lose
your feet. I thought it was a great combination of lovely and peculiar.''

At RISD, Holzer began studying diagrams in books ''that explained how the world
works, in every possible discipline, from theoretical physics to psychology. I
saw the diagrams as the most stripped-down of drawings. And then I got more
interested in their captions, which explained everything cleanly and tersely.
That was one of the ways in which I arrived at the writing I do now.'' But
school authorities, according to Holzer, were not enchanted by the direction her
work was taking. She sensed more options in New York, and applied to the Whitney
Museum's independent study program, which gives young artists a year's
orientation to the New York art world.

Living in then-grungy SoHo, Holzer began to ponder the idea of doing public
works in an urban milieu. The reading list at the Whitney ranged the spectrum of
Western and Eastern thought. ''I realized the stuff was important and profound,
so I thought maybe I could make it more accessible.'' The result was what she
calls her ''Truisms,'' a lengthy series of one-liners in the form of ''people's
pronouncements'' that expressed her idea of ''everything that could be right or
wrong with the world.''

An explosion of psychotic posters around Times Square, warning men of
tuberculosis and leprosy if they frequented the area, fascinated Holzer, and she
also took notice of the ''tons'' of New Wave music posters that were around. ''I
began to see that the short texts I was writing were poster material,'' Holzer
says, ''and that I could paste them up anywhere.'' And she did, relentlessly,
all over town. Her ''Truisms'' are hit-and-run Holzergrams - ranging from pithy
to platitudinous - that approach conventional wisdom a little bit sideways.
Among other things, they are a gnomic form of theater that allowed her to take
on the roles of feminist militant (''ROMANTIC LOVE WAS INVENTED TO MANIPULATE
WOMEN''); callous Yuppie (''OLD FRIENDS ARE BETTER LEFT IN THE PAST''); buckeye
sage (''IT IS MAN'S FATE TO OUTSMART HIMSELF'') and psychobabbler (''ANGER OR
HATE CAN BE A USEFUL MOTIVATING FORCE'').

''It's fun wandering around other people's minds,'' Holzer says. ''In the
'Truisms,' I wanted to write cliches and I was successful. You only have a few
seconds to catch people, so you can't do long, reasoned arguments. The 'Truisms'
don't make value judgments, but they express truth for their original speakers.
I wanted the viewer to make his way through them and maybe gain some tolerance.
I hope they're not simplistic or idiotic.''

In the late 70's, the ''Truisms'' graduated from outdoor walls to those of
alternative spaces, among them Franklin Furnace in downtown Manhattan and the
hip Fashion Moda in the South Bronx. Holzer says she took to these spaces
because they were ''populist,'' and dealt directly with their local communities.
They also gave her a showcase more oriented to the art world.

She was too young and her work too oddball for commercial galleries to be
interested, ''nor were museums touching anyone in their 20's and 30's,'' she
says. ''Now, of course, young artists do have a chance to get their stuff out,
and a star is born every minute.''

The ''Truisms'' are actually much blander than a second series, known as
''Inflammatory Essays,'' that Holzer did from 1979 to 1982, and that she has
described as ''hot, flaming nasty things'' which needed a more ''underground''
format, like the handbill. In them, she takes ''extreme positions, some left,
some right,'' and their language tends toward deep purple: ''SHRIEK WHEN THE
PAIN HITS DURING INTERROGATION. REACH INTO THE DARK AGES TO FIND A SOUND THAT IS
LIQUID HORROR. . . .''

The ''Inflammatory Essays'' - or a version of them - have reappeared in Holzer's
current work, but meanwhile she has done several other series. ''Living,'' begun
in 1980, took on a new Establishment format and tone of voice. The texts, cast
in bronze plaques or done in commercial sign-painters' style to look
institutional, were placed in more formal situations - for instance, next to the
nameplates on office buildings.

Holzer has described the works as ''upper-class anonymous'' in tone, and they
range from revelations like ''YOU LEARN THE HARD WAY TO KEEP A FINGER ON YOUR
NIPPLE WHEN SHAVING YOUR BREASTS'' to sociological patter such as ''AFFLUENT
COLLEGE-BOUND STUDENTS FACE THE REAL PROSPECT OF DOWNWARD MOBILITY. FEELINGS OF
ENTITLEMENT CLASH WITH THE AWARENESS OF IMMINENT SCARCITY.''

In the more urgent ''Survival'' series, launched in 1983 because she felt
''Living'' was getting ''too bland,'' Holzer departed from her multi-voice,
multi-view approach to express her own ''left of center'' position. ''I wanted
to support things that are helpful to people and maybe bash what I think is
dangerous,'' she says. ''So I switched from being everybody to being myself.''

In this series, she gives political instruction: ''PUT FOOD OUT IN THE SAME
PLACE EVERY DAY AND TALK TO THE PEOPLE WHO COME TO EAT AND ORGANIZE THEM'';
makes dire predictions for the human race: ''YOU ARE TRAPPED ON THE EARTH SO YOU
WILL EXPLODE''; and advises those who live like automatons: ''REMEMBER TO
REACT.''

HER ELECTRONIC breakthrough came in 1982, when the Public Art Fund approached
Holzer to do a work for the Spectacolor sign, a big, computer-animated
advertising board mounted on an office building in the heart of Times Square.
Keith Haring and Crash, another grafitti artist, had preceded her. She jumped at
the chance; her installation featured a sequence of selected ''Truisms'' in
flashing red or white lights.

''The signboard is a futuristic, eye-catching thing and I thought it was a
wonderful way to present art clearly,'' Holzer says. ''It's not that I'm trying
to thumb my nose at advertising; it's simply that I want to use means of
communication that work. But I couldn't afford Spectacolor unsubsidized, and so
after I used the big board, I bought a small LED, programmed the one-liner
'Truisms' in, and went on from there. I used them as art proper in art spaces,
and continued whenever possible to do them in public spaces.''

Holzer's most interesting use of the diodes, and her most complex and
challenging work to date, is her spectacular environment, ''Laments,'' now
installed in a cavernous third-floor arena of the Dia Art Foundation, an
alternative exhibition space on West 22d Street in Manhattan. ''Laments'' is a
clear indication that for all her populism, Holzer is at her creative best when
she accepts that art may not be for everybody.

Lined up in a dimly lighted anteroom are 13 stone sarcophagi, in adult, child
and infant sizes, each lid exquisitely lettered with an ''Inflammatory''-style
disquisition. A corresponding computer-animated sign for each tomb, mounted on a
support column in the main space, is programmed with the same text as that on
the tomb's lid. As the signs pulse in phased sequence, the texts flow upward on
them in rivers of otherworldly light, effecting what Roberta Smith, an art
critic for this newspaper, has described as ''a form of silent visual music.''

The texts themselves are, like the ''Inflammatory Essays,'' doom-laden,
holocaustic, a little wild-eyed. Some are genuinely powerful, others read like
parodies, but each takes a fix on the world in terms of the tomb's fictive
occupant. ''THE NEW DISEASE CAME. I LEARN THAT TIME DOES NOT HEAL,'' begins one,
presumably the litany of an AIDS patient; ''I DO NOT WANT TO BE LEFT TO BE
EATEN'' is part of an infant's lament.

The 13 represent ''the living dead,'' says Holzer, ''and they speak as if
measuring their lives against what might have been, what should have been.''

''Laments,'' in fact, evokes such American-grain classics as ''Spoon River
Anthology,'' Edgar Lee Masters' collection of poems that reveal the secret lives
of dead citizens, and Thornton Wilder's ''Our Town,'' in which the dead in a
cemetary live out their past lives as the quick pass their present ones in a
nearby village. Certainly, ''Laments'' has the effect, in its space, of a play
or a reading, and its components are the nearest thing Holzer has done to
creating a sense of human dialogue.

''I like the aggressiveness and the kind of futuristic beauty of the
electronics,'' she says. ''But I don't want to live completely in the age of the
diode, and I think there's a lot of room for the contemplative life. So I also
use what evokes the eternal.''

AT THE VENICE Biennale, Holzer will do her electronic signboards and carved
benches; also television spots, hats and T-shirts for souvenir stands. For her
Guggenheim show, she will take a more formalist approach. She'll do a group of
white granite ''Living'' series benches, and a group of red granite ''Survival''
series benches.

''I'll also make a curved sign to go around the ramp in three spirals, at the
level of the railing. You're dead there if you don't use that space well.''
Indeed, Holzer's spatial imagination is one of her greatest assets as an artist.

Life has changed somewhat for Holzer since her days in SoHo. She and her
husband, the artist Mike Glier, now own part of a building on the Lower East
Side, where - when in town - they occupy a pleasantly bare walk-up apartment,
free of examples of either of their work. ''Do bus drivers bring the bus home?''
asks Holzer.

They spend most of their time, however - with their new baby, Lili - in a
capacious farmhouse in New York State's Hoosick Valley, the heart of Grandma
Moses country, where there seem to be more tombstones than LED's.

The farmhouse, like their apartment, is, interestingly, free of books. As in
Manhattan, there is little art around, although a small head of Mao by the
painter Leon Golub hangs over the baby's crib. In lieu of a studio, Holzer works
out of a bedroom. ''I write with a cheap pen and a tablet,'' she says. ''Then I
go to the typewriter, and start maybe to lay things out on big pieces of paper.
When the writing is done, I program everything directly into the diodes.''

She doesn't miss the city too much. But she allows that all of its problems have
followed her upstate. ''In the city, I developed a shell,'' she says. ''New York
is very distracting and those distractions were getting stale. But here I've got
sensitized again. You worry about how to put more into your stuff; you start
caring again about things not going wrong or working out properly. I've always
thought a worried artist is a good artist.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Jenny Holzer with ''CHARISMA CAN BE FATAL,'' from her ''Truisms''
series, at the Sunrise Systems factory outside Boston where her electronic work
is engineered (Abe Frajndlich/Sygma); in Las Vegas, a Holzergram at Caesars
Palace (Barbara Gladstone Gallery) (pgs. 42-43); at the Dia Art Foundation in
New York, 13 sarcophagi comprise Holzer's ''Laments'' (Bill Jacobson Studio)
(pg. 113)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Bit Player Buys Into the Computer Age

BYLINE: By John Maxwell Hamilton; John Maxwell Hamilton, senior public affairs
adviser at the World Bank, is the author of the forthcoming book ''Entangling
Alliances,'' from which this article is adapted.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 22, Column 1; Business World Magazine

LENGTH: 3871 words


IN A JANUARY NIGHT IN 1973, ALAN R. FRASER lugged a cardboard carton through
customs and stepped into the crowded arrivals hall of Manila International
Airport. The New Zealand entrepreneur was desperate. Fraser needed a company
with the equipment and the low-cost data-entry typists to convert his box of
paper into computer files. He had just come from Singapore, where a small shop
had attempted the job - but had made so many errors the work was worthless. That
left Fraser with only 24 hours to fulfill his company's first contract, a $500
order from an Australian accounting house.

Now he stood in the terminal, looking for a man he knew only from their hurried
telephone conversation that morning: Emmanuel Cu, the manager of a local
data-entry company. When Fraser found Cu, they went to the seedy airport
cafeteria. Cu promised to put the documents on magnetic tape and send them by
plane to Sydney the next day. ''He wanted me to wait overnight in Manila,''
Fraser recalls, ''but I couldn't afford the hotel room.''

Cu delivered, and from those uncertain beginnings has grown Saztec International
Inc., with headquarters in Kansas City, Mo., and a knack for finding clients and
reliable workers around the world.

With $20 million in revenues for the fiscal year of 1989, which ended in June,
Saztec is hardly a major player in the computer-driven globalization of
business. Yet it is emblematic of the phenomenon, one of the thousands of small,
specialized companies toiling in the shadows of such behemoths as I.B.M. and A.
T. &T. to provide the underpinnings for the Information Revolution.

Like so many of its counterparts, Saztec was founded by an individual
entrepreneur, but is now in the hands of a management team. Having mastered a
market niche, the company must scramble to stay ahead of new technologies that
could make its core business obsolete. And in pursuit of capital to chase its
dreams, the company has exposed itself to the vicissitudes of the stock market.

In three years of over-the-counter trading, Saztec shares have ranged as high as
9 3/4 and as low as 1. The company ran net losses for two of those years before
finally realizing a $1 million profit in the fiscal year of 1989. As a badge of
the struggle, Thomas L. Reed, the 44-year-old chairman and chief executive,
points to his mustache, which, unlike his curly, dark hair, is gray. ''It was
brown before we went public,'' he says.

FROM AROUND THE WORLD, PAPER POURS into Saztec offices by the ton: hospital
records from Greensboro, N.C.; names and addresses of Stride-Rite shoe
customers; consumer credit reports from Britain. Ranks of data-entry typists
convert the documents into the digitized form that is the lingua franca of the
Information Age. Typically, two people key in the material, so the computer can
search for discrepancies between the two copies and flag them for an operator to
correct. The finished product, ready for shipment anywhere in the world, is a
computer disk or a magnetic tape the size of a movie reel.

Saztec International specializes in big, time-consuming or tedious jobs that
customers don't want to perform for themselves. Clients include Illinois Bell
and several other telephone companies, which are building computer data bases of
handwritten engineering and maintenance records. (If the family at 249 Mulberry
keeps a pit bull in the backyard, this fact can be flagged for repairmen.)
Saztec also keys in musty volumes of legal records and court decisions for Mead
Data Central Inc., whose NEXIS and LEXIS services contain more than 2,100
on-line data bases.

Over the years Saztec has become one of the world's largest providers of
data-conversion services, according to Linda Helgerson, president of Diversified
Data Resources Inc., which monitors data-storage companies. But the market is
hard to quantify. Although industry estimates place the business in the billions
of dollars (See chart on page 24.), the numbers do not cover the many companies
that handle their data-conversion needs in-house by compiling subscriber lists,
updating personnel records and performing other routine tasks. Some big
corporations use their spare computer capacity to sell data-conversion services
as a side business. And there are thousands of mom-and-pop contractors around
the country that may perform one or two small jobs and then quietly disappear.

Saztec International headquarters, in leased offices at a Kansas City industrial
park, employs about 230 people. The company also runs a 35-person software and
data-processing center near Dayton, Ohio, and a data-entry facility with a staff
of 130 in Ardrossan, Scotland. Other holdings include a majority stake in
London-based Saztec Europe Ltd. and a small piece of its primary subcontractor -
Saztec Philippines Inc., the part of the business Alan Fraser retained when he
sold the rest of the company in 1983.

Saztec International does more than put information into computers. The company
creates the software programs and performs whatever coding, formatting and
computer processing the job may require. In one of its more ambitious and
entrepreneurial undertakings, Saztec in 1987 won a four-year contract to convert
the British Library's book catalogue - all 360 volumes of it - into a database.

When Saztec first learned of the library's plans in 1985, word was that a New
York data company was about to get the job. Conrad Lealand, the New Zealander
who heads the London office, met with library and government officials. Saztec,
he argued, could keep the work in Britain. The company then rushed to set up
shop in Scotland, finding space in a former Shell Oil refinery in Ardrossan and
hiring a score of local people - a small enough experiment that ''we could have
pulled up and gone home if we didn't get the contract,'' says Lealand.

In winning the $3.5-million contract in 1987, Saztec also secured the rights to
sell computer-disk copies of the British Library's database until the year 2001.
Only one of the three disks in the set is ready so far, but more than 40 buyers
- including the Vatican's library and Stanford University - have already signed
up for the $16,500 package. The printed version, says Reed, sells for more than
$19,000.

UNDER TOM REED, SAZTEC DISPLAYS THE corporate informality of the 80's computer
culture. The switchboard operator greets even strangers' calls with a cheery
''O.K., I'll get Tom on the telephone for you.'' His office, overlooking the
industrial park's duck pond, is furnished with an aquarium, easy chairs and two
sofas. ''It's been called the living room,'' says Reed, who consciously eschewed
a ''formal, power room.''

Like many Information Age entrepreneurs, Reed learned by doing. He got involved
with computers and communications as an Air Force staff sergeant in the
mid-60's, gathering military intelligence at electronic listening posts, first
in Okinawa, later in Crete.

After the service he returned to his hometown, Dayton, and became a computer
operator at the National Cash Register Co. (now an information-technology
company known as the NCR Corporation). In 1968, Reed moved to a computer job at
local Wright State University and started taking classes part time. He never
completed his business administration degree, but by the time he left four years
later, Reed was the university's assistant director for computer services.

As Reed was arriving at Wright State, a 31-year-old major in the New Zealand
army named Alan Fraser was growing restless. Fraser, a graduate of Australia's
version of West Point, had fought communist incursions in Malaysia, Borneo and
South Vietnam. But the more he saw of the Vietnam War, he says, the more
disillusioned he became. In 1968 Fraser traded his fatigues for pin stripes and
joined the by-the-book bureaucracy of the world's largest computer company,
I.B.M. For the next few years Fraser, based in Wellington, New Zealand, sold
mainframes, as well as time sharing and other services - including data entry, a
business I.B.M. has long since abandoned to smaller players.

Eventually, Fraser concluded that he would rather start his own company than
work for someone else. While shaving one morning, he pondered the possibilities.
''And then I saw the cap,'' he recalls. The cap belonged to his aerosol shaving
cream can, and Fraser dreamed up such refinements as putting the brand name on
the cap and punching a pin hole in the top to let moisture evaporate from the
nozzle. Seeking a name for the company, he leafed through a magazine, where he
came upon a story about Mexican Indians. He decided on the spot to call his
company-to-be Aztec. Lever Brothers placed orders for Aztec caps, which a New
Zealand plastics company produced to Fraser's specifications.

In 1973, with a bankroll of about $25,000 from his cap project and the sale of
his house, Fraser moved to Sydney to set up a data-entry business. He saw that
the day of punched holes in paper cards was passing and that more and more
corporations were recognizing the value of managing their information with
computers. Fraser registered his Sydney-based company in Singapore, where he
planned to find his low-wage workers. Discovering that another firm was already
called Aztec, he borrowed the 'S' from Singapore to coin the name Saztec.

When Fraser's path crossed Reed's in 1977, Saztec was doing about $1 million
worth of business, serving customers in Australia, Singapore and the United
States by brokering work for data-entry shops in the Philippines and Singapore.
Reed was working in Los Angeles, running a regional office for a data-entry
company called Scan-Data. Fraser walked in one day, prospecting for business.
Reed liked the talkative, energetic New Zealander ''right off,'' he remembers.
''Most people do.''

Scan-Data had just taken on a big insurance-company contract, and Reed gave a
piece of the work to Fraser's Saztec. The two men had subsequent business
dealings. And in 1978, when Fraser decided he needed an expanded presence in the
United States, he turned to Reed, making him Saztec's chief operating officer
and giving him 14 percent of the company.

KENT MEYER IS SAZTEC'S SECRETARY AND a vice president of marketing, but he has
long resisted moving to the Kansas City headquarters. Even while he was
responsible for the company's Scotland operations, he preferred to reside in
Dayton, where his wife grew up. ''We can live anywhere,'' he explains, ''as long
as we have telephone service and Federal Express.''

Meyer's attitude is not unique. For dozens of Saztec employees ''the office'' is
wherever they can plug personal-computer modems into telephone jacks. Two Saztec
systems analysts work and live in Eugene, Ore.; some 65 data-entry operators in
Kansas City work at home.

Such arrangements are becoming commonplace, as businesses support far-flung
operations. According to management consultants Booz, Allen & Hamilton Inc., in
1988 there were 17,000 leased international telephone circuits, the building
blocks of private communications networks. That number may triple by 1995. One
of the largest private networks belongs to General Motors, enabling the staff at
G. M. sites in 40 countries to send engineering designs from computer to
computer and conduct long-distance meetings by closed-circuit video.

Saztec, though far from being a global giant, has been able to ply the
international marketplace by employing a mix of communications media as mundane
as air freight and as in-vogue as fiber-optic lines. When Saztec converted the
Helsinki National Library's catalogue - including new acquisitions - into a
computer database last year, the $130,000 job turned into an information odyssey
(See diagram on pages 22 and 23.) involving Saztec employees and subcontractors
in Manila, Sydney, Toronto, Dayton, London and Ardrossan.

In the data-entry business, one of the essential ingredients is a dependable
supply of low-wage workers. Saztec's typists in Kansas City, the best-paid of
whom earn about $6.50 an hour, perform the jobs that must remain in the United
States because they require same-day turnaround or close supervision by the
client - or, for security reasons, cannot be done offshore. But whenever
possible, Saztec and other data-entry companies claim they must take their work
overseas to be competitive. Robert Denzau, president of Offshore Information
Services, based in Tarrytown, N.Y., says he started his company's 175-person
operation in Jamaica because it let him offer prices 60 percent below those he
would charge for work done in the United States. ''If you can't beat them, join
them,'' says Denzau. In Scotland, where the unemployment rate is 9.2 percent,
Saztec pays a skilled data-entry worker $5.00 an hour. But unless the company
finds other special projects for the Ardrossan facility, it may close after the
project for the British Library is finished. ''Feeding the monster in
Scotland,'' is how one Saztec executive describes the problem. The company finds
it much easier to attract clients to Filipino pay scales. In Manila, where
college graduates slog away at data entry because it pays better than most
alternatives, Saztec offers up to $2 an hour. Compared with the Philippines
average annual income of about $1,700, a Saztec data-entry operator with four
years of experience can earn $2,650 plus bonuses.

Some American data-entry firms use non-English-speaking employees in Asia and
elsewhere, arguing that the typists need not understand what they're copying and
- undistracted by the meaning of the words - will type faster. But Saztec
prefers to operate in countries with English-speaking workers, Fraser says,
because ''English is the language of the computer.'' Stories abound of American
companies that rely on foreign translators who know little about computers and
end up with computer manuals that use the Indonesian word ''underwear'' for
''software'' or the Arabic ''false pregnancy'' for ''dummy load.''

Although Saztec is not among them, many data-entry companies have set up shop in
India and the Carribbean. A. M. R. Caribbean Data Services, an affiliate of
American Airlines, went into the data-entry business in 1983 by using typists in
Barbados to key in data from used airline tickets. Today its business has
expanded to insurance and medical companies, though the company has a policy of
not divulging clients' identities. As one executive explains, ''If you were an
insurance company and were firing data-entry people in the States, would you
want anyone to know you were hiring them in the Caribbean?''

Off-shore workers offer another advantage besides low wages, says Saztec's Reed
- low turnover. Data entry is tedious and demanding, with pay based on speed and
accuracy as monitored by computers. American workers generally have far greater
opportunities to move to more fulfilling jobs than their counterparts in
developing countries. (Even in the United States, entry workers often are those
with few career options. Many states - Minnesota is among the more active - find
data entry a good way to keep prison inmates busy.) Critics see vestiges of
colonialism in the practice of farming out data entry to the third world. They
also perceive a rich irony: the vaunted Information Age, with the Global Village
as its defining metaphor, in practice finds the poor countries performing
piecework for the rich ones. And yet, others argue that without exposure to
computers, the developing nations might be bypassed altogether.

Saztec's Alan Fraser, who says he devotes 12.5 percent of Saztec Philippines'
profits to charity, defends his company's employment practices. Besides paying
comparatively high wages, Fraser also provides free medical care and stock
options. ''If we don't have a benefit,'' he says, ''it's because we haven't
thought of it.''

IN THE MIDST OF 1987's RAGING bull market, a consultant with the National
Association of Securities Dealers visited the headquarters of Saztec, which six
months earlier had raised $2.4 million in its first public stock offering. ''He
said he was there just to let us know how the over-the-counter market works,''
recalls the company's senior vice president and treasurer, David Roberts. ''But
I've always wondered if he wasn't also checking to see if there really was a
company called Saztec International.''

A certain amount of skepticism would have been understandable. In the months
leading up to Black Monday, little-known underwriters had issued shares for
dozens of new ventures through the over-the-counter market. Many of these new
companies soon went bankrupt, notes Richard P. Kiphart, an investment banker
with Chicago's William Blair & Co., and ''few of those stocks ever traded in
relation to their real value.''

Because over-the-counter shares are quoted only as ''bid'' and ''asked'' prices
by the market-maker brokers specializing in the stock, the true value can be
elusive. Through most of 1987, Saztec executives watched their stock with
wonder. Each quarter, ''we'd put out a news release that we were losing money,
and the price would go up,'' says Roberts, recounting the stock's inexorable
ascent from 3 1/4 in December 1986 to 9 3/4 right before the market crash.

In the middle of this run-up, Saztec reported a loss of $180,000 for the 1987
fiscal year. The company put much of the blame on the cost of opening the
Ardrossan facility and acquiring data-entry and computer processing companies in
Kansas City and Dayton. Revenues were not keeping pace with outlays for new
equipment, increased staff and a stepped-up sales effort. But the stock,
undaunted, continued its climb.

Then came the October crash. Soon afterward, the lead broker of Saztec's stock,
a small New York house called Steinberg & Lyman, bailed out of investment
banking. As the other market makers fled to less speculative issues, there was
no trustworthy market for Saztec's shares. By March 1988 the highest bid the
stock could muster was 3 3/4, and Roberts was fielding calls from irate
investors claiming their brokers had misled them. By September 1988, bids were
seldom above 1 1/8.

But once again, the stock's price seemed to have little to do with the
underlying value of the company. During 1988 Saztec moved from Los Angeles -
where operations had been based since Fraser set up his United States beachhead
- to the newly acquired data center in Kansas City, where expenses would be
lower. At the same time, the money being pumped into sales was beginning to pay
off in lucrative new contracts. Saztec reported a loss of $1.1 million in 1988,
but revenues were up 160 percent to $9.2 million.

For Saztec, ''1989 was the year to spend money,'' says Roberts. ''In 1989,
things really took off.'' The company's share price headed back up, and market
makers showed new interest. Rodman & Renshaw, an investment bank in Chicago,
began dealing in Saztec shares in February, when the bid price was around 2 1/4.
Saztec's stock remains a speculative risk, concedes Mark J. Grant, managing
director of Rodman & Renshaw's Kansas City office, ''but it's a businessman's
risk.''

Since Saztec's mid-year announcement of a million-dollar profit for 1989,
accompanied by its projections of 20 percent growth for 1990, the stock has
risen further. Through the autumn, bid prices were in the 4-to-4 1/4 range.
''This time,'' Roberts says, ''the price increase is for all the right
reasons.''

LAST WINTER SAZTEC USED A LASER technology known as image scanning to put
pictures of the Gerber baby, McDonald's golden arches and more than 600,000
other registered trademarks onto compact disks that can present color drawings
and photographs on a computer screen. The $1-million job was performed for a
company that intends to provide services for attorneys and research companies
specializing in copyright law.

Saztec has also used image scanning to convert some of the Du Pont Company's
engineering manuals to optical disk. Such projects, says Reed, ''open a new kind
of business for us.''

In the Information Age, technological change is rapid, and companies like Saztec
must keep up. ''Saztec doesn't have to invent the newest technology,'' says an
analyst with the Kansas City investment house of George K. Baum & Co. ''They
just need to master it.''

At Saztec, data entry by keyboard still generates the bulk of the company's
revenues, but various Government and private studies have predicted that
third-world data-entry workers eventually will give way to optical character
readers (O. C. R.'s) - devices that can scan a printed page and convert the
words to computer text.

In fact, Saztec has used O. C. R.'s since the early 80's, but only for the 5
percent of its jobs in which the printed documents are sufficiently legible and
uniform in size and format. Reed insists that O. C. R.'s will never completely
replace people, who can read handwritten scraps of paper and distinguish between
a coffee stain and a word. And he notes that a human operator must be on hand to
correct the occasional snatches of garbled text that even the best
optical-scanning equipment produces. While traditional data entry represents a
smaller portion of Saztec's overall business each year, the revenues from the
work continue to increase - $12 million in fiscal 1989, compared with $1.5
million five years ago.

Soon the company may be able to send even more of its data-entry jobs to the
Philippines, assignments that because of tight deadlines might formerly have
stayed in the United States. Using a new one-day-turn-around service it calls
Information Conversion Express (I. C. E.), Saztec plans to employ a bank of
facsimile machines to send records - at the rate of one page every three seconds
- from Dayton to Manila. The keyed data would be sent back via satellite or
fiber-optic telephone circuits.

One candidate for I. C. E. is the database company Mead Data Central, which
until now has entrusted only old legal documents to Saztec's offshore workers.
For newer material, Mead uses its own data-entry operators, fearing that any
delay would let competitors put the material on line sooner. While Mead
executives say early I. C. E. trials have met the company's speed and accuracy
standards, no contract has been signed.

I. C. E., if successful, could let Saztec play a bigger role in its customers'
day-to-day operations. And ongoing work, as opposed to one-time projects, would
give Saztec much greater stability.

Back in Manila, Alan Fraser hopes I. C. E.'s two-way communications capabilities
will let his Filipino workers move beyond mere data entry to more sophisticated
activities. He now plans to double his staff to 2,000 and move to a $2.5 million
facility he is building near Manila's airport - the place Saztec got its start.

Fraser envisions the day when his employees will not merely build databases, but
also tap into them to perform research for overseas clients. One possibility, he
says, thinking aloud, might be to create a profile of the European commodities
market for American accounting firms.

''We can say to the best brains,'' continues Fraser, already framing the concept
in marketing terms, ''here you have all the information of the world. At your
fingertips.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A picture today on page 23 of The Business World, part 2 of The Times Magazine,
showing Alan Fraser, founder of Saztec, carries an incorrect credit line. The
photographer was Jay Mariano for Sygma. On page 42, a picture caption about
Stephen Wolf misstates his corporate affiliation. It is UAL, not UA.

GRAPHIC: Thomas Reed, Saztec's C.E.O., and Gary Abernathy, president, at Kansas
City, Mo., headquarters. Racks of computer tapes contain data typed in by
American and Filipino workers (Stuart Bakal-Schwartzberg) (pg. C22); Alan
Fraser, Saztec's founder, with workers at the Saztec Philippines facility. Data
entry is done in English-speaking countries, he says, because ''English is the
language of the computer.'' (Jay Mariano/Sygma) (pgs. 23); Tammy Kunkle, with
her son, Joshua, in Independence, Mo. She is among the dozens of data-entry
typists employed by Kansas City-based Saztec who do their work at home (Stuart
Bakal-Schwartzberg) (pg. 54)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 49, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 5924 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas issue of
December 1988. It suggests only high points in the main fields of reader
interest, and it does not include the titles chosen by the editors of The Book
Review as the Best Books of 1989. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings. Quoted comments are from The Book Review.

Autobiography and Biography

THE AMBITION AND THE POWER. By John M. Barry. (Viking, $22.95.) This story of
the rise and fall of Jim Wright, Speaker of the House, ''is an important
accomplishment'' written by ''a fair and uncompromised observer.''

AMELIA EARHART: A Biography. By Doris L. Rich. (Smithsonian Institution,
$19.95.) The author, a journalist and photographer, ''writes . . .
parsimoniously and . . . colorfully'' about the life of the aviator who captured
the country's imagination.

AND THE WALLS CAME TUMBLING DOWN: An Autobiography. By Ralph David Abernathy.
(Harper & Row, $22.50.) A colorful, controversial, earthy, often humorous
account of the civil rights movement, written by a man who was at its center.
''His storytelling is gripping, even moving.''

THE ANDY WARHOL DIARIES. Edited by Pat Hackett. (Warner Books, $29.95.) A
half-million words on nearly everything. ''Despite their virtuoso triviality,
their naive snobbery and their incredible length, the diaries of Andy Warhol are
not without a certain charm.''

BALM IN GILEAD: Journey of a Healer. By Sara Lawrence Lightfoot. (Merloyd
Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) ''A daughter's loving biography of her
mother,'' the pioneering child psychiatrist Dr. Margaret Morgan Lawrence, that
records ''her long journey, as a gifted and accomplished black woman, across the
rugged terrain of race and gender in America.''

BEHIND THE MOUNTAIN: Return to Tasmania. By Peter Conrad. (Poseidon, $18.95.)
''Sublime writing . . . memorable metaphors and . . . sere wit'' characterize
this memoir of the author's childhood.

BERNARD SHAW. Volume Two: 1898-1918. The Pursuit of Power. By Michael Holroyd.
(Random House, $24.95.) In this second volume of the playwright's biography,
focusing on Shaw as a political fighter, he ''emerges as a man more baffled than
triumphant in his quest.''

BITTER FAME: A Life of Sylvia Plath. By Anne Stevenson. (Peter Davison/Houghton
Mifflin, $19.95.) A biography of the poet, a suicide at age 30, that attempts to
exonerate Plath's maligned family. ''In the work of sorting out these truths,
half-truths and inventions, this new biography is a significant step.''

THE BROKEN CORD. By Michael Dorris. (Harper & Row, $18.95.) A painful personal
chronicle of the writer's discovery that his adopted child is afflicted by fetal
alcohol syndrome and a searing look at ''the condition that has blighted his
son's life,'' written in ''clear and affecting'' prose.

THE BRONTES: Charlotte Bronte and Her Family. By Rebecca Fraser. (Crown, $25.) A
look at the author of ''Jane Eyre'' ''as she appeared to her contemporaries. . .
. A social historian's sense of place is everywhere present in this biography,
and a novelist's imaginative feeling for detail.''

DAUGHTER OF DESTINY: An Autobiography. By Benazir Bhutto. (Simon & Schuster,
$21.95.) A ''fascinating portrait'' of Pakistan's Prime Minister and her family.

FELIX FENEON: Aesthete & Anarchist in Fin-de-Siecle Paris. By Joan Ungersma
Halperin. (Yale University, $35.) A ''detailed and fascinating biography of the
contradictory and enigmatic'' critic of art and literature.

FIORELLA H. LA GUARDIA AND THE MAKING OF MODERN NEW YORK. By Thomas Kessner.
(McGraw-Hill, $24.95.) ''This is a biography of a petty, petulant, often
unpleasant little man who, with the passage of time, has come to be regarded as
New York City's greatest mayor,'' written with ''sweep and lucidity.''

FORBIDDEN TERRITORY: The Memoirs of Juan Goytisolo, 1931-1956. Translated by
Peter Bush. (North Point, $18.95.) The early life of one of Spain's leading
novelists. ''It is against wanton destruction that Mr. Goytisolo writes. . . .
Beneath his anger . . . there lies a belief in human survival.''

GEORGIA O'KEEFFE: A Life. By Roxana Robinson. (Edward Burlingame/Harper & Row,
$25.) A portrait of the artist that is both ''levelheaded and protective''; it
''does much to give body to the O'Keeffe myth.''

GLENN GOULD: A Life and Variations. By Otto Friedrich. (Random House, $24.95.) A
senior writer for Time writes a biography of the pianist that is ''touching,
intriguing and ultimately tragic.''

GOLDWYN: A Biography. By A. Scott Berg. (Knopf, $24.95.) An ''absorbing
biography, thick with amusing anecdote'' about the driven movie producer.

GINSBERG: A Biography. By Barry Miles. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) A
''skillful,'' fact-filled life of the courageous, deliberately ridiculous poet -
and hero of our time. ''Read it; you'll enjoy yourself.''

GOLDEN INCHES: The China Memoir of Grace Service. Edited by John S. Service.
(University of California, $19.95.) A ''wonderful, sad, moving memoir by an
indomitable American who went to China with her husband'' to further the work of
the Y.M.C.A. in that country.

THE GOOD TIMES. By Russell Baker. (Morrow, $19.95.) The New York Times columnist
recounts his life as a reporter. ''A superb autobiography, wonderfully told,
often hilarious, always intelligent and unsparing.''

HARP. By John Gregory Dunne. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The autobiography of
the Irish-American writer. ''He can wrench bleak emotions. . . . If you start
the book you'll likely stay to the end, gripped by verbal resource or else by
sheer morbidity.''

HATTIE: The Life of Hattie McDaniel. By Carlton Jackson. (Madison Books,
$18.95.) A ''poignantly sympathetic biography'' of the actress, the first black
artist to win an Academy Award. ''Mr. Jackson has succeeded enormously in
writing a caring biography of a multitalented woman.''

HEMINGWAY IN LOVE AND WAR: The Lost Diary of Agnes von Kurowsky, Her Letters,
and Correspondence of Ernest Hemingway. By Henry Serrano Villard and James
Nagel. (Northeastern University, $21.95.) ''As well as serving as a corrective
to literal readings of 'A Farewell to Arms,' the diary either directly or
inferentially fills out the personality'' of Hemingway, a fantasist and
self-mythologizer.

HIROHITO: Behind the Myth. By Edward Behr. (Villard, $22.50.) The biography of
Japan's last Emperor is ''a thoughtful and appropriate challenge to the
orthodoxy of the blameless Emperor that has prevailed in many English-speaking
circles.''

HONORABLE JUSTICE: The Life of Oliver Wendell Holmes. By Sheldon M. Novick.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) ''The first full biography based on unrestricted access
to the Holmes papers. . . . As chapter follows masterly chapter . . . hopes
mature into admiration of author and awe of subject.''

THE IRON LADY: A Biography of Margaret Thatcher. By Hugo Young. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $25.) ''With patience and comprehension,'' a veteran political
journalist tells the story of Britain's Prime Minister in ''a model political
biography.''

ISARA: A Voyage Around ''Essay.'' By Wole Soyinka. (Random House, $18.95.) The
Nobel Prize-winning playwright and author of ''Ake'' continues his family story
with a ''homage to his father'' and life in the Nigeria of 50 years ago; the
book ''supplies the essential ingredient missing from history books - not only
the Zeitgeist, but the heart that propels the spirit.''

LET THEM CALL ME REBEL: Saul Alinsky - His Life and Legacy. By Sanford D.
Horwitt. (Knopf, $29.95.) ''A highly readable, exhaustively researched biography
that is full of both playful anecdote and thoughtful political analysis'' about
the legendary community organizer.

LEWIS MUMFORD: A Life. By Donald L. Miller. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $24.95.) The
first full-length biography of the architect, urban activist and man of letters,
written by a professor of history at Lafayette College. ''The value of this
biography is its painstaking and competent assemblage of sources.''

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF ANDY WARHOL. By Victor Bockris. (Bantam, $21.95.) One of
''the best so far in an encroaching flood of Warholiana. . . . The one to read
for knowledge of Warhol the man.''

THE LIFE OF GRAHAM GREENE. Volume One: 1904-1939. By Norman Sherry. (Viking,
$29.95). The first installment of this thoughtful and ambitious biography of the
writer ''provide[s] special satisfactions.''

LOST IN TRANSLATION: A Life in a New Language. By Eva Hoffman. (Dutton, $18.95.)
An editor of The Book Review takes ''a sad, remorseful yet bright-eyed look
backward'' to her childhood in Poland and her emigration to the United States.
''Thanks to its honesty, its bravery and its good humor, it is a book that
repairs the very loss it laments.''

MARY SHELLEY: Romance and Reality. By Emily W. Sunstein. (Little, Brown,
$24.95.) ''This [book] promises to be the definitive biography'' of the author
of ''Frankenstein'' and wife of Percy Bysshe Shelley.

MILES: The Autobiography. By Miles Davis with Quincy Troupe. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.95.) The ''profusely detailed, exceedingly candid and eminently readable''
story of the life and times of the musician whose ''siren call . . . abides as
one of the most seductive in the music of this century.''

MOTHERWIT: An Alabama Midwife's Story. By Onnie Lee Logan as told to Katherine
Clark. (Dutton, $16.95.) This oral biography ''reaffirm[s] the black woman's
time-honored role in the ancient practice of midwifery. And the great American
quilt of diversity gets another colorful square.''

NIXON: Volume Two. The Triumph of a Politician, 1962-1972. By Stephen E.
Ambrose. An evenhanded, reliable examination of Mr. Nixon's second rise, from
his defeat for Governor of California through two victories as President. ''What
sets this book apart is Mr. Ambrose's commanding grasp of material.''

OUR KIND OF PEOPLE: The Story of an American Family. By Jonathan Yardley.
(Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $21.95.) A family remembrance that ''reads like a
first-rate novel,'' by a book critic for The Washington Post.

OURS: A Russian Family Album. By Sergei Dovlatov. Translated by Anne Frydman.
(Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $15.95.) ''Stalin dominates . . . this series of
portraits'' of the author's family and homeland. ''The book is remarkable for
its lack of acrimony, bitterness or even indignation.''

A PLACE FOR US. By Nicholas Gage. (Marc Jaffe/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) The
author of ''Eleni'' picks up his own story of emigration to Worcester, Mass. ''A
warm-hearted, likable contribution to its genre.''

PAUL ROBESON: A Biography. By Martin Bauml Duberman. (Knopf, $24.95.) ''The
glorious and tragic life of Paul Robeson is a poignant, gripping story. . . .
Mr. Duberman has written a superb biography of a great man.''

RICHARD MILHOUS NIXON: The Rise of an American Politician. By Roger Morris.
(Holt, $29.95.) The initial work in a projected three-volume biography is filled
with insightful and absorbing detail about the former President's early life.
''A massive, powerful biography.''

THE ROAD FROM COORAIN. By Jill Ker Conway. (Knopf, $18.95.) ''The historian and
former president of Smith College, who grew up on a sheep station [in
Australia], has written a remarkable memoir.''

SAYING GOODBYE: A Memoir for Two Fathers. By M. R. Montgomery. (Knopf, $18.95.)
A writer for The Boston Globe tells the life stories of his father and
father-in-law in a ''retrained but deeply moving book, a model of good prose.''

SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS: Memoirs. By John Updike. (Knopf, $18.95.) Parts of a life,
as related by the novelist. ''His best writing . . . is the prose of rapture. .
. . It is good to see a writer enjoying his talent and his luck.''

SKETCHES FROM A LIFE. By George F. Kennan. (Pantheon, $22.95.) ''Beautifully
written diaries'' from a man considered ''the last of the architects of postwar
American foreign policy.''

THE SOUND OF WINGS: The Life of Amelia Earhart. By Mary S. Lovell. (St.
Martin's, $22.95.) The author of ''Straight On Till Morning: The Biography of
Beryl Markham'' turns her attention to the first woman to cross the Atlantic by
air, in a story that offers ''fascinating detail . . . on Earhart's relationship
with her husband,'' George Palmer Putnam, the man who helped to make her famous.

STORMY APPLAUSE: Making Music in a Worker's State. By Rostislav Dubinsky. (Hill
& Wang, $22.95.) A ''lively memoir'' written by the Soviet musician and first
violinist of the Borodin Quartet, covering the period between 1945 and 1975.

THIS BOY'S LIFE: A Memoir. By Tobias Wolff. (Atlantic Monthly, $18.95.) The
author of ''The Barracks Thief'' tells his own story in a memoir that is
''literate and consistently entertaining - and richer, darker and funnier than
anything else Tobias Wolff has written.''

WHEN HEAVEN AND EARTH CHANGED PLACES: A Vietnamese Woman's Journey From War to
Peace. By Le Ly Hayslip with Jay Wurts. (Doubleday, $18.95.) ''A searing and
human account of Vietnam's destruction and self-destruction. Lucidly, sometimes
even lyrically, Ms. Hayslip paints an intensely intimate portrait.''

Children

BILL PEET: An Autobiography. Written and illustrated by Bill Peet. (Houghton
Mifflin, $16.95.) A ''marvelous new species,'' this ''child's storybook'' that
is also ''the memoir of an adult'' describes the life of the well-known
children's book author who worked as an illustrator for Walt Disney from the
making of ''Dumbo'' until ''Mary Poppins.'' (Ages 8 to 12) DOES GOD HAVE A BIG
TOE? Stories About Stories in the Bible. By Marc Gellman. Illustrated by Oscar
de Mejo. (Harper & Row, $14.95.) This joyful collection ''is in the tradition of
the midrashim: stories, allegories, fables whose purpose is to interpret and
illuminate the fixed narrative of the Scripture.'' They have ''the ring of
folk-fables and the wit of a single, affectionate heart.'' (All Ages) LISA'S
WAR. By Carol Matas. (Scribners, $12.95.) In her fine novel set in Copenhagen
during the years of the Nazi occupation, the author is able to pose
''sophisticated concerns with an honorable simplicity.'' The central character,
a young girl, joins the Resistance. (Ages 12 and up) NED AND THE JOYBALOO. By
Hiawyn Oram. Illustrated by Satoshi Kitamura. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.)
Ned finds a Joybaloo in the linen closet and, in a glorious fantasy, the little
boy and his imagination soar. Dazzling illustrations capture the child and his
playmate. (Ages 3 to 8) MAMMAL. By Steve Parker. (Knopf, $12.95.) The
''Eyewitness'' series of science books imported from England set a remarkable
standard ''integrating text and illustration in a graphically exciting and
intellectually enticing way.'' This stunning volume includes ''a remarkable
photographic sequence'' showing a cat giving birth. (Ages 9 and up) THE OLD
SYNAGOGUE. Written and illustrated by Richard Rosenblum. (Edward E. Elson/Jewish
Publication Society, $12.95.) In this simple story book the author and
illustrator conveys ''the complexities of both urban and religious life with
great clarity and charm.'' (Ages 6 and up) SHABANU. Daughter of the Wind. By
Suzanne Fisher Staples. (Knopf, $13.95.) The heroine of this novel set in the
Cholistan Desert on the Indian-Pakistani border is 12. Her account of one year
''meticulously documents the rigors and tribulations of nomadic life, as well as
the narrator's flowering from a child into a spirited young woman.'' (Ages 12
and up) SWAN LAKE. By Margot Fonteyn. Illustrated by Trina Schart Hyman.
(Gulliver/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) The plot of the popular ballet is
retold in ''by far the most suggestive, complete and authoritative'' fashion in
the slim, elegantly illustrated story book. (All Ages) THE TRUE STORY OF THE 3
LITTLE PIGS. By Jon Scieszka. Illustrated by Lane Smith. (Viking Kestrel,
$13.95.) Are we to blame A. Wolf ''because, while on an errand to borrow sugar
from his porcine neighbors, he happened to sneeze a few times''? The ''excited
and funky'' illustrations match the hilarious revisionist text to a standard
story. (Ages 3 to 8) THE TUB PEOPLE. By Pam Conrad. Illustrated by Richard
Egielski. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) The seven painted wooden figures live ''in and
about a bathtub and every day they frolic in the water and ride on a soap bar.''
In this small drama for preschoolers, ''the tension between the text and the
pictures rivets'' young readers. (Ages 4 to 8)

Crime

THE DEATH OF A JOYCE SCHOLAR. By Bartholomew Gill. (Morrow, $18.95.) The chief
superintendent of Dublin's murder squad discovers his kinship with Leopold Bloom
while hunting down the killer of a Joycean. ''An affectionate acquaintance with
Joyce's Dubliners adds considerably to the pleasures of this profoundly clever
literary mystery.''

THE FOURTH DURANGO. By Ross Thomas. (Mysterious Press, $18.95.) The tiny town of
Durango, Calif., is the perfect hideout for a man with a price on his head - in
this case, a judge who's been framed. ''We already know how witty Mr. Thomas can
be about entrepreneurial greed and political chicanery,'' but his depiction of
Durango ''is a revelation.''

JUICE. By Robert Campbell. (Poseidon, $18.95.) When nations owe other nations
billions of dollars, what is there to say about a guy who's into a loan shark
for $2,000, plus $200 a week in interest? ''Robert Campbell has a mouthful to
say about a chump like that, and . . . he says it with grand panache, in the
colorful patois of Hollywood 'gamooshes' and 'juicemen.' ''

THE KING OF THE NIGHTCAP. By William Murray. (Bantam, $16.95.) Shifty Lou
Anderson is a dedicated horseplayer who plays detective to keep his favorite
recreation clean and almost honest. ''The author's own obvious passion for the
sport throws a sunny glow on the tracks where Shifty mingles companionably with
jockeys and trainers.''

THE MARSHAL AND THE MADWOMAN. By Magdalen Nabb. (Scribners, $16.95.) Marshal
Salvatore Guarnaccia investigates the apparent suicide of a crazed woman who
lived in a poor section of Florence. ''The English author's new crime novel
examines the human components of a murder case on a level of perception that
surpasses mere mastery of form.''

MAY'S NEWFANGLED MIRTH. By Mary Jo Adamson. (Bantam, Paper, $3.50.) Mary Jo
Adamson ''works the classical whodunit format with great ingenuity. She writes
like a dream . . . threading into her tale of revenge and retribution ravishing
descriptions'' of the Puerto Rican locale.

POODLE SPRINGS. By Raymond Chandler and Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $18.95.) The
creator of the ''Spenser'' novels ''collaborates'' with the classic detective
writer by completing Chandler's last book. ''At his very best, Mr. Parker sounds
more like Chandler than Chandler himself - but with an edge the master had begun
to lose in the waning days of his life.''

THE SIRENS SANG OF MURDER. By Sarah Caudwell. (Delacorte, $16.95.) Sarah
Caudwell's trouble-prone young barristers return for ''another great lark'' in
her latest novel. ''Although coincidence and happenstance loom large in the plot
mechanics, the abundant wit and sheer insouciance of Ms. Caudwell's style make
this no nevermind.''

THE STORY OF ANNIE D. By Susan Taylor Chehak. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) This
is an ''absolutely stunning first novel'' about a small Nebraska farming town
where the protagonist's best friend commits suicide and three young women are
raped and murdered.

TALKING GOD. By Tony Hillerman. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) Lieut. Joe Leaphorn and
Officer Jim Chee of the Navajo Tribal Police return in a ''brilliant'' and
complex suspense story that is part of ''Mr. Hillerman's long-running
show-and-tell course in Navajo language and culture.''

TICKET TO RIDE. By Dennis Potter. (Vintage, Paper, $6.95.) The author of ''The
Singing Detective'' probes the shattered mind of a murderer ''with tremendous
technical assurance'' and an ''expertly tight weave of . . . many rich symbolic
and thematic strands.''

Current Affairs and Social Commentary

AMONG SCHOOLCHILDREN. By Tracy Kidder. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.)
The author of ''The Soul of a New Machine'' examines ''a year in the life of a
fifth-grade class in Holyoke, an industrial city in southwestern
Massachusetts''; the book ''is full of the author's genuine love, delight and
celebration of the human condition. He has never used his talent so well.''

BARBARIAN SENTIMENTS: How the American Century Ends. By William Pfaff. (Hill &
Wang, $19.95.) ''A truly original critic of American diplomacy'' analyzes
''America's historic failure . . . to factor the power and persistence of
nationalism around the world into its foreign policy.''

BIG SUGAR: Seasons in the Cane Fields of Florida. By Alec Wilkinson. (Knopf,
$18.95.) A writer for The New Yorker manages ''to penetrate the mystery and the
misery'' of the West Indian workers who cut America's sugar cane crop. ''Mr.
Wilkinson has assembled a vivid collage of the cutter's world.''

CITY: Rediscovering the Center. By William H. Whyte. (Doubleday, $24.95.) The
author of ''The Organization Man'' turns his attention to public spaces and
urban life. ''His commentary . . . offer[s] a fresh, often controversial
perspective. . . . There is genuine brilliance here, born of years of
observation.'' THE COCAINE KIDS: The Inside Story of a Teenage Drug Ring. By
Terry Williams. (Addison-Wesley, $16.95.) A New York sociologist's report on the
five years he spent with a group of teen-age drug dealers. ''What makes [this
book] particularly valuable is that Mr. Williams combines his talents as a keen
observer with thoughtful, sophisticated analysis.''

THE COMMON INTEREST: How Our Social-Welfare Policies Don't Work, and What We Can
Do About Them. By Leslie W. Dunbar. (Pantheon, $22.95.) A longtime liberal
social activist challenges current views of poverty with case studies of poor
people. ''In this moving book, Mr. Dunbar lets the poor speak for themselves.''

THE ENIGMA OF JAPANESE POWER: People and Politics in a Stateless Nation. By
Karel van Wolferen. (Knopf, $24.95.) A Dutch journalist ''has written a
distinguished and disturbing book about how the world's new economic superpower
is run.''

EUROPEANS. By Jane Kramer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) ''If this truly
pleasurable collection of her New Yorker essays is called 'Europeans' - not 'The
Europeans' - it is because Ms. Kramer's methodology is to start at the grass
roots and work upward. . . . The best reporting works the way she does it.''

FARM: A Year in the Life of an American Farmer. By Richard Rhodes. (Simon &
Schuster, $19.95.) The author of ''The Making of the Atomic Bomb'' turns his
attention to a Missouri farm family and their cyclical struggles. ''Mr. Rhodes
brings empathy and intelligence to his subject. . . . His chronicle is
unvarnished, his vision acute.''

FORGIVEN: The Rise and Fall of Jim Bakker and the PTL Ministry. By Charles E.
Shepard. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.95.) ''A fascinating behind-the-scenes look at
the greed, deceit and manipulation that littered the path to [Jim] Bakker's
downfall'' written by the Charlotte Observer reporter who won a Pulitzer Prize
for his series of articles on the evangelist.

GENE DREAMS: Wall Street, Academia, and the Rise of Biotechnology. By Robert
Teitelman. (Basic Books, $19.95.) ''With lucid grace and an insider's grasp''
the author explains how investors bought the latest scientific ''revolution''
long before profitable products existed. IF WOMEN COUNTED: A New Feminist
Economics. By Marilyn Waring. (Harper & Row, $19.95.) ''The major contribution
of this angry yet humorous, well-written and accessible book is to demonstrate
that . . . the current system of national income accounts is not sufficiently
accurate to serve as the basis for public policy decisions.'' INNUMERACY:
Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences. By John Allen Paulos. (Hill &
Wang, $16.95.) An ''entertaining book'' that attempts to ''inspire a
mathematical way of looking at the world that does not depend on much actual
mathematics.''

IN THE SHADOW OF THE SACRED GROVE. By Carol Spindel. (Vintage, Paper, $8.95.) A
young American artist spends a year living and creating in a West African
village. ''Her temperament shines through in her writing - clear, bright, full
of splashes of color, skillfully composed . . . a remarkable work.''

JERUSALEM: City of Mirrors. By Amos Elon. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) This book
''is a word portrait like none of those that have come before of the fabled
city. It is from the loving but unsparing pen of Israel's most elegant
iconoclast.''

LEBANON: Death of a Nation. By Sandra Mackey. (Congdon & Weed, $22.95.) A
freelance journalist's ''gloomy'' assessment of the country's disintegration
''consists in making the story of Lebanon's morass readable for the
uninitiated.''

LIPSTICK TRACES: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century. By Greil Marcus.
(Harvard University, $29.95.) ''A coruscatingly original piece of work'' about
the ''carnivalesque subculture'' of the left in this century; ''an absorbing new
study.''

LORDS OF POVERTY: The Power, Prestige, and Corruption of the International Aid
Business. By Graham Hancock. (Atlantic Monthly, $17.95.) This blistering attack
on foreign aid and the bureaucracies that administer it is ''a deadly serious
book . . . [that] succeeds in standing the myth of foreign aid on its head, and
demands a serious reply from the development industry.''

MAASAI DAYS. By Cheryl Bentsen. (Summit, $19.95.) A young American woman
examines the lives of the Masai people of East Africa over a six-year period.
The author ''deals with a very serious issue: how a people confronts massive
social and economic change.'' MAD DREAMS, SAVING GRACES. Poland: A Nation in
Conspiracy. By Michael T. Kaufman. (Random House, $19.95.) An ''indispensable''
account of the struggles between the Polish Government and the Solidarity
movement, leavened with the story of the author's own family past.

MATERNAL THINKING: Toward a Politics of Peace. By Sara Ruddick. (Beacon,
$24.95.) A philosopher posits a way of thinking based on the practical work
involved in mothering children; a ''provocative argument.''

MORE LIKE US: Making America Great Again. By James Fallows. (Houghton Mifflin,
$18.95.) A ''balanced and judicious'' comparison of Japanese and American
societies leads the author to conclude that the United States' great hope lies
''in its best and most characteristic virtues: its democratic manners . . . and
readiness to offer everyone a second chance.''

MOSCOW SPRING. By William Taubman and Jane Taubman. (Summit, $18.95.) A couple
who teach at Amherst College recount ''the heady atmosphere of Moscow . . . in
early 1988, with all its contradictory nuances and uncertainties.''

THE NEW MONEY MASTERS: Winning Investment Strategies of Soros, Lynch,
Steinhardt, Rogers, Neff, Wanger, Michaelis, Carret. By John Train. (Harper &
Row, $22.50.) Written in ''a clean, easy style,'' the author has assembled eight
profiles of investment geniuses who ''filter everyday experience differently.''
PRIVATE ACTS, SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES: AIDS and the Politics of Public Health. By
Ronald Bayer. (Free Press, $22.95.) An associate professor at Columbia
University ''has done . . . a welcome service'' in probing ''the manner in which
officials have weighed the perceived dangers of AIDS against the individual's
constitutional rights.''

SECOND CHANCES: Men, Women, and Children a Decade After Divorce. By Judith S.
Wallerstein and Sandra Blakeslee. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) A psychologist
summarizes her 10-year study of the children of divorce with the help of a
science writer who contributes to The New York Times. ''As a work of clinical
observation, the book is a beautiful piece of writing, full of insights.''

THE SECOND SHIFT: Working Parents and the Revolution at Home. By Arlie
Hochschild with Anne Machung. (Viking, $18.95.) This ''insightful report on
two-career family life'' is the best discussion of ''what must be the
quintessential domestic bind of our time.''

SOMOZA FALLING. By Anthony Lake. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) A
''worthwhile study'' by a former Foreign Service officer about the ouster of the
Nicaraguan dictator and the resulting effect on American foreign policy.

THE SUN ALSO SETS: The Limits to Japan's Economic Power. By Bill Emmott. (Times
Books, $19.95.) With ''unemotional, finely reasoned arguments,'' the author
contends ''that Japan's huge financial surpluses could shrink as rapidly as they
appeared and that its power and wealth could prove as ephemeral as that of
OPEC.''

THE TEMPTING OF AMERICA: The Political Seduction of the Law. By Robert H. Bork.
(Free Press, $22.50.) ''A learned and powerfully argued neoconservative book''
written by the Supreme Court nominee rejected by the Senate in 1987. The book
''is a lucid, elegant, provocative work of legal scholarship.''

TEN MEN DEAD: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike. By David Beresford.
Introduction by Peter Maas. (Morgan Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $18.95.) An
''excellent'' history of the 1981 hunger strike in Ireland that details the
''broad cast of characters with insight and care.''

TERRITORY OF LIES. The Exclusive Story of Jonathan Jay Pollard: The American Who
Spied on His Country for Israel and How He Was Betrayed. By Wolf Blitzer.
(Harper & Row, $22.50.) The Washington bureau chief for The Jerusalem Post ''has
written . . . a lucid, highly readable account of one spy case that shook the
foundations of the relationship between the United States and Israel.''

WAR AND PEACE IN CENTRAL AMERICA. By Frank McNeil. (Scribners, $19.95.) A
30-year veteran of the Foreign Service writes ''an acerbic chronicle'' of United
States policy in Central America since the late 1970's. ''Mr. McNeil deserves
admiration for serving his readers as candidly as he served his Government.''

WASTED: The Preppie Murder. By Linda Wolfe. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) This
story of the murder of Jennifer Levin, a young New York woman, is ''an
excellent, valuable book.''

WOMEN OF DEH KOH: Lives in an Iranian Village. By Erika Friedl. (Smithsonian,
Cloth, $24.95; Paper, $10.95.) An anthropologist's ''enthralling'' view of an
Iranian community of women, drawn from 20 years of fieldwork.

Essays, Criticism and Letters

AGAINST JOIE DE VIVRE: Personal Essays. By Phillip Lopate. (Poseidon, $18.95.) A
new collection of essays, ''prickly and combative . . . shrewd and uttered with
a supple street-poet elegance.''

AN APPETITE FOR POETRY. By Frank Kermode. (Harvard University, $22.50.) This
collection of 10 essays by a literary critic ''is a fervent reminder of the
glory of literature in a greedy decade whose academic critics are rewarded for
abandoning their calling.''

THE CALL OF STORIES: Teaching and the Moral Imagination. By Robert Coles.
(Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) The eminent psychiatrist talks about why and
how literature can make a difference, beginning with his own life; a
''persuasive book.''

THE COMPANY WE KEEP: An Ethics of Fiction. By Wayne C. Booth. (University of
California, $29.95.) ''In this almost indecently satisfying book'' a professor
of English ''examines the strategies of writers and the counterstrategies of
readers, and speculates on all the possibilities of relation between these
two.'' GREAT PLAINS. By Ian Frazier. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) The
essayist takes readers on an expansive tour of the Great Plains. ''This is a
terrific book. . . . Mr. Frazier is a skilled writer, and he succeeds in
interesting us in what interests him.''

THE IMAGE OF THE BLACK IN WESTERN ART, Volume Four: From the American Revolution
to World War I. Part One: Slaves and Liberators. Part Two: Black Models and
White Myths. By Hugh Honour. (Menil Foundation/Harvard University, $50 each.) A
British art historian's ''magisterial'' look at black people in white culture.
''It is a rare occasion in the history of art when we are able to glimpse so
vividly how image-making serves as an instrument of oppression.''

ITALIAN DAYS. By Barbara Grizzuti Harrison. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $22.95.) A
''lush, compendious memoir of several months of travel in Italy . . . adds a new
dimension'' to travel literature - ''a sense of personal direction.''

LETTERS FROM A WAR ZONE: Writings 1976-1989. By Andrea Dworkin. (Dutton,
$18.95.) Essays, speeches and occasional pieces from the radical feminist writer
and novelist. ''Andrea Dworkin is still out there fighting, and hers is a very
specific battle: against the way American culture treats women.''

THE LETTERS OF JACK LONDON. Volume One: 1896-1905. Volume Two: 1906-1912. Volume
Three: 1913-1916. Edited by Earle Labor, Robert C. Leitz 3d and I. Milo Shepard.
(Stanford University, $139.50.) A collection of more than 1,500 letters by ''the
most widely read American writer in the world.''

THE LETTERS OF JOHN CHEEVER. Edited by Benjamin Cheever. (Simon & Schuster,
$19.95.) Selected correspondence of the prizewinning fiction writer, ''colorful
and witty . . . crude and routine.''

METAPHOR & MEMORY: Essays. By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf, $19.95.) A collection of
reviews and commentaries on writing and writers: ''When insight, feeling and the
writer's art come together . . . the distinction between essay and story seems
unimportant.''

THE MOST BEAUTIFUL HOUSE IN THE WORLD. By Witold Rybczynski. (Viking, $18.95.) A
professor of architecture relates the experience of building his own home. ''A
gem of a book . . . with a wealth of meaning.''

NO MAN'S LAND: The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century. Volume
Two: Sexchanges. By Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar. (Yale University,
$29.95.) In this second volume of a projected three-volume work, ''Ms. Gilbert
and Ms. Gubar write with facility'' about American and British literary
modernism and the sexual anxieties it expresses.

NOW, WHERE WERE WE? By Roy Blount Jr. (Villard, $17.95.) A ''deft new collection
of essays'' from the humorist is ''brilliantly loopy, reassuringly subversive.''

READING RUSSELL: Essays 1941-1988. On Ideas, Literature, Art, Theater, Music,
Places, and Persons. By John Russell. (Abrams, $29.95.) Depth, experience,
seriousness and gentility are joined in this ''handsome'' book of pieces by the
chief art critic of The New York Times.

TRAVELS WITH ALICE. By Calvin Trillin. (Ticknor & Fields, $18.95.) ''One of the
classiest and funniest essay writers to appear regularly between hard covers''
continues his culinary adventures around the globe.

VLADIMIR NABOKOV: Selected Letters, 1940-1977. Edited by Dmitri Nabokov and
Matthew J. Bruccoli. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $29.95.) A ''solid volume of
selected correspondence . . . scrupulously prepared'' by the author's son and a
professor of English at the University of South Carolina.

WHAT AM I DOING HERE. By Bruce Chatwin. (Viking, $19.95.) This last work by the
author, who died in 1989, is a mixed bag of travel writing, fiction and
reminiscences; ''what comes through in his last book is a life miscellaneous and
on the move, traveled on foot, but never pedestrian.''

THE WRITING LIFE. By Annie Dillard. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) The author of
''Pilgrim at Tinker's Creek'' turns her attention to the work of being a writer.
''Annie Dillard is a wonderful writer and 'The Writing Life' is full of joys.''

WRITING A WOMAN'S LIFE. By Carolyn G. Heilbrun. (Norton, $14.95.) An ''astute
and provocative book . . . of wise and witty essays'' about ''the lives of
independent and ambitious women.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Notable Paperbacks

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 78, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3185 words


This list of paperbacks is a selection from the New & Noteworthy column since
the December 1988 Christmas issue. It includes novels, poetry, stories,
biography, memoirs, letters, history, essays and science.

ADAM, EVE, AND THE SERPENT, by Elaine Pagels. (Vintage, $8.95.) The author of
''The Gnostic Gospels'' shows how politics might have helped transform the
cryptic Garden of Eden myth from a celebration of freedom to a condemnation of
original sin.

AMERICA INVULNERABLE: The Quest for Absolute Security From 1812 to Star Wars, by
James Chace and Caleb Carr. (Summit, $12.95.) The Strategic Defense Initiative,
the authors argue, is the outgrowth of an obsessive belief in unilateral defense
that is rooted in the War of 1812, when the British burned the White House.

AN ARTIST OF THE FLOATING WORLD, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $8.95.) A novel
about a Japanese artist who used his talents to glorify the imperialist
movement.

ANTHILLS OF THE SAVANNAH, by Chinua Achebe. (Anchor/Doubleday, $7.95.) A
Nigerian novelist's tale of three friends who try to run a country.

THE ARK SAKURA, by Kobo Abe. Translated by Juliet Winters Carpenter. (Vintage
International, $8.95.) Inside a hollowed-out mountain, a Japanese beggar
assembles a group of outcasts intent on surviving nuclear war.

BAD BEHAVIOR, by Mary Gaitskill. (Vintage, $7.95.) For the unhappy characters
who populate these matter-of-fact stories, there is nothing very remarkable
about sadomasochism.

BEING WITH CHILDREN, by Phillip Lopate. (Poseidon, $9.95.) A novelist and
essayist tells about his experiences trying to teach writing to children on New
York's Upper West Side.

BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss. (Signet/New American Library, $5.95.) The true
story of Rob Marshall, a wealthy New Jersey suburbanite, who arranges to have
his wife shot to death during a faked robbery. Also available from Signet is a
new edition of FATAL VISION ($5.95), Mr. McGinniss's account of the murder by
Jeffrey McDonald of his pregnant wife and two children in 1970. In a new
epilogue the author rebuts a New Yorker article that accused him of tricking Mr.
McDonald into confiding in him.

THE BOOK AND THE BROTHERHOOD, by Iris Murdoch. (Penguin, $8.95.) A novel about
lapsed revolutionaries from Oxford who decide to bankroll a friend who is
writing a utopian tract.

BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler. (Berkley, $5.50.) In another novel about
eccentrics in Baltimore, Maggie Moran, a cheerful, meddling woman, marries off
her son to a 17-year-old she shanghais from an abortion clinic.

A BRIGHT SHINING LIE: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam, by Neil Sheehan.
(Vintage, $12.95.) This story of an officer whose deceptions came to typify the
war in Vietnam won a National Book Award and a Pulitzer Prize.

BY SILENCE BETRAYED: Sexual Abuse of Children in America, by John Crewdson.
(Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) A journalist shows that when it comes to sexual
abuse children have more to fear from their families and friends than from
violent interlopers.

CAPOTE: A Biography, by Gerald Clarke. (Ballantine, $12.95.) A mesmerizing
account of Truman Capote's lifelong masquerade ball.

THE CAPTAIN AND THE ENEMY, by Graham Greene. (Penguin, $7.95.) A novel whose
narrator, deep in the Central American jungles, seeks the true identity of a
mysterious stranger who once spirited him away from a boarding school, claiming
to have won him in a backgammon game.

CLOAK & GOWN: Scholars in the Secret War, 1939-1961, by Robin W. Winks.
(Quill/Morrow, $14.95.) How Yale University has provided the Government with
very well educated spies.

COMING OF AGE IN THE MILKY WAY, by Timothy Ferris. (Anchor/Doubleday, $10.95.) A
chronicle of how the human spirit outgrew the earth and set its sights to the
sky.

DANGEROUS DOSSIERS: Exposing the Secret War Against America's Greatest Authors,
by Herbert Mitgang. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The Federal Bureau of Investigation's
secret files on Sinclair Lewis, William Faulkner and other literary suspects.

THE CONTROL REVOLUTION: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information
Society, by James R. Beniger. (Harvard University, $12.95.) How the Industrial
Revolution begat the Information Revolution, by producing a society so complex
that it requires computers to keep it from inevitably slipping toward entropy.

A DEADLY SILENCE. The Ordeal of Cheryl Pierson: A Case of Incest and Murder, by
Dena Kleiman. (Signet/ New American Library, $4.95.) A New York Times reporter
tells about the sexually abused Long Island teen-ager who paid a classmate $400
to kill her father.

DICTIONARY OF THE KHAZARS: A Lexicon Novel in 100,000 Words, by Milorad Pavic.
Translated by Christina Pribicevic-Zoric. (Vintage, $9.95.) A novel, in the form
of a do-it-yourself narrative, about a fictional tribe called the Khazars, who
lived in a land where the seasons were marked by calendars that flowed in both
directions and it was possible to read colors as though they were words.

DISCOS AND DEMOCRACY: China in the Throes of Reform, by Orville Schell.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $9.95.) In a book published a year before China's latest
cataclysm, a Western journalist wonders whether the ancient society can
withstand the pressures of modernization.

THE DREAMS OF REASON: The Computer and the Rise of the Sciences of Complexity,
by Heinz R. Pagels. (Bantam, $9.95.) A physicist tells how the computer, like
the telescope and the microscope, will change the way we understand the world.

DUSK: And Other Stories, by James Salter. (North Point, $7.95.) Laconic stories
about exiles and drifters.

EMPEROR OF THE AIR, by Ethan Canin. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $7.95.) In one of
these short stories, a high school astronomy teacher's campaign to save an old
elm tree threatens to erupt into a neighborhood war.

AN EMPIRE OF THEIR OWN: How the Jews Invented Hollywood, by Neal Gabler.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) Spurned by East Coast high society, entrepreneurs
like Adolph Zukor, L. B. Mayer, the Warner brothers and Harry Cohn established
their own fantasy land in Southern California.

THE FACTS: A Novelist's Autobiography, by Philip Roth. (Penguin, $7.95.) Philip
Roth comes clean with the true story of his heavily fictionalized life,
including, for good measure, commentary by his character Nathan Zuckerman.

FAMILY MEMORIES: An Autobiographical Journey, by Rebecca West. Edited by Faith
Evans. (Penguin, $7.95.) Surprisingly absorbing recollections about the writer's
relatives.

FLANAGAN'S VERSION: A Spectator's Guide to Science on the Eve of the 21st
Century, by Dennis Flanagan. (Vintage, $8.95.) After spending 35 years as editor
of Scientific American, Dennis Flanagan learned that science is the greatest
spectator sport of all.

HER OWN TERMS, by Judith Grossman. (Ivy, $3.95.) A refugee from dreary south
London finds that the Oxford literary world can be just as oppressive to women.

HEROES OF THEIR OWN LIVES. The Politics and History of Family Violence: Boston
1880-1960, by Linda Gordon. (Penguin, $8.95.) A history of a society's attitudes
toward child abuse, incest and wife beating.

THE HIGH ROAD, by Edna O'Brien. (Plume/New American Library, $8.95.) A novel
about an Irish expatriate who shatters the languid calm of a Spanish island when
she has an affair with a local peasant girl.

IN SEARCH OF J. D. SALINGER, by Ian Hamilton. (Vintage, $8.95.) A very
unauthorized biography of the writer who chose to slip through a tear in the
Veil of Maya and disappear into the silence of New Hampshire.

IN THE AGE OF THE SMART MACHINE: The Future of Work and Power, by Shoshana
Zuboff. (Basic Books, $11.95.) Thanks to the computer, work is becoming less a
matter of manipulating things than manipulating symbols.

JULIA PARADISE, by Rod Jones. (Penguin, $6.95.) The tale of a Shanghai
psychoanalyst who cures a missionary's wife of tormenting fantasies by making
love to her.

THE KING OF THE FIELDS, by Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Plume/New American Library,
$8.95.) A fairy tale of sex and violence about a tribe of cave-dwelling hunters
and gatherers who fight the farmers, set in prehistoric Poland. Translated by
the author from the Yiddish.

LIBRA, by Don DeLillo. (Penguin, $4.95.) A novel about a C.I.A. conspiracy to
kill President John F. Kennedy and blame Fidel Castro by fingering a Communist
dupe named Lee Harvey Oswald.

LAST DAYS OF THE SICILIANS: The FBI's War Against the Mafia, by Ralph
Blumenthal. (Pocket Books, $4.95.) After Carmine Galante was murdered in a
Brooklyn restaurant in 1979, Federal investigators learned of a Mafia within the
Mafia, which used a network of pizzerias to launder drug money.

THE LETTERS OF JOHN CHEEVER, edited by Benjamin Cheever. (Simon & Schuster,
$10.95.) A hefty selection of letters, accompanied by editorial commentary, that
presents a loving but far from idealized portrait.

LIFE, A USER'S MANUAL, by Georges Perec. Translated by David Bellos. (Godine,
$14.95.) Complex word games and characters that include a millionaire who makes
jigsaw puzzles that he himself must solve.

LIVES OF THE TWINS, by Rosamond Smith. (Avon, $3.95.) Joyce Carol Oates's
pseudonymous novel about a woman who has a secret affair with her therapist's
estranged identical twin.

LONGING FOR THE HARMONIES: Themes and Variations From Modern Physics, by Frank
Wilczek and Betsy Devine. (Norton, $9.95.) How physicists find order beneath the
cacophony of subatomic particles, quasars, pulsars and black holes.

MASCARA, by Ariel Dorfman. (Penguin, $7.95.) An ominous novel about a man
without a face who steals the visages of others.

THE MATHEMATICAL TOURIST: Snapshots of Modern Mathematics, by Ivars Peterson.
(Freeman, $10.95.) Mathematicians seek truth and beauty with fractals, prime
numbers, strange attractors, cellular automata and other abstractions.

THE MIDDLEMAN AND OTHER STORIES, by Bharati Mukherjee. (Fawcett, $3.95.) From
Vietnam, the Caribbean, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka to Queens, Ann Arbor and Cedar
Falls, the modern immigrants in these short stories create a multiplicity of new
worlds.

MISSING BEAUTY, by Teresa Carpenter. (Zebra, $4.95.) In a true story of
obsession and murder, a middle-aged medical school professor resorts to homicide
to kick an expensive habit: Robin Benedict, a prostitute from Boston's Combat
Zone.

NATURAL OBSESSIONS: Striving to Unlock the Deepest Secrets of the Cancer Cell,
by Natalie Angier. (Warner, $14.95.) A journalist becomes resident
anthropologist in a molecular biology lab, chronicling the search for genes that
cause cells to become malignant.

NEW AND COLLECTED POEMS, by Richard Wilbur. Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$10.95.) This collection of poems by the man named the United States' poet
laureate in 1987 won a Pulitzer Prize.

NORA: A Biography of Nora Joyce, by Brenda Maddox. (Fawcett Columbine, $12.95.)
A young Irish chambermaid named Nora Barnacle eloped with an aspiring writer
named James Joyce for a mismatch made in heaven.

NOTHING BUT THE BEST: The Struggle for Perfection at the Juilliard School, by
Judith Kogan. (Limelight Editions, $10.95.) A lawyer and harpist who graduated
from Juilliard tells of cutthroat competition at her alma mater.

NOWHERE TO GO: The Tragic Odyssey of the Homeless Mentally Ill, by E. Fuller
Torrey. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $8.95.) A psychiatrist blames his colleagues
for treating the ''worried well,'' who can afford to pay their bills, at the
expense of the homeless.

PACO'S STORY, by Larry Heinemann. (Penguin, $7.95.) A novel about a Vietnam
veteran whose nightmares follow him back to Texas and a job in a greasy spoon.
The novel won a National Book Award.

THE PAPER: The Life and Death of The New York Herald Tribune, by Richard Kluger
with the assistance of Phyllis Kluger. (Vintage, $16.95.) The history of the
newspaper that gave Tom Wolfe his start.

PARIS TROUT, by Pete Dexter. (Penguin, $7.95.) After a Georgia shopkeeper named
Paris Trout kills a 14-year-old black girl, the people in the town of Cotton
Point try to convince themselves that they are somehow different from their
racist, paranoid neighbor. The novel won a National Book Award.

PARTING THE WATERS: America in the King Years 1954-63, by Taylor Branch. (Simon
& Schuster, $14.95.) A Pulitzer Prize-winning history of the Civil Rights
movement.

THE PIGEON, by Patrick Suskind. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $5.95.) The
well-ordered life of a Parisian bank guard is transformed completely when a
pigeon shows up at his door.

THE POET AT THE PIANO: Portraits of Writers, Filmmakers, Playwrights, and Other
Artists at Work, by Michiko Kakutani. (Peter Bedrick, $8.95.) A collection of
profiles, including such subjects as Saul Bellow, Ingmar Bergman, Sam Shepard
and Laurence Olivier, by a New York Times book critic.

THE POWER GAME: How Washington Works, by Hedrick Smith. (Ballantine, $5.95.) In
recent times, Washington has become fractured into hundreds of power centers,
each fighting to garner enough influence to get things done.

THE PREDATORS' BALL: The Inside Story of Drexel Burnham and the Rise of the Junk
Bond Raiders, by Connie Bruck. (Penguin, $8.95.) The rise and fall of Drexel
Burnham Lambert and its West Coast Wunderkind, Michael Milken.

THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED: Book Three of the Vampire Chronicles, by Anne Rice.
(Ballantine, $5.95.) The mother vampire of them all awakens from a
6,000-year-old sleep with a plan to bring peace on earth by killing most of the
men.

THE QUESTION OF HU, by Jonathan D. Spence. (Vintage, $8.95.) A history of a
curious Chinese tourist who was thrown into a French insane asylum in the early
18th century.

QUINN'S BOOK, by William Kennedy. (Penguin, $8.95.) A young newspaperman tries
to win the heart of Maud Fallon, the beautiful enigma he saved from drowning
when she was 12 years old.

THE RABBI OF LUD, by Stanley Elkin. (Scribners, $8.95.) A fictional New Jersey
rabbi presides over a congregation of the dead.

THE RAT, by Gunter Grass. Translated by Ralph Manheim. (Harvest/Helen and Kurt
Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $9.95.) In a concatenation of stories within
stories, Gunter Grass tells of the dawning of the posthuman age when the world
is overrun by rats.

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE GREAT POWERS: Economic Change and Military Conflict
From 1500 to 2000, by Paul Kennedy. (Vintage, $12.95.) When mighty empires
hasten their own demise by spending too much money on the military.

THE RISK POOL, by Richard Russo. (Vintage, $8.95.) Ned Hall chooses a college as
far as possible from his hometown of Mohawk, where his father is a drunk and his
mother is strung out on Librium.

SAILING, by Susan Kenney. (Penguin, $7.95.) After a cancer patient's wife gives
him a sailboat, he gets a grip on his life.

SECRETS OF THE TEMPLE: How the Federal Reserve Runs the Country, by William
Greider. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) A book that demystifies the
Federal Reserve Board.

A SOCIAL HISTORY OF MADNESS: The World Through the Eyes of the Insane, by Roy
Porter. (Dutton/Obelisk, $8.95.) A collection of case studies in which the
history of the asylum is told from the point of view of the inmates.

SOMEONE WAS HERE: Profiles in the AIDS Epidemic, by George Whitmore. (Plume/New
American Library, $8.95.) Three true stories about victims of the AIDS virus by
a man who has since died of the disease.

SPENCE + LILA, by Bobbie Ann Mason. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $6.95.) In a novel
by the author of ''In Country,'' a farmer helps his wife in her struggle against
breast cancer.

THE STATUE WITHIN: An Autobiography, by Francois Jacob. Translated by Franklin
Philip. (Basic Books, $10.95.) The autobiography of the renowned molecular
biologist is ''not only literate but positively literary,'' our reviewer said.

STORIES IN AN ALMOST CLASSICAL MODE, by Harold Brodkey. (Vintage, $12.95.) Tales
from a craftsman of abundant prose about the relentlessness of suffering.

THE TENANTS OF TIME, by Thomas Flanagan. (Warner, $5.95.) A historical novel
about three Irishmen who play different roles in the country's sorrows.

THE THIRD GENERATION, By Chester Himes. (Thunder's Mouth, $11.95.) A searing
novel, published in 1954, about a black professor whose wife tries to pass for
white.

THREE SCIENTISTS AND THEIR GODS: Looking for Meaning in an Age of Information,
by Robert Wright. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) Masterly portraits of three
eccentric thinkers in search of the secrets of life.

TRACKS, by Louise Erdrich. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The Chippewa
ancestors of the characters in ''Love Medicine'' and ''The Beet Queen'' fight
winter, smallpox and a conquering alien culture.

TWO AGAINST ONE, by Frederick Barthelme. (Collier/Macmillan, $7.95.) During a
surprise birthday visit from his estranged wife, Edward is invited to join her
and her lover in an enduring threesome.

UNDER THE EYE OF THE CLOCK: The Life Story of Christopher Nolan, by Christopher
Nolan. (Delta, $7.95.) A paralyzed poet tells how he learned to flex the muscles
of his mind.

VANISHED, by Mary McGarry Morris. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $6.95.) A
dull-witted middle-aged road worker and a 14-year-old runaway embark on a
five-year odyssey of truck stops and cheap motels.

WASHINGTON GOES TO WAR, by David Brinkley. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The television
journalist recalls how World War II transformed a sleepy city with Southern
efficiency and Northern charm into a boom-town bureaucracy.

WHATEVER HAPPENED TO GLOOMY GUS OF THE CHICAGO BEARS? by Robert Coover.
(Collier/ Macmillan, $7.95.) A novel about an ambitious young Quaker named
Richard Nixon who becomes a football star.

WHEN THE MIND HEARS: A History of the Deaf, by Harlan Lane. (Vintage, $15.95.)
For hundreds of years, deaf people have tried to make the hearing understand
that words need not be spoken - or even written - to qualify as language.

WHERE I'M CALLING FROM, by Raymond Carver. (Vintage, $8.95.) Stark, haunting
tales left behind by Raymond Carver, who died last year of cancer at the age of
50.

WHO KILLED CBS? The Undoing of America's Number One News Network, by Peter J.
Boyer. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) A horror story about the decline of Edward R.
Murrow's old aerie.

WHO WROTE THE BIBLE? by Richard Elliott Friedman. (Perennial/Harper & Row,
$8.95.) A scholarly hunt for Moses' ghostwriters that reads like a detective
story.

WRITING A WOMAN'S LIFE, by Carolyn G. Heilbrun. (Ballantine, $6.95.) A
humanities professor who writes mysteries tells how literature has conspired to
make women seem more like men want them to be.

THE YELLOW WIND, by David Grossman. Translated by Haim Watzman. (Delta, $8.95.)
A young Israeli novelist spends a season among the West Bank Palestinians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Journal;
Sad Flotsam, the Boat People Must Drift Home

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Dec. 2


Hong Kong, straining to house the tens of thousands of Vietnamese boat people
who have arrived in the last 18 months, is making final arrangements to force
them to return to the country they risked their lives to escape.

As British negotiators in London work out the final details of the repatriation
plan with Vietnamese officials, this British colony has been considering
ferries, charter planes and even a floating casino to take the Vietnamese home.
Government officials said this week that the first forced repatriations could
begin before the end of December, and will be carried out in secret.

A British Government official said that while London and Hanoi have a general
agreement on what they have agreed to call ''the orderly return program,'' they
must still devise a way to monitor the resettlement of those who will be sent
back, and work out logistical arrangements.

The Cost of Resettlement

Eventually, Hong Kong hopes to send back some 40,000 Vietnamese who fled the
despotism and poverty of Vietnam, sailing across the South China Sea in tiny
open boats. Newspapers here and in Britain have reported that Britain will pay
Vietnam $600 per person to cover the cost of resettlement.

A Hong Kong official said the plan was to return the first group of Vietnamese
quickly and in secret, ''for security reasons.'' He said the press ''will be
informed after the fact.''

''We can't have the date of the first departure leaking out because that could
cause widespread rioting in the camps here,'' he said. There have been reports
that the first forced repatriations will be carried out under dark.

British officials say that Vietnam, eager for diplomatic acceptance and foreign
aid, has agreed to accept the forced return of its citizens but has warned
against articles and photographs featuring weeping Vietnamese.

''I don't think the British want publicity on this either,'' a relief worker
said. ''It doesn't enhance the British image, does it? Forcing people at
gunpoint onto boats and planes at Christmas time.''

A Sense of Haste

A Hong Kong Government official said that while ferries and ships were being
checked, ''we cannot rule out the use of planes for the first few trips because
we need to move quickly, the minute the ink dries on the agreement with Vietnam.
''

A ship's surveyor hired by the Government here to inspect the Macmosa, which
carries vacationers between Macau and Taiwan, said the gambling ship had been
rejected because there was not time to put bars on all the portholes and divide
the ship into small, cell-like spaces.

The Government official said: ''In the long term, we will be looking to use
ships because of the sheer numbers involved and because they are safer.
Obviously, an aircraft is riskier if the Vietnamese cause a disturbance.''

The Screening Process

Hong Kong now houses about 57,000 Vietnamese, only 13,000 of whom are considered
refugees and await resettlement in a third country. The remaining 44,000, who
arrived after a June 16, 1988, cut-off date, are undergoing a strict screening
process and are treated as illegal immigrants unless they can prove they fled
political or religious persecution. Only a small percentage of them are expected
to do so.

The boat people live behind high barbed-wire fences, crowded into squalid camps
patrolled by armed guards. The camps are closed to news organizations, and even
relief workers have limited access.

Government officials have said they want to begin the forced returns soon to
discourage more Vietnamese from sailing here before the good winds begin in
March. Most of the Vietnamese here are poor fishermen and farmers from the
north, and almost a third are young children.

With pockets of Vietnamese already staging demonstrations and hunger strikes to
protest the return plan, security officials here have drawn up contingency plans
for widespread rioting in the detention centers when the first group has
departed.

The American Position

The United States, which this year settled the largest number of Vietnamese from
Hong Kong, has opposed the mandatory repatriation plan, asking that voluntary
repatriation be given more of a chance. President Bush and Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher of Britain discussed the issue when they met a week ago at
Camp David, Md.

A Bush Administration official said the United States was ''unalterably opposed
to forced repatriation to Vietnam unless and until dramatic improvements occur
in that country's economic, political and social life.''

British officials, who argue that Americans routinely force illegal immigrants
from Mexico and Haiti to go home, say they have no alternative.

Despite the strict screening criteria, the poor conditions of the Hong Kong
camps and the slim hope of resettlement, the Vietnamese keep coming. Hong Kong
officials say a voluntary program begun last March under the auspices of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is not working. Only 600 boat
people have returned voluntarily, with 130 more flying back on Thursday. About
1,000 volunteers await processing by Vietnam for return, officials said.

Group of 72 Is Readied

A group of 72 Vietnamese, moved out of the larger detention camps and isolated
in Phoenix House, an old factory building converted into a holding center, is
widely expected to be the first to be sent back. Members of this group have been
refusing food for days.

''We still do not have a date, or even the numbers of Vietnamese to be returned
on the first trip,'' said a senior Government official familiar with the
Vietnamese problem. ''But that group in Phoenix House has been prepared -been
coaxed, you might say.

''Everyone there was screened out and lost their appeal of the decision. They
were then moved to Phoenix House, where they were visited by representatives of
all the major resettlement countries - the United States, Canada, Australia -
and told they had no chance of being accepted by those countries. They were told
that unless they went home, they could spend the rest of their lives in that old
factory.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of refugees at the Whitehead Detention Center in Hong Kong
protesting a repatriation plan that would force them to return to Vietnam.
(NYT/Marc Fallander)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The 'Auteur' Syndrome

BYLINE: By BUDD SCHULBERG; The following remarks, adapted here, were delivered
at the Deauville Festival of American Films, in France, in September. The
author, who has just completed the film adaptation of his novel ''What Makes
Sammy Run?'', was given the festival's Prix Litteraire.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


From the supercolossal ''Batman'' to the personal and innovative documentary
''The Thin Blue Line,'' from the baseball fantasy ''Field of Dreams'' to the
sensitive gay tragedy ''Torch Song Trilogy,'' the selection of motion pictures
here brings a cross-section of American films from big to small, from blatant
commercialism to avant-garde experimentation. Yet as I read the glossy, elegant
107-page program, I find something missing: the writer.

His or her work is not missing. Indeed, each glossy page of the beautiful
souvenir program not only devotes a full page to each film but tells in detail
the story of the film, describing the characters and neatly summing up the
theme. But since the page is headed by the title of the film, followed in
headline type by the director's name, the page presumes to tell us the director
is the author of the content printed in 400 words directly under his or her
byline.

One would assume, turning, say, to ''Casualties Of War,'' that Brian de Palma
wrote this dramatic examination of the failure of grace under pressure in the
cauldron of Vietnam. But study the tiny letters in the lower left-hand corner of
the page and you discover that the eminent playwright David Rabe wrote the
screenplay, based on a searching expose by Daniel Lang in The New Yorker.

Or take ''Torch Song Trilogy,'' again presented as if authored by Paul Bogart,
complete with photo, bio and filmography. Bogart would be the first to
acknowledge that the story, characters and theme are the creation of Harvey
Fierstein, who also wrote the original play from which this compelling film was
adapted. Yes, you'll find Fierstein's name in the lower left-hand box, among a
dozen other ''credits' - if you have especially good eyesight or perhaps a handy
magnifying glass.

What we are up against is the director's darling (and writer's nemesis) - the
''auteur'' theory - so dear to the hearts of so many French critics and our own
diehard Andrew Sarris.

My impression of the ''auteur'' theory is that of a giant vacuum cleaner sucking
up all the contributions of the writers (not to mention the cameramen and film
editors) into one great overblown bag labeled auteur - director.

Since trivia games are still with us, let's play Who Wrote? Mention ''Citizen
Kane,'' and 10 out of 10 will say Orson Welles. The real writer is someone most
of you may never have heard of, Herman Mankiewicz.

Take other giants: John Ford, Frank Capra. Who would deny them their legendary
place in American film history? But did Ford write ''Stagecoach,'' ''The
Informer'' or ''The Long Voyage Home''? No, it was the gifted Dudley Nichols,
who in each case built his film adaptions on writers as pre-eminent in their own
field as Ernest Hycox, Sean O'Faolain and Eugene O'Neill.

When we think of ''It Happened One Night,'' ''Mr. Deeds Goes To Town'' and
''Meet John Doe,'' we associate them with the enchanted humanism of Frank Capra.
Who remembers that these and other Capra successes were written by Robert
Riskin? Just as who remembers that behind the towering neo-realists of Italy's
postwar renaissance, Roberto Rosselini and Vittorio De Sica, was a writer whose
name and credits were sucked up into the great vacuum cleaner marked auteur -
the late Cesare Zavattini?

If Fellini had remained merely the writer of Rosselini's breakthrough film
''Open City,'' he might have toiled obscurely in the writer's ghetto. He escaped
the vacuum cleaner, as did Joe Mankiewicz and many other frustrated film
writers, only by moving up to director.

It is to Elia Kazan's credit that after close collaboration with Tennessee
Williams, John Steinbeck, Arthur Miller, William Inge and me, he decided: ''I'm
tired of interpreting other people's work, much as I admire it. I'll make my own
pictures from my own stories, my own scripts.'' ''America, America'' and ''The
Arrangement'' followed.

Only then does an auteur become the genuine article: the author of the work.
Call Woody Allen an auteur and you'll get no arguments from the Writer's Guild.
The same with Spike Lee. Or Oliver Stone, if he sits down and bangs out
''Platoon'' or ''Wall Street'' before directing it. Charlie Chaplin was an
auteur.

If the play's the thing, so is the movie script. The most despised of the art
forms, it may actually be the most demanding.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Army's Rifle of the Future: 2 Bullets at Once?

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 4


The Army is searching for a new, improved rifle for its 21st century soldiers.

Since September, 36 Army and Air Force shooters have been conducting preliminary
tests with four prototypes of an advanced combat rifle at a computerized Fort
Benning range. The range has equipment that monitors their heart rates and
records their hits at distances from 25 to 600 meters.

The goal is to develop a weapon that would replace the M-16's that soldiers have
toted since the Vietnam war. The Army is searching for a weapon that can hit the
target twice as often in combat.

''The M-16-A2 is the finest combat rifle in the world, but the accuracy of that
weapon because of human factors is not as high as one would like it to be,''
said Pete Rowland, public affairs officer for the Army's Armament Research,
Development and Engineering Center at Picatinny Arsenal, N.J.

The Army has spent about $40 million since 1982 on research and development and
expects to spend another $17 million by 1991, when officials decide what
technology to pursue.

The prototypes, some very futuristic, were submitted by the Colt Firearms
division of Colt Holdings Inc. of Hartford; Steyr-Daimler-Puch of Steyr,
Austria; the AAI Corporation of Cockeysville, Md., a subsidiary of United
Industrial Corporation, and Heckler & Koch, a German concern with an American
subsidiary in Chantilly, Va.

Two Bullets at Once

The Colt rifle fires conventional ammunition or a cartridge with two
projectiles. Colt said one projectile travels to the point of aim and the other
diverges slightly to increase hit probability.

The Steyr uses a plastic-cased cartridge that fires a steel flechette, or dart.
The AAI rifle fires a brass cartridge with a flechette and the Heckler & Koch
shoots a 4.92-mm bullet from a ''caseless cartridge'' made of molded propellant.

Mr. Rowland said the Army is conducting the tests to determine if it is possible
to increase accuracy with current technology and also lessen the weight a
soldier must carry.

''The soldier of today is weightily equipped,'' he said. ''Anything that can be
done to make that lighter - and a lot is being done - will increase his
effectiveness. Probably from head to foot, the Army is looking for a way to
lighten the load.''

On the battlefield, the soldier's shooting is hampered by a variety of factors,
including stress, fatigue, weather and obscured targets, he noted. ''The goal is
to develop some compensations in the weapon to offset the outside factors that
affect a soldier in battle,'' he said. ''The soldier has to have twice the
accuracy that he has with the current version.''

Shooters Will Be Under Stress

Earlier this year, the Army conducted extensive engineering and safety tests on
the prototypes at Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland.

At Fort Benning, the rifles will be tested in a series of exercises on a special
range designed to maximize stress and fatigue. The shooters will engage targets
from 25 to 600 meters away in the prone, standing and foxhole positions.

Target exposure times will vary from less than 2 seconds to as long as 10
seconds. Some of the targets will move and some will be stationary.

To increase stress, participants will engage in strenuous physical activities
before firing and their heart rates will be monitored. Simulators will reproduce
the sounds of returning enemy fire.

In January, another team of Army and Air Force shooters will arrive at Fort
Benning to begin another three months of testing.

Program managers at Picatinny Arsenal say soldiers could have a new rifle by as
early as 1995 if the new designs are successful in doubling the combat
effectiveness of the M-16.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Why Salvadoran Army Wants War Without End;
Another Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


To the Editor:

We object strongly to the conclusion you reach in ''Relief but No Remedy in El
Salvador'' (editorial, Nov. 23). You implicitly blame both sides for balking the
proposed cease-fire. However, the most recent statement by President Alfredo
Cristiani rejecting cease-fire, for even three hours, clearly puts the
responsibility on his Government (aided and abetted by the United States).

The State Department - and, too often, Congress - has poured billions into
propping up the regimes of Jose Napoleon Duarte and Mr. Cristiani with arms,
supplies and military ''advisers.'' After 10 years, with more than 71,000
Salvadorans dead, the United States cannot produce a military victory for its
puppets - any more than it could in Vietnam.

It is time the United States used its power and prestige for peace, by
officially joining the meetings of the five Central American presidents,
assisted by the Organization of American States, to implement the guidelines of
the Central American peace plan for which President Oscar Arias won the Nobel
Peace Prize: (1) Immediate cease-fire by all combatants in El Salvador and
Nicaragua. (2) Implementation of free and fair elections supervised by the
United Nations and the O.A.S. in Nicaragua. (3) Cessation of all foreign
military aid by third parties - including the United States, the Soviet Union,
Cuba and countries within the region. (4) Demobilization of the contra military
bases and soldiers in Honduras and Nicaragua (the original deadline was Dec. 4,
1989).

We propose that President Bush instruct the State Department to join Congress in
extending an invitation to the Central American presidents, the O.A.S. and the
United Nations for a peace conference in Washington in late January. This is the
best option for pursuing and achieving peace in the region.

ROBERT BOEHM
MAURICE S. PAPRIN
  New York, Nov. 27, 1989

The writers are, respectively, chairman and president of the Fund for New
Priorities in America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Wasn't Tough Enough

BYLINE: By Kenneth L. Adelman; Kenneth L. Adelman was director of the Arms
Control and Disaramament Agency from 1983 to 1987.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The ''no surprises'' summit meeting was surprising in its lack of ''new
thinking'' about the new world unfolding. This summit smacked of summits of the
1970's, with arms control once again raising the highest expectations.

President Bush and his top advisers are now poised to lunge for the capillaries,
as they promise gala summertime summit signings, staff-kicking and
deadline-setting for three new major accords this year. Secretary of State James
Baker heads off next month to Moscow, where he will dive into SS-18 throw weight
and other arms control nitpicks.

Rather than rework outdated past proposals, the Bush team should push two
big-ticket items of grand historical sweep and significance.

The first is the complete removal of Soviet forces from Eastern Europe. This
would end the cold war where it began. It need not be reciprocated by all our
G.I.s leaving Europe. For sundry reasons, reunification among them, Mikhail
Gorbachev may not want all U.S. troops to leave West German soil soon.

The second item to push for is an end to Leonid Brezhnev's legacy of bailouts of
Cuba, Nicaragua, Vietnam and Afghanistan, which would save Mr. Gorbachev $10
billion yearly.

Why should Mr. Gorbachev spend gobs of scarce, hard currency to keep these
mostly far away Marxist regimes in power when he smiles as Marxists fall next
door? Does he really care more about Fidel Castro's fate than about Erich
Honecker's?

Besides constituting a major diversion, the arms control hype will yield
positive harm at worst and dubious benefit at best.

Take the treaty on strategic arms. Aside from horrendous verification woes (some
seemingly insolvable), are persistent doubts about whether the agreement helps
U.S. strategic stability.

Before joining the Bush Administration as national security adviser, Brent
Scowcroft and the ambassador to the Vienna arms talks, R. James Woolsey, wrote
that Start could push the U.S. into ''a new kind of triad: vulnerability,
wishful thinking, and a hair trigger.'' Not reassuring words, but unfortunately
still true.

Or take the conventional-arms accord. While beneficial to NATO when first
proposed earlier this year, it has been overtaken by events. If concluded, this
accord would legitimize the continued presence in East Europe of some 300,000
Soviet troops beyond the mid-1990's.

This is odd when the Hungarians and Czechs are calling for a complete Soviet
troop withdrawal from their countries. Mr. Gorbachev reportedly speaks of
removing all his forces in East Europe by the year 2000. So why are we still
proposing an accord that legitimizes the Soviet military's presence there
indefinitely.

Or take a worldwide ban on chemical weapons. This noble aim is simply
unachievable, since verification is impossible.

Mine is not a broadside attack on either arms talks or formal arms accords. But
rather than go for agreements without real arms control, without clearly helping
security or saving money, we should seek real arms control without agreements.

We should adopt an approach of evolving, parallel policies with the Soviets.
Reductions initiated by their side that are below our levels in key categories
would be matched by us, and vice-versa. Each side thereby tailors its forces to
make them affordable, survivable and sensible.

This is a dynamic approach, one that recognizes rapid changes in Eastern Europe
and in economic conditions. The formal number-crunching approach must end in a
static formula.

However, formal arms control could reduce one severe threat: the wildfire spread
of ballistic missiles. Washington and Moscow could jointly open to all nations
the intermediate range nuclear forces treaty's ban on ballistic missiles of a
range between 300 to 3,400 miles. This verifiable accord could help prevent more
than 15 countries from producing ballistic missiles within a decade.

History is already being kind and gentle to President Bush. It is handing him
enormous opportunities to usher in a far safer future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

KITCHEN BOOKSHELF;
New Volumes That Tantalize Eye and Palate

BYLINE: By NANCY HARMON JENKINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2773 words


THE 1989 holiday season brings an exceptional bounty of books for cooks and food
lovers, handsome picture books for gift-giving, thoughtful books for thinking
and those rare, treasured volumes that both tantalize the eye and palate with
clearly presented recipes and provoke thoughtful discourse or at least good
dinner-table conversation.

In his new book, ''America Eats,'' William Woys Weaver, a leading culinary
historian, stresses the importance of ''connectedness,'' a bond that is
expressed, he says, in ''the interaction of people caring for one another
through food.'' There are too many people in this country today who have
forgotten that bond, and even more who have never experienced it. In the spirit
of ''America Eats,'' the best books on this holiday list may help restore what
has been lost.

Jasper White, the author of ''Jasper White's Cooking From New England'' (Harper
& Row, $27.95), is a man with a masterful understanding of connections. As the
chef and a co-owner of Jasper's in Boston's North End, he is also one of the
most talented cooks in New England - indeed, in the country, his fans say.

Mr. White understands and articulates in this book some important truths: for a
great chef, knowing where food comes from is as important as knowing what to do
with it once it arrives in the kitchen, and for people who care about food, it
is vitally important to protect the bounty that has sustained America, before it
is too late.

There are glorious recipes in this book, especially for seafood (lobster sauteed
with fiddlehead ferns and morels and chowder with fresh and smoked haddock, a
signature dish at Jasper's) but also for exotica like wild duck breast, venison
(with a classic French sauce thickened with wild beach plum puree), and an
unusual dish of pork chops braised with clams and garlic, inspired by porco a
alentejana, a favorite of New England Portuguese fishermen.

There are also a number of recipes for dishes that spring directly from New
England's most cherished traditions, dishes one doesn't always associate with
great chefs or their restaurants: Boston baked beans, for instance, or roast
Vermont turkey with sausage and sage dressing, or (eyebrows raised, all you
trend-spotters?) New England boiled dinner, followed thriftily by red-flannel
hash to use up the leftovers. As he prepares it (and despite its name), boiled
dinner is a magnificent dish, a worthy focus of a grand tradition.

Madeleine Kamman is another of those rare cooks and teachers who understands
that soil, climate and topography are as important to food as they are to wine.
Thus, in ''Madeleine Kamman's Savoie: The Land, People, and Food of the French
Alps'' (Atheneum, $24.95), she begins her discussion about the food of Savoy,
that mountainous region of eastern France, by talking about the geology of the
French Alps. Then she goes on to the language, folk culture, society and history
of a magnificently scenic area - 130 pages of detailed information before the
first recipe. But every bit of it, Ms. Kamman would argue, is absolutely vital
to an understanding of this robust cuisine.

Relying on rich, thick cream and sweet butter, on a variety of fresh and ripened
cheeses, on smoked bacon and sausages, this is not food for the faint of heart.
Typical of the region are whole-wheat, buckwheat and corn-flour pastas;
vegetable gratins; fondues and cheese puddings, and a fascinating variety of
polentas (with snails, with dried pears and prunes, with cherry ragout). Ms.
Kamman's enthusiasm for this region, where she spent much of her childhood, is
deeply affecting.

Diana Kennedy, a redoubtable Englishwoman who has lived for more than 30 years
in the Mexican countryside, traveling and cooking and writing about its food,
has argued persuasively that Mexico's culinary heritage is as rich, complex,
varied and interesting as any in the world. The kind of combination plate (two
tacos, one burrito, beans, rice and salsa) that most people in the United States
think of as Mexican food, she denounces as ''a cheap culinary 'fix.' ''

Following on her earlier books, she sets out in ''The Art of Mexican Cooking''
(Bantam, $24.95) to broaden perspectives, with 11 different recipes for tamales
alone (one with fish stuffing, another made with honey and cinnamon), and an
astonishing variety of sauces, cooked and uncooked, most of them using chilies.
Mrs. Kennedy insists firmly on the right ingredients. Fortunately, as new
varieties of chilies start to show up in specialty stores and supermarkets, it
becomes easier to duplicate these dishes.

Not just an instruction book with recipes for a variety of Mexican dishes, this
is a full-blown course in how to cook and eat Mexican food, what goes with what
and why, and the cultural background that gives the cuisine depth and
complexity.

William Woys Weaver's book, ''America Eats: Forms of Edible Folk Art'' (Harper &
Row, $16.95) is a robust celebration of America's culinary heritage, or that
part of it that grew out of the strong Anglo-German traditions of the Northeast.
This book was developed as a catalogue to accompany a show Mr. Weaver put
together for the Museum of American Folk Art in Manhattan (it opens tomorrow).
But the volume stands on its own as an important discussion of the complex web
of relationships that tie together artifacts, recipes, geography and folk
culture.

The objects (metal, ceramic, wood and printed sources) are handsome in
themselves, but the author's great gift is his ability to relate the what, how
and why of these, and to supply with historic recipes (green-tomato pie,
Baltimore crab gumbo, New Jersey ham and parsnips) that demonstrate the
qualities.

Ten years ago it was difficult to find a Vietnamese restaurant in this country
or indeed anyone who knew that Vietnam was the source of one of Southeast Asia's
most exciting cuisines. Now it's hard to find a major city that doesn't boast at
least one decent Vietnamese eating place, and interest in the food is high. But
until now, cooks interested in exploring the cuisine had only Gloria Zimmerman
and Bach Ngo's first-rate ''Classic Cuisine of Vietnam'' to guide them. (The
book is currently available as an NAL paperback, $9.95.) Nicole Routhier's new
book, ''The Foods of Vietnam'' (Stewart, Tabori & Chang, $35), is a worthy
addition to that slim library, even with a decidedly off-putting price tag, the
result of an overdesigned book that seems aimed for the coffee table rather than
the kitchen. That's too bad because Ms. Routhier, who was born in Saigon and
teaches cooking in Manhattan, is a charming and persuasive advocate of
Vietnamese food, and her book is as good an introduction for the novice as it is
a graduate program for those who have already experimented with the cuisine. The
recipes, which run the gamut from appetizers like cha gio, little deep-fried
spring rolls, to desserts like fried stuffed bananas, are clear and instructive.

''Bistro fare,'' says Patricia Wells, the author of ''Bistro Cooking'' (Workman,
$12.95) ''is a food without pretension, a cuisine based on familiar ingredients
that we can all relate to.'' From all over France, Ms. Wells, an American who
lives in Paris and is the restaurant critic for The International Herald Tribune
and the French magazine L'Express, has collected recipes from her favorite
bistros, those small neighborhood restaurants where the food is hearty,
home-style and apt to be very, very good.

This is not fancy haute cuisine, but rather gutsy, heart-warming food of
tremendous appeal - dishes like oxtail terrine, brandade de morue (pureed salt
cod), rabbit in mustard sauce, blanquettes d'agneau and de veau (lamb and veal
stews), bean and sausage combinations and wonderfully old-fashioned flans, fruit
tarts and clafoutis. The traveler in France, looking for good food, would be
wise to take along a copy of Ms. Wells's personal favorites listed at the back
of the book.

According to the jacket copy of ''The Cuisines of Germany'' (Poseidon, $24.95),
the author, Horst Scharfenberg, is a well-known food writer and host of a
television cooking show in West Germany. His book could not have been published
at a more opportune moment: the events taking place in Central Europe are bound
to evoke a renewed interest in the cooking and culture of Germany, a part of the
world American gastronomes have dismissed.

Mr. Scharfenberg ignores modern political realities to discuss the culinary
regions of ''historic Germany,'' and it is a little startling to see Germany's
borders extend from Alsace-Lorraine in the west to Silesia in the east and then
northward up through Danzig (better known these days as Gdansk) and East
Prussia. Still, the discussion of the cuisines of these areas and the historical
reasons for them are fascinating.

The recipes evoke a mysterious, Hansel-und-Gretel world of peppery spices and
sweet-sour, lemony-vinegary marinades - dishes like Konigsberger Klopse
(meatballs in a sour sauce), Hasenpfeffer (jugged or braised hare), herring
salad, dumplings, potato pancakes, sauerkraut and a magnificently peppery
Pfeffer-Potthast (beef hot pot).

''Simple'' and ''unpretentious'' are adjectives Joyce Goldstein uses to describe
the food of the Mediterranean, which she clearly loves to eat and cook. The
cuisines of North Africa, Spain, Italy, France, Greece and the Middle East form
the basis of her cookbook, ''The Mediterranean Kitchen'' (Morrow, $22.95), and
of the menu at Square One, her restaurant in San Francisco.

Olive oil, lemon, garlic, cumin, wild thyme and cilantro, are the flavors that
inspire her food, and if the dishes are not ''completely authentic,'' as Ms.
Goldstein is the first to admit, they are nonetheless, she believes, true to the
spirit of the place. Her seafood recipes are particularly exciting, though
simple and unpretentious are hardly the words that come to mind for a
spectacular Moroccan-style baked fish with preserved lemons and onion confit.

In ''The Renaissance of Italian Cooking,'' (Fawcett Columbine, $30), Lorenza de'
Medici covers 12 regions of Italy, looking specifically at the cuisine produced
in great houses by and for people of means. What is astonishing is the extent to
which this cooking derives from the same sources as the cuisine of the people,
la cucina casalinga (literally, home cooking).

The food the author describes is more refined and stylish, and it is certainly
presented in settings, like the Palazzo Taverna in Rome, of vivid and
spectacular beauty, photographed by John Ferro Sims. But whether it's a wild
asparagus omelet from Umbria, fresh sardines with bread crumbs from Sardinia or
pumpkin risotto from Lombardy (all recipes found in the book), there is a
remarkable continuity from high to low and back again. The book is elegantly
produced, a handsome gift book that is also really useful.

Alan Davidson's fans may come away from his newest book ''Seafood: A
Connoisseur's Guide and Cookbook'' (Simon & Schuster, $29.95), with a sense of
deja vu. Much of the material has already appeared in ''Mediterranean Seafood''
and ''North Atlantic Seafood,'' the two books that established him as a
considerable authority on fish and fish cookery.

This book seems to have been designed to show off Charlotte Knox's graphics, and
they are worthy of attention - big, four-color, full-page illustrations,
accurate, detailed and, in many cases, handsome enough to frame. Mr. Davidson
deals with each group of fish separately (salmon, the cod family, fish without
true bones, etc.), and there is a section of recipes from around the world at
the back. But of the first 20 recipes, more than a third have already appeared
in his earlier books, often with more interesting head notes. Still, this is a
handsome, elegant production, a nice introduction for beginners who are not
familiar with Mr. Davidson's earlier, and more interesting, work.

Camarones Enchipotlados (Shrimp in chipotle sauce) Adapted from ''The Art of
Mexican Cooking'' by Diana Kennedy

Preparation time: 20 minutes, plus 30 minutes for marinating

Cooking time: 25 to 30 minutes

1 pound large shrimp, peeled, deveined and butterflied with tail shell left on
 Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
 1/4 cup fresh lime juice
2 very ripe medium-size tomatoes, about 3/4 pound
Y cup olive oil
1 medium-size white onion, sliced thin
4 chiles chipotles adobados, or to taste (see note)
1 garlic clove, peeled and roughly chopped
Y cup dry white wine
 1/4 teaspoon dried oregano, Mexican if possible.

1.Preheat the broiler.

2.Season shrimp with salt, pepper and lime juice, and set aside to marinate for
about 30 minutes.

3.Using aluminum foil, line a shallow pan into which the tomatoes will just fit.
Put the tomatoes in the pan and broil 2 inches from the heat, turning from time
to time until the skin is blistered and browned and the flesh is mushy.

4.Heat the oil in a frying pan. Drain the shrimp, reserving any liquid, and add
the shrimp to the pan, along with the sliced onion. Fry, shaking the pan and
tossing the ingredients, for about 3 minutes. Remove the shrimp and onion with a
slotted spoon, and set aside, reserving the oil.

5.In an electric blender, make a rough-textured sauce by pureeing the tomatoes,
the chilies and their liquid and the garlic. Reheat the oil in which the shrimp
cooked, add the sauce, and fry over high heat, stirring and scraping the bottom
of the pan to prevent sticking, for about 8 minutes. Add the wine, oregano,
reserved marinade and salt to taste, and cook another minute. Add the
shrimp-onion mixture, and cook about 2 minutes. The shrimp should be just cooked
and still crisp. Serve immediately.

Yield: 3 to 4 servings.

NOTE: Chiles chipotles adobados are smoked jalapeno chilies in a mild red chili
sauce. They are readily available canned.

Ragout of Brussels Sprouts With Bacon, Apples And Walnuts From ''Jasper White's
Cooking From New England''

Preparation time: 20 minutes

Cooking time: 25 minutes

2 pints brussels sprouts (about 1 1/2 pounds)
 Salt to taste
 1/4 pound slab country bacon, cut in 1/2-inch pieces
1 medium-size onion, cut in 1/2-inch pieces, about 1 cup)
2 small apples, peeled, cored and cut in 1/2-inch pieces
 1/2 cup chicken stock or water
1 cup heavy cream
1 cup walnut halves, lightly toasted
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped parsley
 Juice of 1/2 lemon
 Freshly ground black pepper.

1.Trim each brussels sprout, and score an X on the bottom. Cook, uncovered, in
plenty of boiling salted water until tender (about 8 minutes). Drain and rinse
under cold running water to prevent further cooking. Drain well. Unless the
sprouts are very small, cut in half.

2.Fry the bacon pieces in a large saute pan over medium heat. When bacon begins
to crisp, add the onion. Cook for about 2 minutes, stirring, or until the onion
wilts.

3.Add the apples, sprouts, stock or water and cream, and simmer for about 5
minutes or until the cream is thick enough to coat the sprouts lightly. Add the
toasted walnuts and parsley. Season to taste with lemon juice, salt and pepper.
Serve immediately.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Pfeffer-Potthast (Beef hot pot with pepper)

Adapted from ''The Cuisines of Germany'' by Horst Scharfenberg

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 1 hour and 30 minutes

1 3/4 pounds well-marbled beef, cut into 3/4-inch to 1-inch cubes
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
3 medium-size onions, half sliced thin and half chopped fine or grated
1 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons coarsely ground (or cracked) black pepper
Y teaspoon allspice
2 bay leaves
 1/2 unpeeled lemon, thickly sliced
2 to 3 cups water or beef stock
3 tablespoons bread crumbs
 1/2 teaspoon sugar
2 tablespoons drained capers (optional)
 Lemon juice (optional).

1.In a large, heavy-bottomed pot, saute the beef cubes quickly in oil until they
are brown. Add the onions, salt, pepper, allspice, bay leaves and lemon slices
and mix well. Add the water or stock to cover the beef cubes. Stir to blend, and
cook, covered, over low heat for 1 hour, stirring frequently and adding more
liquid if necessary.

2.Add the bread crumbs and sugar, stir, then cook for an additional 20 minutes.
Remove the bay leaves and lemon slices. Add capers if desired. Taste the sauce
for seasoning. It should be thick and very spicy. Add more salt, allspice or
lemon juice if desired. Serve immediately.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

NOTE: This dish is usually served with plain boiled potatoes, half-sour pickles
and pickled beets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Theater;
A Heart of Gold For a House of Strays

BYLINE: By LAURIE WINER

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 676 words


Baba Goya, the title character and earth mother in the 1973 play by Steve Tesich
now being revived at the Second Stage Theater, starts the morning with an
Italian love song and a cup of strong Turkish coffee. As long as her household
is full of warm bodies, Goya is undaunted by all of the messy problems they can
pose.

Her fourth husband, Mario, says he's dying, but he has helpfully taken out a
newspaper ad for his replacement. Meanwhile, Goya's daughter, Sylvia, has come
home, fleeing a husband who impregnated her only to test the legality of an
abortion law.

Bruno, Goya's adopted son, is a policeman so overwhelmed with pity for criminals
that he forgets to take his socks off in the shower. An old man Goya has
recruited as an honorary grandfather is getting really crotchety. If this sounds
like ''You Can't Take It With You'' for the 1970's, hold on.

Other colorful characters flit in and out of Goya's shabby but comfortable
Queens home, designed by Tom Kamm with a keen eye for detail, from the worn
fabric on the sofa arms to the faint grease stains on the Coldspot refrigerator
and the stack of National Geographics under the end table. There's also an
unthreatening Japanese criminal whom Bruno has brought home and has chained to
the radiator.

Two suitors drop by in response to Mario's ad. Goya rejects one, a stiff German
named Adolf who has applied before. But the next applicant is a sad sack with
good qualifications: he has no relatives or friends. Goya herself is an orphan,
so he's invited to stay.

Goya is all accepting of these characters, who are little more than walking
eccentricities. But she does draw the line somewhere. She sympathetically pats
Sylvia's head when the girl confesses to having been a shoplifter and an actress
in pornographic movies. But when her daughter admits that she voted for Nixon to
get back at her husband, Goya pushes her off a chair.

First produced at the American Place Theater, ''Baba Goya'' is a period piece
now. It evokes a nostalgia for the 1970's as a time when social problems didn't
seem so overwhelming, when Americans were more generous about sharing the
wealth.

In films like ''Breaking Away'' and ''Four Friends,'' Mr. Tesich, a Yugoslav
immigrant, used more realistic characters to embody America's constant striving
toward social equality. In his play ''The Speed of Darkness,'' which had its
premiere this year at the Goodman Theater in Chicago, Mr. Tesich focused on a
loving family whose happiness is seriously threatened by the residue of guilt
and rage from the Vietnam War. ''Baba Goya'' seems like the work of another
writer entirely, one who is trying out a lightly absurdist tone that sabotages
his sentimental message. The play suffers from an overload of whimsicality.

Under Harris Yulin's direction, the actors turn in some good comic thumbnail
sketches. As Goya, Estelle Parsons is a disheveled Mother Courage with a healthy
yen for her beefy Mario, played with wide-eyed wonder by Jack Wallace. Thom
Sesma's deadpan running commentary as the criminal is refreshing, a harbinger of
the more straightforward Tesich characters to come. Ron Faber, as Adolf,
delivers a portrait of a punctilious German who manages not to be a cliche.

As the members of her household leave the nest, Goya gets ready for another trip
to the orphanage the way other people go down to the dog pound. Mr. Tesich has
always liked a happy ending, but this one comes much too easily.

So Happy In the 1970's

BABA GOYA, by Steve Tesich; directed by Harris Yulin; set, Tom Kamm; lighting,
Mal Sturchio; costumes, Candice Donnelly; sound, Gary and Timmy Harris;
production stage manager, Camille Calman; stage manager, Edward Phillips.
Presented by Second Stage Theater, Robyn Goodman and Carole Rothman, artistic
directors. At 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.

Goya ... Estelle Parsons
Mario ... Jack Wallace
Old Man ... David Clarke
Bruno ... Patrick Breen
Sylvia ... Martha Gehman
Adolf ... Ron Faber
Criminal ... Thom Sesma
Client ... Irving Metzman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST;
U.S. Offers Moscow a Few Ideas On How to Improve Its Economy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 542 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


The Soviet Union received some free economic advice from American officials
during the Malta summit meeting on how Moscow could put a chicken in every pot -
or least some soap in every washroom.

A senior Administration official said today that during last weekend's meetings
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d presented Foreign Minister Eduard A.
Shevardnadze with a paper detailing benefits to the Soviet economy of diverting
to domestic programs $15.5 billion that Moscow is spending this year on foreign
military and economic aid. The total is the estimated dollar value of the Soviet
aid, much of which is military equipment.

The paper, prepared by the State Department's Bureau of Economic and Business
Affairs and translated into Russian, was intended to demonstrate the
''opportunity costs'' of Moscow's assistance to Cuba and other third world
nations, the official said. Estimates From the C.I.A.  The sum of $15.5 billion
is the amount that the Central Intelligence Agency estimates is provided by
Moscow in military and economic assistance to Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia,
Cuba, Ethiopia, Nicaragua and Vietnam.

Mr. Shevardnadze reportedly did not tell Mr. Baker what he thought of the paper,
which presented rough calculations of how the diversion of Moscow's assistance
could help President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's campaign to reform the Soviet
economy and society.

According to the paper, the diversion of a even a small fraction of the funds
could markedly improve the quality of life in the Soviet Union. Diverting $500
million could provide each Soviet citizen with 10 times as much soap a year as
is now available, the paper says, alluding to the current shortage of soap in
the Soviet Union.

The paper also outlines possible alternative uses of the Soviet aid.

In one projected case, it would enable almost two million Soviet families to
double their annual consumption of goods and services, the paper states. There
are about 72 million Soviet families, according to the 1989 Soviet census.

More Meat on the Table

Alternatively, the sum would be sufficient to increase per capita meat
consumption by 31 pounds per year. The average Soviet citizen consumers about
145 pounds of meat each year, less than half of the amount consumed by the
average American, according to American officials.

An expenditure of $15.5 billion could lead to more than a fivefold increase in
investment in health facilities, such as hospitals, clinics and sanitariums.
Such a sum could also be used to double state expenditures to meet immediate
health care needs, boosting spending for medicine and doctor's salaries, for
example.

Whether Moscow is open to the American suggestions of how it might apply its
''peace dividend'' remains to be seen. Soviet officials have, however, publicly
stressed their interest in the ''economic conversion'' of some military assets,
such as missile factories, for the production of goods for Soviet citizens.

There has been relatively little talk such ''economic conversion'' in the United
States. And some specialists speculate that Moscow may be tempted to respond
with its own paper, detailing, for example, how the cancellation of the B-2
Stealth bomber would free up funds for the homeless.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia's Hun Sen Is Himself Khmer Rouge

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


To the Editor:

In commending to us the Hun Sen regime as the only force capable of standing
''between the Khmer Rouge and their former killing fields,'' your editorial of
Nov. 20 (''On Cambodia: Immoral, and Pointless'') neglects to mention that the
leading figures of that Government are themselves Khmer Rouge. As battalion
commanders in the eastern zone of Democratic Kampuchea, Hun Sen, Heng Samrin and
Chea Sim played a major role in converting eastern Cambodia into a strict-regime
forced-labor camp.

Following directives from Phnom Penh Central, they loyally pursued the
extermination of undesirable elements in general and of the Chams in particular.
To be sure, they were forced to flee into Vietnam in the fall of 1978, but this
was only because of Pol Pot's incredible sense of paranoia and not to any lack
of enthusiasm on their part for his policies. Hun Sen et al. merit a circle of
hell only a short rung removed from that reserved for Pol Pot and his politburo.

The great majority of Cambodians - which is to say those ''non-Communists''
rendered ''marginal'' by the ''Glorious 17th of April,'' in 1975, when the Khmer
Rouge seized power in Cambodia, and subsequent events - would like to be
delivered from both factions of the Khmer Rouge. But that would entail a
large-scale and long-term military intervention by a consortium of Western and
pro-Western countries, followed by a massive program of reconstruction aid, of
which you would doubtless disapprove. After all, you denounce as ''immoral and
pointless'' more modest proposals for intervention which prevented the Khmer
Rouge from coming to power in the first place.

Nonetheless, such a program of intervention is essential if Cambodia is to
survive as a nation at this late date.

DAVID ROBERTS JR.
  Houston, Nov. 20, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Peru Says It Will Resume I.M.F. Debt Payments

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


Peru, which was nearly expelled from the International Monetary Fund three
months ago for refusing to make payments on overdue I.M.F. loans, has agreed to
resume some payments, Peruvian officials said today.

''There is the beginning of an arrangement with the I.M.F.,'' said First Vice
President Luis Alberto Sanchez, who led a delegation in talks with the I.M.F.,
other Washington-based international organizations and American officials.

He and Luis Juan Alva, Second Vice President and a candidate for president in
elections scheduled for next year, said Peru would pay future I.M.F. obligations
when they fall due and would make a payment before the end of the year covering
the amount due in the final quarter.

Payment Put at $44 Million

Although Peruvians would not confirm a figure, other officials said the payment
was expected to total $44 million.

An I.M.F. official confirmed that discussions had started ''to regularize the
situation.'' The I.M.F. is expected to send a mission to Peru to discuss a new
economic program.

The reconciliation reflects the country's desperate need for economic help as it
fights inflation of 25 percent a month, drug trafficking and an insurgency led
by the Maoist guerrilla organization Shining Path.

Compounding Peru's difficulties are the country's mounting arrears not only to
the I.M.F. but also to the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.
The three lending agencies, owed a total of $1.64 billion, have cut off credit,
and commercial bank credit has also dried up.

The re-establishment of links with the I.M.F. is critical if Peru it is to get
the financing it needs from other lending organizations and commercial banks.

Prelude to Expulsion

In September, members of the I.M.F. board discussed the possibility of declaring
Peru in noncompliance with the fund's articles of agreement, a prelude to
expulsion. It would have been the first time any government was expelled from
the 151-nation organization.

Relations had deteriorated because of the refusal of the Government of President
Alan Garcia to make any payments on the $800 million in Peruvian arrears to the
I.M.F.

Mr. Garcia took that step after finding that Peru would be paying more to the
I.M.F. than it was receiving, and he adopted a disastrous policy of refusing to
allocate more than 10 percent of export earnings to service the country's debts.
That was only half the percentage required.

Peru's Position

The Peruvian officials insisted today that the problem was not that Peru had
refused to pay but that it could not. ''Peru wants to fulfill its commitments,''
Mr. Alva said.

Because the I.M.F. represents a pool of funds that is constantly re-lent to
needy members, it regards arrears as a matter of grave concern.

The organization administers a $120 billion pool of currencies and gold. Members
may borrow from the pool under conditions that become increasingly stringent as
more money is borrowed.

Because of the long duration of the third world debt crisis, arrears have become
a growing problem for the I.M.F. Other countries barred from I.M.F. loans
because of their arrears include Honduras, Somalia, Vietnam, Guyana, Liberia,
the Sudan, Zambia, Sierra Leone and Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Books of The Times;
Of the Holocaust, German Scholars and a Survivor

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 962 words



In Hitler's Shadow
West German Historians and the Attempt to Escape From the Nazi Past
By Richard J. Evans
196 pages. Pantheon Books. Hard cover, $18.95; paperback, $8.95.
Double Indemnity
A Memoir
By Zofia S. Kubar
208 pages. Hill & Wang. $17.95.

''German history does not simply belong to the Germans,'' writes Richard J.
Evans, professor of history at the University of London. ''The rest of the world
has an intense and legitimate interest in German attitudes to the recent past
and Germans' feelings about their national identity and purpose.''

Although ''In Hitler's Shadow'' was written before the Berlin wall began to
crumble, it has particular meaning now. Under Soviet domination and its own
rigid regime, East Germany never acknowledged the extent of the Holocaust to the
same degree as the West German Government. East German authors and historians
could not write freely; some had their works published, often at personal risk,
on the Western side of the wall. It will be interesting to see what the East
German historians, unfettered, will write about the Third Reich's atrocities and
their Government's responsibility to the victims of the concentration camps.

Professor Evans offers surprising evidence in his well-documented study about
the effort of some West Germans to escape the Nazi past. He reveals how a small
but influential group of conservative historians, writing for their countrymen
in the 1980's, have justified the criminality that the rest of the world thought
was proved at the Nuremberg trials. These historians have attempted to exculpate
the German Army and the many thousands of German civilians who were willing
participants in the Third Reich's crimes.

Commenting about West Germany since World War II, Professor Evans writes: ''The
'economic miracle' gave the West German economy an enviable stability and
strength. Yet this was achieved not least on the basis of trying to forget about
the past. Very little was said about Nazism. Next to nothing was taught about it
in the schools. The Nazi affiliations of major figures in the economy were never
mentioned. Even in politics, there was no great stigma attached to a Nazi
background, so long as this did not become the embarrassing object of public
debate.''

He identifies some of the leading West German historians whose books or lectures
have tried to detach the German volk from the deeds of the Third Reich: Hellmut
Diwald, author of ''History of the Germans''; Ernst Nolte, author of ''Three
Faces of Fascism''; Michael Sturmer, professor of history at Erlangen
University; Andreas Hillgruber, professor of history at Cologne University, and
Joachim Fest, a Hitler biographer and an editor at Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung.

Citing their works and words, Professor Evans points out that these historians
contend that the murder of millions of Jews in Auschwitz was not unique. They
say a comparable act of genocide took place in 1915 when the Turks killed a
million and a half Armenians. Why did the Nazis commit a similar act? Because,
Ernst Nolte contends, they had to counteract the Russians. The Germans believed
they would become Stalin's next victims and the Nazis needed an ideology to
defend the German bourgeoisie against the Communist threat. Anti-Semitism
provided such a counterideology. Thus Hitler's acts, as Nolte puts it, were
''understandable, and up to a certain point, indeed, justified.''

As further justification for Hitlerism and the Holocaust, these historians draw
a parallel to the role of the United States in Vietnam and that of the Soviet
Union in Afghanistan. Professor Evans responds that it requires ''a considerable
degree of myopia'' to compare Vietnam and Afghanistan to the premeditated and
highly organized murders of millions of men, women and children in Auschwitz and
the other concentration camps.

''In Hitler's Shadow'' concludes that the survival of West German democracy and
its continued stability in European and world politics now require ''a
continuing, open and honest confrontation with the Nazi past.'' In light of
current developments, a reader is left with the thought that the same need for
historical truth applies to East Germany.

Fortunately, enough potential victims intended for the German gas chambers
survived to tell their stories - and dispute the revisionist historians. Primo
Levi, the late Italian novelist, told me he refused to have the Auschwitz number
on his arm removed so that young people would ask him what the tattoo signified.
Several recently published memoirs also bear witness, including Jiri Weil's
''Life With a Star'' (Farrar, Straus & Giroux), an account of a Jew in
Nazi-occupied Prague, and Yehuda Nir's ''Lost Childhood'' (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich), the story of a few members of a Polish family from Lvov who
survived with forged baptismal certificates.

Among the most remarkable memoirs is ''Double Indemnity,'' by Zofia S. Kubar,
who fled the Warsaw ghetto and assumed a new identity. She constantly had to
reassure herself that she could pass for a Pole, banking on her brown eyes and
dark blond hair. She writes: ''Flaxen hair and blue eyes would have been better.
What bothered me most was my nose, not especially long, but not the small,
upturned Polish kind. Would the shape of my nose determine my future?''

After a series of narrow escapes and encountering the anti-Semitism of many
Poles, the author was hidden by an old school friend named Danka, one of the
righteous gentiles who saved her. The two young women from different backgrounds
broke down the walls of prejudice that at first existed between them. ''Double
Identity'' becomes more than a story of survival; it is about courage and
friendship and freedom even in the shadow of death.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 30, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A book review on Dec. 9 about a memoir by Zofia S. Kubar, a Holocaust survivor,
misstated the title.

The book, published by Hill & Wang, is ''Double Identity,'' not ''Double
Indemnity.''

GRAPHIC: Photo of Zofia S. Kubar

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Sinking the Boat People

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 521 words


Nothing is more unfashionable than yesterday's victims. This is the fate of more
than 50,000 Vietnamese boat people now threatened with forced repatriation from
refugee camps in Hong Kong. No longer ''victims of Communist tyranny,'' they are
merely ''illegal immigrants,'' in the words of Prime Minister Thatcher of
Britain. According to her Foreign Office, their return is not ''forced'' but
''involuntary.'' This nice distinction will bring no comfort to those about to
be repatriated.

All told, 167,000 boat people have fled to Hong Kong since 1975, of whom around
112,000 have been resettled there and in other countries. Recent arrivals come
mainly from Haiphong, a trip of three to seven days in fragile boats.

After accepting 10,000 Vietnamese in 1979 and 1980, Britain has found room for
only hundreds each year. The United States has absorbed 50,316, but only about
800 in the last year. Meanwhile the exodus continues - 46,000 since June 1988,
and hundreds more arrive every month.

There is no recent parallel for handing over so many unwilling people to a
Communist state. A less recent parallel is disturbing: the forced return in
1945-46 to the Soviet bloc of hundreds of thousands of refugees, chiefly by the
British. Most were killed or sent to labor camps. It was to prevent such
cruelties that civilized states agreed to forbid the practice called
refoulement.

In French that means forced return, a practice proscribed in article 33 of the
United Nations Convention on refugees: ''No contracting state shall expel or
return a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where
his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion.''

According to the British, nearly all the Vietnamese have been carefully screened
by the U.N. and most cannot claim a well-founded fear of persecution. That is
disputed by the respected Lawyers Committee on Human Rights. It regards the
screening as biased and careless and contends the refugees are helpless to
contest adverse findings.

The boat people do not share Britain's faith in Hanoi's avowals of decent
treatment for returnees. As of September, only 264 Vietnamese elected voluntary
repatriation, despite every inducement. Imagine what Charles Dickens might say
about the silky assurance of a British civil servant that returning these people
is ''a process of deportation which is used every day across the globe.''

Granted, the choices are difficult. Washington initially condemned forced
repatriation as ''odious'' but is opening no doors, pointing out that America
has already absorbed a million or so Indochinese refugees. The Lawyers Committee
urges granting the boat people permanent asylum in labor-short Hong Kong. The
U.S. Committee on Refugees urges, perhaps more realistically, a one-year grace
period until the world comes up with a better solution.

The U.S., Britain and other countries in the region should be struggling to find
one. That would sit easier on the conscience than idly watching as 50,000
refugees are forced from their refuge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

New Administration: Profiles of Dinkins's Eight Appointees;
Barbara Joelson Fife: Deputy Mayor

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 410 words


Barbara Joelson Fife is a classic case of civic leader become political leader.

She first became involved in civic affairs promoting the causes of the
environment, parks, urban renewal and waterfront rehabilitation. It was natural
for Mrs. Fife to jump first to the political arena and then to her first public
office as special assistant. This year she became acting chief of staff to
Manhattan Borough President David N. Dinkins.

Soon she will move to the the warren of offices around the mayor's office in
City Hall, where she will be one of four deputy mayors.

The 58-year-old West Side Democrat is also a rare politician - someone who
managed to bridge the ideological gap in the Democratic Party when that schism
was at its worst, during the Vietnam War era. Though a peace advocate, a liberal
and reform Democrat, she was friendly with such Democratic Party leaders as
Patrick J. Cunningham and Joseph F. Crangle.

Mrs. Fife, whose husband, Martin, is a successful businessman, raised four sons
while active in efforts to clean up the Hudson River and Jamaica Bay, to build
low-income housing in Clinton and to preserve parks.

Only one of her sons, Richard, is involved in politics or government. He is a
political media consultant.

A graduate of Bryn Mawr College in 1952, she returned to formal schooling and
received a master's degree in urban planning from Hunter College in 1983. She
also lectured at Hunter and administered an urban internship program before her
appointment to the Borough President's office in 1985.

She has lived almost all her life in the city. Born in Newton, Mass., she moved
to New York as a child with her parents. Her father, Julius Joelson, owned a
small chain of movie houses in the Bronx, and Mrs. Fife still recalls Sunday
afternoon family outings checking the various JJ Theaters.

Until her move to the Borough President's office, she was a familiar figure in
politics for 20 years as a Democratic state committeewoman from the West Side,
chairwoman of the state committee reform caucus for half that time; treasurer of
the Democratic state committee for the last four years and a Democratic national
committeewoman for the last nine years. She said she would resign her party
posts.

She managed the unsuccessful campaign of Carl McCall for the Democratic
nomination for lieutenant governor in 1982, but in the mayoral campaign this
year she ran the Borough President's office while Mr. Dinkins campaigned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Barbara Joelson Fife (NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: Clark;
Enlivening History Through Veterans Of World War II

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 67, Column 3; Style Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WORCESTER, Mass.


Timothy Donohue realized that many of his classmates think of World War II as
something in ancient history, not something that began for the United States
only 48 years ago.

So Mr. Donohue arranged for a half-dozen World War II veterans from the
Ex-P.O.W. Speakers Bureau in Boston to give a presentation last Thursday on
Pearl Harbor Day as part of a final project for his ''Human Conception of
Death'' class taught by Prof. Lois Brynes at Clark University's College of
Professional and Continuing Education. The group, formed from the Veterans
Outpatient Clinic, tried to help students gain a greater understanding of the
experiences of World War II.

''This isn't 'Rambo' or some glorified movie,'' said Mr. Donohue, 45 years old,
a Vietnam veteran who was in the Marines. He dropped out of Clark in 1970, and
started working with the outpatient clinic in 1983. He is a senior in the
College of Professional and Continuing Education where he is studying history
and social psychology.

The Speakers Bureau was formed in 1986, and over the last three years the group
has given presentations at nearly 50 schools, and reached more than 8,000
students. ''Our goals are to assist teachers and the education process by
presenting a living, breathing history lesson,'' Mr. Donohue said. Five Months
as a P.O.W.  Herbert Johnson, an airman captured in Germany on his 24th bombing
mission, conveyed many veterans' dismay at the attitude of students toward World
War II.

He recalled an incident when he was at a grocery store, and the young man
helping him out with his bags remarked on his prisoner-of-war license plate.
''Is that from Vietnam?'' he asked. Mr. Johnson told him that he was a World War
II veteran. ''When was that?'' he was asked. ''When I think about what we went
through to get the freedom they have today,'' Mr. Johnson said, ''we should wake
these kids up.''

Arden Schofield, who was held for five months in a German prisoner-of-war camp,
told the students, ''It's not so much what we went through, but what we
learned.''

''There are children who never heard of World War II and can't relate to what
happened,'' said Michael Salem, who described his journey to Stalag 7A in a
boxcar so crowded everyone had to stand for days with no food or water. ''We are
trying in our own humble way to educate them. I'm going to keep on talking to
these kids until they understand.''

On a Death March

''Students, we found, know very little about the war,'' said Mr. Schofield, who
taught high school English for 30 years before retiring. ''It's not the kids'
fault. It's not in the books. It's one paragraph.''

Philip Toland, who was held prisoner by the Japanese for almost four years, was
forced to go more than 70 miles on a death march in which 6,000 to 7,000 men
died. At the end of the march, the prisoners were locked inside a warehouse for
days before being shipped to prison camps where, Mr. Toland said, he was
tortured and starved.

''You're dealing with attitudes and people living through something most people
don't even think about,'' said John Gilman, a senior from New York, majoring in
sociology in Clark's day college. ''I can totally understand coming from their
experience. I was moved by how tense they were.''

'Slices of Experiences'

Professor Brynes, the director of the Master of Arts in the liberal arts
program, said the course deals with a lot of theory on death. Presentations like
the veterans', she said, ''give people a texture that these are particular
lives. It's not an abstraction anymore. Nations may talk about going to war, but
it's really people going to war.''

''We get so caught up in our individual lives that we forget what other people
have suffered for us,'' said Jennifer Hines, a sophomore from Somers, Conn.,
majoring in environment technology and society, who was among the 200 students
in the Johnson Auditorium of the Sackler Sciences Center. ''This was definitely
more effective than just reading about it or hearing about it in class.''

Mr. Donohue said his goal was to show ''slices of different experiences.''

''Every P.O.W. could tell you a story of what happened to him,'' Mr. Salem said.
''We don't have time to tell you the whole story, but that's a part of it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Cabaret;
Jim Morris and Mr. Bush

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 100, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 371 words


''I know what it's like to be homeless,'' declares Jim Morris, impersonating
George Bush. ''I don't have a home in Minneapolis or in Denver.''

Mr. Morris's President is a man awash in his own malapropisms, twisted turns of
phrase and leaps of illogic. He insists that he is not ''antisemantic.'' In
fact, he is sending a special ''oy vey'' to the Middle East. He also entertains
some original notions of history and geography. Trying to take credit for the
trend toward a more unified Europe, he boasts, ''We were responsible for the
re-unification of Vietnam years ago.'' Of his Central American policy, he
explains, ''Central America - it's America! It's ours!'' On the issue of school
prayer, he assures us, ''God wouldn't cheat on his SAT's - He knows all the
answers.'' About his plans for Dan Quayle, he says, ''Let's see if he can handle
the vice presidency before I give him an important job.''

Though the comedian, who made his name impersonating Ronald Reagan, does a
wicked Bush, he doesn't bring the same edge of glee to Mr. Bush that he brings
to Mr. Reagan. In his new show, ''An Evening With the Presidents,'' which runs
through Dec. 31 at Steve McGraw's (158 West 72d Street), about two-thirds of the
evening is devoted to a rambling Bush speech that finds amusing scatological
double-entendres in familiar bureaucratic jargon.

The character he creates is an eccentric fuddy-duddy who maintains an
unflappable composure while consistently making a fool of himself. What is
missing from the caricature is a sense of the grim executive drone that
underlines President Bush's public pronouncements.

The comedian's sense of fun returns in the final segment of the show, in which
he impersonates Ronald Reagan at home in Bel Air. Pantomiming the former
President as he stumbles through his morning ablutions singing ''Jimmy cracked
corn and I don't care,'' he paints him as a lovable, doddering Santa Claus who
hasn't lost his cowboy swagger. Before saying good night, Mr. Morris's Reagan
almost apologizes for having accepted $2 million from a Japanese corporation to
give a speech. ''Don't look at me that way,'' he pleads sheepishly but with a
twinkle in his eye. ''Homes in Bel Air don't grow on trees.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Precious Moment

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 654 words


Mikhail Gorbachev is remaking history in the Soviet Union and Europe. With the
end of the cold war, George Bush has the same opportunity in the United States -
the first chance in 40 years to think seriously about diverting resources from
old and rapidly receding threats to a new agenda of urgent needs.

There will be honorable, even tortured, argument about how to spend any ''peace
dividend.'' Some people will urge reducing the deficit. Others will press for
specific purposes like improving education and health care, combating drugs,
cleaning up rivers and air.

The task is to seize the moment, to begin that debate before the billions
trickle away, swallowed up by old and practiced lobbies. That's just what
happened to the ''peace dividend'' that was supposed to follow the Vietnam War.

There won't be ''a lot of excess money,'' President Bush said the other day,
adding that what there is should be used to trim the deficit. That seems an
astonishing surrender. There could be quite a lot of funds available, to an
Administration willing to fight to carve them out.

For starters, the $1.2 trillion Federal budget includes at least $100 billion in
expenditures directed toward past security threats. And it is realistic to
contemplate finding another $100 billion in unjustified subsidies and from new,
carefully targeted taxes. Here are some illustrations:

Direct Defense Spending.  One-third of the Federal budget remains devoted to the
purposes and trappings of the cold war. One-quarter of the Pentagon's $290
billion in outlays this year are to maintain U.S. troops in Europe. In due
course, those expenditures can drop substantially. Moscow is pledged to cut its
forces in Europe by several hundred thousand, and Mr. Bush plans to propose
further deep reductions on both sides.

Another $200 billion-plus is earmarked to produce new missiles and long-range
aircraft in the 90's. But in the same period, the two powers expect to cut their
strategic forces in half.

Defense-Associated Spending.  The Energy Department spends $8 billion a year
making nuclear warheads. But strategic arms will be cut and medium-range
missiles are already being destroyed. The Central Intelligence Agency and the
military intelligence organizations spend $20 billion each year. A good chunk of
that is needed to verify arms treaties. But much is tied to cold war relics and
has never been of particular use to policy makers. Over all, the end of the cold
war could mean annual savings of between $50 billion and $75 billion in military
and related activities.

Subsidies and Taxes.  This is also a rare opportunity finally to stop giving
Government handouts to affluent citizens, like the farm subsidy program, or the
built-in tax subsidies to the well-to-do elderly. Subjecting Social Security to
regular tax rates would, without harming those in need, produce billions
annually, enough to fund catastrophic health and nursing care.

And as for taxes, even without touching income-tax rates, the gasoline tax, far
less than that in other countries, could be raised to bring in billions
earmarked for highway repair, transit improvement and conservation.

These changes would be phased in gradually. Time is needed to insure that the
Soviet Union is staying on a steady course and cutting its forces. Thus,
military reductions would be lower in the early years, then rise more sharply.
Thus, spending would start slow on new agenda items to see what programs work,
and which don't.

The President is right to say that making good policy is the first order of
business. But that said, why not begin the policy discussion now? There's no
surprise about the main items on any new agenda -deficit reduction, lamentable
state of public education. the environment, drugs. What's new in the post-cold
war equation is the opportunity to give this agenda the attention it deserves.

It's a precious moment. It won't last.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Peace Without The Khmer Rouge?

BYLINE: By Winston Lord; Winston Lord was Ambassador to China from November 1985
until April.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


For years, policy makers have faced an excruciating dilemma in Cambodia: How to
forestall both the return of the Khmer Rouge and the acceptance of Vietnamese
aggression. Now that Vietnam has largely withdrawn from Cambodia, the decibel
level of the debate has risen sharply, reflecting legitimate fears that the
murderous Khmer Rouge might re-enact the killing fields.

There is no worse outcome. But such fears, orchestrated by Hanoi, drive some
Americans to conclude that we should acquiesce in the reign of the Heng
Samrin-Hun Sen regime. This is better than rule by the Khmer Rouge - but the
worst of the alternatives. Here's why.

First, the regime leaders, including Heng Samrin and Hun Sen, are ex-Khmer Rouge
members with Cambodian blood on their hands. They threw in their lot with
Vietnam, not out of moral compunction but to escape Pol Pot's executioners.
Second, the regime was created and propped up by Hanoi and still gets
large-scale Vietnamese and Soviet support. It has shown no meaningful signs of
independence. Must we condone Vietnam's invasion by conceding its hegemony in
Indochina?

Third, the Association of South East Asian Nations, whose security is most at
stake, opposes a Cambodia run from Hanoi and presses for a neutral, independent
nation led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. Why do stout supporters of the U.N.
blithely dismiss 128 countries that have just voted, by the largest majority
ever, to reject the regime in Phnom Penh?

Finally, the fiercely nationalistic Cambodians, despite their hatred of the
Khmer Rouge, have resisted Vietnamese colonization for a decade. Given a choice,
they would surely choose a Sihanouk-led government. If, however, they selected
Hun Sen, it is better that he win by vote than by international fiat. When we
favor elections, often under difficult conditions, in Central America, Eastern
Europe and around the globe, why the double standard for Cambodia?

Before rushing to yield Cambodia to Vietnam's control, let us consider the other
options. One is the current policy of the U.S., the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, China and the international community.

It would allow the Cambodians to determine their own future through
internationally supervised elections. This requires a transitional government
led by Prince Sihanouk and including the forces of Hun Sen, the non-Communists
and, unfortunately, the Khmer Rouge. They have powerful military forces that
will not go gently into the night. Banned from any participation in a political
settlement they will, with China's aid, prolong the civil war.

How can the Khmer Rouge then be shackled? Various measures toward this end have
been put forward and have been endorsed by China - and even the Khmer Rouge.

Prince Sihanouk would head the coalition. The Khmer Rouge would be included; Pol
Pot and others of his ilk would be excluded. All armed Cambodians, including the
Khmer Rouge, would be regrouped in bases and disarmed; the cease-fire,
segregation and disarming would be policed by a strong U.N. peacekeeping force.
There would be free elections with international supervision; all factions would
abide by the outcome.

We must assume the Khmer Rouge would grasp for power. And in coalions of bitter
enemies, the thugs usually prevail. But the Khmer Rouge might be contained by
cessation of Chinese aid, cooperation among the other three Cambodian factions
and a large, effective international force.

Prince Sihanouk, who lost 15 family members to Khmer Rouge terror, subscribes to
this scenario.

The issue of Chinese aid is central; without it the Khmer Rouge would be
severely weakened. The U.S. has worked successfully to modify China's overall
stance. Beijing has moved from solely supporting the Khmer Rouge, to backing the
resistance coalition, to stipulating Prince Sihanouk as the genuine leader, to
proposing specific commitments for controlling the Khmer Rouge.

I believe Beijing would agree to end its aid and constrain the Khmer Rouge as
part of an overall settlement for a Sihanouk government.

Another approach is for the Sihanouk and non-Communist forces to dump the Khmer
Rouge and join in a temporary alliance with the regime in Phnom Penh to organize
the elections. The international community would have to insist that Prince
Sihanouk be the real head, not the figurehead that Hun Sen and his backers
demand. All parties would have to commit themselves to fair elections.

The incentives for the Phnom Penh authorities would be to gain international
backing and to isolate the Khmer Rouge. Hanoi and Moscow might agree to a
genuinely neutral Cambodian government to stave off a Khmer Rouge victory.

But this approach means continued fighting by Khmer Rouge, making countrywide
elections very difficult. It would be hard to persuade China to halt its support
for them, though we would point to the prospect of a Sihanouk government as a
buffer against Vietnam, and Beijing may now be leaning toward limited
rapprochement with Hanoi. We face these same problems, however, if we turn over
Cambodia to Hun Sen - with all the additional drawbacks already cited.

Yet another alternative is Australia's suggestion for a U.N. trusteeship to
replace the government and organize the elections. Prince Sihanouk apparently
supports this general idea as a fallback.

This approach appeals in principle because it would dismantle the Hun Sen
regime, serve as a further check on the Khmer Rouge and insure independent
neutral administration of the elections. But it would be very complex to
implement, and the Phnom Penh regime and Khmer Rouge are likely to oppose it.

Clearly any path is treacherous because the Khmer Rouge are treacherous.
Reasonable people can disagree on the best route; no one should claim a monopoly
on wisdom or morality.

But isn't it better to seek one of these three internationally supervised
settlements and bridle the Khmer Rouge than to back one Communist faction
against the other in an ongoing civil war? Isn't it better to strive for
Cambodian self-determination, independence and neutrality than to impose a proxy
government, reward aggression and fuel Vietnamese expansionism?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

El Salvador's Army: A Force Unto Itself

BYLINE: By Joel Millman; Joel Millman is a freelance writer living in New York
City. He spent the last 14 months studying the Salvadoran military as a fellow
of the Institute of Current World Affairs in Hanover, N.H.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 47, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3884 words


IT WAS A SCENE SALVADORANS HAD HOPED THEY WOULD NEVER SEE again. On Nov. 16,
while a full-scale battle raged between the Salvadoran Army and leftist rebels
in the streets of the capital, the bodies of six Jesuit priests murdered in the
night lay strewn across a university campus. A witness said the killers had been
soldiers in uniform.

Overnight, El Salvador had been pulled back to its awful past. For a decade,
American military advisers, diplomats and reporters had been proclaiming that
the Army had improved, that it was growing better able by the day to fight a
difficult war. The Salvadoran armed forces, which during the early 1980's had
been blamed for the murders of four American churchwomen and scores of
Salvadoran civilians, were now described as mature, democratic and reformed.

After 10 days of fierce fighting in the capital, the Army managed to turn back
the guerrilla offensive - but at a tremendous cost in resources and its own
prestige. Once again, it had misjudged the strength of the rebel Farabundo Marti
National Liberation Front and ignored its own intelligence reports suggesting
the guerrillas were moving their forces into the city. Despite the $1 billion in
military aid the United States had given during the last decade, Washington
could no longer claim that the Salvadoran military would be able to end the war
soon.

But though the Army's reputation as a ''mature'' military force had been
shattered, its political power remained undiminished. Throughout the offensive,
the civilian President, Alfredo Cristiani, promised his people repeatedly that
the soldiers would respect the lives of noncombatants - promises that were
belied by the Army's tactics.

The Army bombed and strafed the neighborhoods of the capital, killing and
wounding hundreds of civilians. These casualties, together with Cristiani's
reluctance to even acknowledge the possibility of Army involvement in the
Jesuits' murders - he suggested, against all evidence, that the rebels were
responsible - convinced many Salvadorans of what they had suspected all along:
Despite claims of ''reform'' and ''progress,'' in El Salvador no civilian
government controls the military.

''I love that word, 'progress,' '' said Col. Robert M. Herrick, until 1987 the
head of an American Army think tank monitoring the war. ''We've had 'progress'
every year since the war began. The war should have been over a long time ago.''
One billion dollars in American military aid seems to have bought an army big
enough to survive its own mistakes, and powerful enough to resist any effort to
reform it - to end pervasive corruption or weed out corrupt officers. Instead of
fostering reform, the American money has been absorbed into a network of
corruption and patronage that has grown up over half a century, and has made the
Salvadoran military an empire unto itself.

Officially, the Salvadoran military denies charges of systemic corruption. After
more than a year spent studying the empire, however, including interviews with
many senior Salvadoran officers - most of whom would speak only on condition
that they not be named - a picture emerges of an already powerful institution
grown virtually untouchable on the spoils of a lucrative war.

AT FIRST GLANCE, EL SALVADOR's military academy, the Escuela Militar Capitan
General Gerardo Barrios, could be the athletic complex of a large Midwestern
university. Instead of trophies, there are polished brass shells and the seals
of Army units. Along one wall, the framed face of each academy comandante stares
implacably from behind his pane of glass: Prussian and Chilean officers
dominated during the early years, then came Americans, and finally Salvadorans.

A plaque recalls the 50th anniversary of the school's 1936 class - the men who
fought with Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez to suppress a peasant revolt, leaving
20,000 campesinos dead and General Hernandez in power for more than a decade. In
1944, rival officers overthrew him, and so began the 35-year coup-begets-coup
cycle that until this decade defined Salvadoran politics, and gave Escuela
Militar its nickname: ''School of the Presidents.''

It is a tough school. Many more cadets are accepted than can ever rise to
positions of power, so attrition begins the first day. There are forced marches,
beatings, all-night calesthenics - ordeals designed to reduce each class to a
hardened core of officers. The soft boys from the good families go first,
followed by the scholars - those most equipped for success outside the military.
The survivors are cloistered in the academy, isolated from a civilian world they
are taught to view as decadent, amoral and corrupt.

Absolute obedience to authority and loyalty to one's own tanda - or academy
class - are the foundations of the cadets' training. By graduation, the entering
class has been reduced to perhaps one-fourth its size, and unbreakable alliances
have formed among the survivors.

In a country of great scarcity, a military career is a poor boy's only sure path
to the middle class. ''Their goals are largely materialistic,'' Armando
Interiano, a retired officer, says of the recruits. ''It comes from growing up
poor.'' Immediately after graduation, the cadet receives his first payoff: the
right to import a car duty-free, a privilege he often sells to civilians. To
insure their futures, cadets try to attach themselves to prosperous mentors,
military or civilian.

Throughout the 1970's, military officers not only controlled the Presidency, but
exercised, through the military's own political party -the Party of National
Conciliation - a virtual monopoly on the country's political discourse. Officers
fighting for promotions saw command positions as the equivalents of elected
office.

An officer taking command of one of the three regional brigades had at his
disposal a vast system of patronage and graft, with countless opportunities for
enrichment. Colonels leased troops as guards or laborers to local businessmen,
or even, in some cases, as hired killers to insure labor peace. And there was
always money to be siphoned off from the base's payroll and food budgets.

The top commanders distributed the take among their allies. A captain or major
waited patiently for his share. With coups almost always determining succession,
every tanda pushed its most capable officers toward brigade commands, where they
generated wealth to spread among the allied tandas, and guaranteed each clique
enough firepower to survive changes at the top. ''When I left in 1977,'' says
one senior American diplomat now serving a second tour in El Salvador,
''corruption was so prevalent, it was just about inconceivable that an officer
would rise to a senior level without being corrupt.''

During the early 1980's, as El Salvador's rebel insurgency grew and the American
aid program expanded, American advisers arrived, bent on reform. The Americans
encouraged rapid expansion of the officer corps, hoping to dilute institutional
corruption by weakening the power of individual cliques. During the 1970's, 600
Salvadoran officers had ruled 15,000 troops. To these were now added more than
1,000 new officers drawn from the ranks of enlisted men and trained by Americans
in the United States and Panama. Graduates of these ''quickie officer candidate
schools,'' it was hoped, would flood the Salvadoran Army with new leaders and
begin eliminating the corrupt standards of the past.

It didn't work out that way. As the officer corps grew, so did the number of
commands and the pool of enlisted men. The Army is now 57,000 strong. Instead of
three brigades for the tandas to jockey for, there are now seven, and seven
provincial commands, called detachments, with some 2,000 men in each. Each of
the brigade and detachment commanders of El Salvador's 14 regional departments -
the ''Fourteen Warlords'' - now commands as many men as the top three brigade
commanders did during the 1970's.

''You're seeing second lieutenants with BMWs,'' says Capt. Joaquin Ventura, now
retired from the Army. ''Once you had to be a colonel to get rich, now even the
lower ranks steal.'' The patronage system remains intact; indeed, the Tammany
Hall-style rituals have become even more refined.

A VISIT WITH A PATROL in the eastern garrison of San Miguel reveals the system
at work. Of 12 soldiers interviewed, 11 were local campesinos who had been
picked up by Army controls and forced into uniform. Only one was a veteran, a
man who had re-enlisted voluntarily. Though many soldiers would might choose to
re-enlist - jobs are scarce in Salvador, and the salary of a re-enlistee is
nearly double that of conscript - few commanders seem to care about retaining
experienced soldiers.

In fact, many commanders do fill these re-enlistment slots - with plazas
ficticias, or ''ghost soldiers.'' These are nonexistent soldiers, names added to
the brigade's roster that draw salaries divertable into the brigade slush fund.
Since the Salvadoran Army has no central roster, every year the 14 commanders
divide 20,000 pay slots among them, to be assigned at the commander's
discretion.

''Just about every brigade lists at least one 50-man company that isn't there,''
says one major. ''Each of those 50 pay slots brings 500 colones'' - equivalent
to about $100 - ''each month. Times 12 months that's $60,000.'' It's more
cost-effective to create imaginary re-enlistees than poorly paid recruits. Thus,
the Army does little to encourage re-enlistment, and some commanders actively
discourage it; battlefield experience is sacrificed for graft.

Meanwhile, every time a soldier deserts, or dies in action, the commander can
add to his list of ghost soldiers, earning himself yet another salary.

The rapid growth of the officer corps, far from eliminating such abuses, has
actually worsened them. With more and more eager young officers pushing for
promotion, commands are changed more frequently. Senior brigade officers seldom
command for more than 12 months, a fact that encourages them to enrich
themselves quickly. The large cash flow from the ghost soldiers allows a top
commander to amass a ''retirement fund'' quickly, as well.

After being forced into uniform, a recruit is often further abused by descuentos
obligatorios - mandatory deductions - that are siphoned from his salary. A
soldier in San Miguel, for example, pays $20 a month month for food, and another
$5 for boot polish, toothpaste and oil to clean his rifle. Several times a year,
he has to buy uniform accessories - a $10 black beret, for example.

In other commands, soldiers are made to pay for sneakers, soccer uniforms, blue
jeans - even the barracks television, which remains the property of the brigade.
''These are like a commission for the lower officers,'' explains one officer.
''Like on Independence Day, a captain or major will decide everyone must wear a
brigade T-shirt in the parade. You can say, 'Sir, I only want one T-shirt,' but
they sell you three. And that's an order. In a brigade of 3,000 men, someone is
making real money.'' Commander Miguel Antonio Mendez's deduction of $1 from each
of his troops to build a wall around his Third Brigade base is one of the
legends of the 1980's. ''Seeing that, the way the men had to pay for their own
defense,'' says one American colonel based in El Salvador. ''It caused our
stomachs to churn.''

Colonels still rent out soldiers - so-called supernumerarios - to guard coffee
plantations, factories and bus lines, charging from $200 to $300 per man per
month. Eventually, the various schemes merge into a seamless web, as a
Salvadoran lieutenant colonel now serving abroad explained. ''You go to
headquarters and say you need a money order for food for a two-week operation.
The supply officer signs for the order, but you only put your men out for one
week. Or maybe only half the men guard a coffee farm, where the owner is already
paying, and providing food for the troops. What they don't eat you sell to the
men on base.'' The money flows into the brigade slush fund; cash raised for
legitimate expenses like food commingle with funds pocketed, or passed on to
other officers to forge a reform-proof unit. Some commanders even tap the fund
to ''buy'' officers from other brigades, building their personal following while
furthering their clique's rise to a more lucrative command.

THE AMERICANS' GOAL was to eliminate all this, of course, but the effort has
been undermined by the command structure, and the fierce loyalty within the
tandas. ''Peer pressure is too great,'' says one American Army officer, who was
based in the eastern war zone during the mid-1980's. ''When they try to execute
good leadership principles they get slam-dunked unmercifully.'' Powerful tandas
shove the American-trained upstarts aside, and reform, meant to rise from below,
is suppressed.

In August, two teams of junior Salvadoran officers began researching the problem
of mismanagement. They produced a report, ''Considering the Conduct of the
War,'' that detailed many of these abuses. When asked about the report, Army
Chief of Staff Col. Rene Emilio Ponce, appearing more interested in who had
leaked it than in its contents, said that the researchers overemphasized
''isolated'' abuses, particularly the padded rosters. Colonel Ponce's powerful
tanda, called the Tandona (or ''Big Class''), is considered among the most
corrupt of the military cliques.

American officials in El Salvador and Washington acknowledge the endemic
corruption, but argue that improving battlefield performance has necessarily
been a higher priority. Some American diplomats and military advisers even speak
hopefully of following the ''Argentine Model'': first defeat the insurgency,
then concentrate on building democracy.

But in Argentina - or Panama, a better comparison - the armed forces have also
resisted change, responding to each crisis with a grab for even greater power.
In El Salvador, the military's power is abetted by civilian politicians who
match the corruption of the old military regimes. Even before the guerillas'
recent offensive, the failure of civilian leadership and the rebels' propensity
to attack civilian as well as military targets, had produced a climate of
insecurity for the Army to exploit, making businessmen eager to hire the Army's
troops.

''As soon as I got a brigade command,'' says retired Col. Sigfredo Ochoa, now a
top man in the ruling ARENA party, ''businessmen would approach me, offering to
put me on their board of directors, or sell me shares in their company. I would
say, 'But I have no money.' They would say, 'Don't worry about that.' ''

Ochoa - who many say was not really immune to corruption while in uniform -
points to El Salvador's fishing industry as an example of the
officer-businessman alliance. Shrimpers on the Pacific coast always enjoyed
friendly relations with the armed forces; they routinely gave Navy officers a
''tax,'' a few hundred pounds from each catch. Occasionally, fleet owners would
pay an additional fee to the port captain for guarding the coastline.

That was when shrimping was a $100-million-a-year industry. Now, battered by
capital flight and labor strife, and hurt by the fact that two of the country's
important ports - El Triunfo and La Union - lie in the eastern war zone, the
fishing industry has dwindled to a fraction of its former size. And the Navy has
become the industry's silent partner.

According to dock workers, fishermen and local politicians, active and retired
officers hold controlling shares in many of the big export firms. In El Triunfo,
where a three-year strike has idled 40 boats of one large consortium, a rival
company, Atarraya, is thriving, reportedly under military protection.

Up the coast, the port of Acajutla has been purged of unions, and revitalized by
the influx of new, military-controlled fleets. Navy chief Col. Humberto Villalta
berths four of his own shrimpers in Acajutla, under the banner of the Promarisal
fishing company. According to port officials, the military fishing companies -
''the pirates,'' the locals call them - don't pay municipal taxes, or Social
Security taxes for their sailors. In both Acajutla and El Triunfo, according to
local fishermen, Colonel Villalta's control of navigation licenses gives him
final say over who can fish.

Colonel Villalta refuses to discuss his fishing business; when I asked him about
it, he hung up the telephone. But the company itself is not so shy. ''The
military man is the true Salvadoran,'' Mauro Granados, Promarisal's business
manager, told me. ''Why should I invest with a doctor, or an engineer, someone
who is going to leave El Salvador? The military man cares about the development
of the country.''

Other businessmen are not so sanguine. Many have complained for years about
competition from the Cooperativa de la Fuerza Armada in San Salvador, the
Salvadoran Army's post exchange. In 10 years, it has grown from a small shop to
a shopping mall, complete with a supermarket and a three-story department store,
and, according to veteran officers, it acts as a conduit for contraband goods
brought into the country duty free.

All this is small change when set against the Army's main cash reserve, a Social
Security fund called the Social Provision Institute of the Armed Forces (IPSFA).
With the war business booming in El Salvador, the fund has become one of Latin
America's financial success stories. It deducts a percentage from every
subscriber's salary; every soldier who finishes his two-year hitch pays $150
into an IPSFA account, but only the disabled, or families of the dead, receive
any payments. Enriched by the 20,000 new recruits that pass into the brigades
each year, the fund has become a money tree, growing from less than $2 million
in reserves in 1980, to more than $100 million by the end of 1988.

''They're the biggest source of liquid capital in the country,'' says one
Salvadoran businessman. ''They've got so much money they don't know where to put
it.''

So the military has been buying property: estates once belonging to the Duenas
and de Sola familites, pillars of the old oligarchy; prime real estate in San
Salvador's suburbs. Here, the question of corruption is practically irrelevant.
With credit tight and long-range financial planning almost impossible, only the
Army has the cash to develop such properties, or convert the oligarchy's land
wealth into liquid assets.

This year the military paid $2 million for an oceanside resort, the Pacific
Paradise, and is developing a 500-lot housing development in the suburbs. A
second parcel will become its new corporate headquarters, and, at one famous old
estate, it is building a combination veterans community and rehabilitation
center.

Projects like this let the Army build new alliances with construction firms,
suppliers and builders' unions. It is already invading the financial markets;
IPSFA makes mortgage and car loans to members and their families and now
co-signs small-business loans issued by two civilian banks. There is also a
military funeral home, and military farms that market produce at low prices for
members.

For the past two years, IPSFA has been negotiating with the government for
permission to allow it to invest in joint ventures with multinational
corporations. There are plans for an IPSFA insurance company and land bank.
IPSFA has even purchased - for $5 million - a 13-story office tower for the new
Bank of the Armed Forces, which it expects to open next year.

IF THE ARMED FORCES do open their new bank, the profits from fishing and
duty-free television sets will be pocket change, and the balance of power
between soldiers and civilians will be permanently altered. ''The day an officer
can go to his own bank for a loan,'' says Luigi Einaudi, El Salvador's
Ambassador to the Organization of American States, ''he escapes the landowner.
Instead of being a tool of one class, he becomes his own master. And,
potentially, the master of the state.''

In El Salvador, the 14 warlords have replaced the ''Fourteen Families.'' The
country's President may no longer be an officer, but more power than ever rests
with the military. One of Alfredo Cristiani's first acts after becoming
President was to order that all institutional funds, including IPSFA's, be
deposited in the country's central bank. When the military balked, he backed
down.

Despite his appeal to right-wingers and his ARENA party's recruitment of many
former officers, President Cristiani is discovering that he is a fringe player
when it comes to Army affairs. ''He's like our George Bush,'' says one officer.
''Army officers like to be ordered. He consults.''

Cristiani may well find that the pattern set in the early years of the war -
civilian control of the government together with American-sponsored autonomy for
the military - marginalizes his efforts, especially now that the war is heating
up again.

Under Jose Napoleon Duarte, President until June of this year, ''the military
and the government were like a married couple,'' says another former President,
Alvaro Magana. ''They didn't love each other, and they rarely talked. Sometimes
they would sit and watch the same television show, but they mainly went separate
ways. I'm afraid the Army has learned it likes that relationship, and doesn't
want to change.''

Indeed, Cristiani's difficulties with the military began even before he took
office, almost provoking a coup in May. Air Force officers, hoping their
commander would be chosen as Defense Minister, grounded aircraft at Ilopango Air
Force Base for two days, threatening to boycott the war. A few days later,
during Soldier's Day celebrations, Air Force jets buzzed the reviewing stand of
the outgoing Defense Minister, Gen. Vides Casanova, drowning out his speech and
embarrassing officers and diplomats alike.

President Cristiani vacillated publicly over the nomination of a successor,
settling finally on a compromise choice - Gen. Rafael Larios - who, because of
his lack of support within the institution, was virtually a lame duck the moment
he assumed office.

Determined not to permit November's ''Battle of San Salvador'' to become this
war's Tet Offensive, the United States will no doubt move swiftly to shore up
the military. In the showdown over the Defense Minister appointment, the United
States encouraged Cristiani to bow to Army pressure, avoiding a challenge to
powerful officers and thus reaffirming the military's role as an untouchable
institution.

But a militarized El Salvador will not yield easily to civilian initiatives.
''It's the same mistake we made in Vietnam,'' says Colonel Herrick. ''Military
aid is easy; all you have to do is give the bucks, and all they have to do is
take them. But we got ourselves into a position where we have no leverage, so we
have been acquiescing for years in corruption and methods of operations we don't
believe in, all because of the Realpolitik of winning the war.''

''The U.S. equated a professional armed forces with democracy,'' says opposition
political leader Ruben Zamora. ''They're not synonymous. What the U.S. has done
is teach the Army it's better to be owner of the country than a landlord of a
building. Instead of their own party, they control the whole political system.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: At El Salvador's elite military academy, officers-to-be form alliances;
infantrymen tend to be conscripts (DONNA DECESARE/IMPACT VISUALS)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: December 10, 1989

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   4    DADDY, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $19.95.)
                 Unexpected crises wreck the safe, predictable
                 world a man has built for himself and his family.

 2      2   6    THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Viking,
                 $21.95.) After a writer of horror tales kills off his
                 pseudonym, the deceased goes on a murderous
                 rampage.

 3      3   4    CARIBBEAN, by James A. Michener. (Random
                 House, $22.95.) The history of the sea islands told in
                 fictional form.

 4      4   15   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

 5      5   8    FOUCAULT'S PENDULUM, by Umberto Eco.
                 (Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $22.95.)
                 Ancient documents and arcane codes produce
                 astonishing results when thrown into a computer.

 6      6   3    STRAIGHT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $18.95.) A
                 steeplechase jockey inherits property and a
                 mysterious enemy.

 7     13   2    THE ELEVENTH HOUR, by Graeme Base.
                 (Abrams, $14.95.) An illustrated mystery story
                 about a birthday party attended by 11 animals.

 8      7   2    SORCERESS OF DARSHIVA, by David Eddings.
                 (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) The fourth volume in
                 the ''Malloreon'' fantasy saga.

 9     11   12   JIMMY STEWART AND HIS POEMS, by Jimmy
                 Stewart. (Crown, $9.95.) Verses by the venerable
                 motion picture star.

10     10   8    TALES FROM MARGARITAVILLE, by Jimmy
                 Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.)
                 Short stories set on a mythical Caribbean island.

11      8   2    SWAN LAKE, by Mark Helprin. (Ariel/Houghton
                 Mifflin, $19.95.) A new retelling of the fable upon
                 which the ballet is based, with illustrations by Chris
                 Van Allsburg.

12     14   13   CALIFORNIA GOLD, by John Jakes. (Random
                 House, $19.95.) A young man from Pennsylvania
                 makes his fortune in 19th-century Los Angeles.

13 *    9   13   THE PILLARS OF THE EARTH, by Ken Follett.
                 (Morrow, $22.95.) The lives of men and women
                 whose fortunes are linked by the construction of a
                 cathedral in 12th-century England. Q
14     12   3    THE RENEGADES OF PERN, by Anne
                 McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) Three
                 clans struggle to survive outside the huge stone
                 fortresses in the fantasy world of Pern. Q
15           12  OLDEST LIVING CONFEDERATE WIDOW
                 TELLS ALL, by Allan Gurganus. (Knopf, $21.95.) A
                 99-year-old woman reflects on her past.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction Q
 1      1   6    MY TURN, by Nancy Reagan with William Novak.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) The former First Lady's
                 memoir of her White House years. Q
 2      9   9    ROSEANNE, by Roseanne Barr. (Harper & Row,
                 $18.95.) The autobiography of the television
                 comedian. Q
 3      3   58   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday
                 matters. Q
 4      2   12   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays. Q
 5      6   5    DRIVE, by Larry Bird with Bob Ryan. (Doubleday,
                 $17.95.) The autobiography of the Boston Celtics
                 basketball star. Q
 6      5   3    ALL MY BEST FRIENDS, by George Burns with
                 David Fisher. (Putnam, $17.95.) Reminiscences
                 about show business acquaintances. Q
 7      4   6    EDUCATION OF A WANDERING MAN, by Louis
                 L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) The author recalls the
                 places he visited and the books he read in his youth. Q
 8     10   86   A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W.
                 Hawking. (Bantam, $18.95.) A scientist reviews
                 efforts to create a unified theory of the universe. Q
 9      7   5    LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $18.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed by a young bond trader. Q
10      8   15   AMONG SCHOOLCHILDREN, by Tracy Kidder.
                 (Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A year in the life
                 of a fifth-grade teacher in Holyoke, Mass. Q
11            8  I WANT TO GROW HAIR, I WANT TO GROW UP,
                 I WANT TO GO TO BOISE, by Erma Bombeck.
                 (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Fifteen stories of children
                 surviving cancer. Q
12     14   5    CHILI DAWGS ALWAYS BARK AT NIGHT, by
                 Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $17.95.) Essays on
                 politics, religion, sex, golf, etc., by the syndicated
                 columnist. Q
13            3  THE LONG GRAY LINE, by Rick Atkinson.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The lives of members of
                 West Point's class of 1966, from cadet years
                 through Vietnam to the present. Q
14     13   3    HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems. Q
15     12   3    WONDERFUL LIFE, by Stephen Jay Gould.
                 (Norton, $19.95.) What the contents of a small
                 quarry in the Canadian Rockies have revealed
                 about the past and about scientific methods.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous Q
 1      2   22   THE WAY THINGS WORK, by David Macaulay.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Explanations in
                 pictures and text. Q
 2      1   6    MARTHA STEWART'S CHRISTMAS, by Martha
                 Stewart. (Potter, $18.95.) Advice about cooking,
                 decorating and entertaining during the holiday
                 season. Q
 3      4   46   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's advice about how to make a
                 personal fortune. Q
 4      5   7    THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS THREE
                 ANCIENT CUISINES, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow,
                 $18.95.) Recipes from China, Greece and Rome. Q
 5      3   3    THE WAY TO COOK, by Julia Child. (Knopf, $50.)
                 More than 800 recipes from ''the French chef.''


 These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ENCHANTED DRAWINGS: The History of Animation, by Charles Solomon. (Knopf, $75.)
An ambitious, sprawling illustrated account of the evolution of animated movies,
packed with tales of warring studios, greedy producers and great artists.

JEAN HOWARD'S HOLLYWOOD: A Photo Memoir, with photographs by Jean Howard and
text by James Watters. (Abrams, $39.95.) Herself one of Hollywood's most
beautiful and privileged people, Jean Howard snapped her shutter with a social
historian's eye, capturing the great at play in the 1940's and 50's.

IN SEARCH OF LOST ROSES, by Thomas Christopher. (Summit, $18.95.) A delightful
book-length essay on antique roses, from ancient Rome to Tombstone, Ariz., and
on the obsessional characters who hunt and love them, by one of their number.

AMELIA EARHART: A Biography, by Doris L. Rich. (Smithsonian Institution,
$19.95.) THE SOUND OF WINGS: The Life of Amelia Earhart, by Mary S. Lovell. (St.
Martin's, $22.95.) Two biographies of the famous American pilot (and feminist)
who vanished in the South Pacific in 1937. The authors agree on the important
facts; Ms. Lovell is more skeptical about her flying skills than Ms. Rich, and
thinks better of her husband and publicist, G. P. Putnam.

THE JEWS IN AMERICA. Four Centuries of an Uneasy Encounter:

A History, by Arthur Hertzberg. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A broadly familiar
story that rises to the superb in its account of the last 60 years or so, but is
pessimistic about the future, foreseeing an end to Jewish history unless a
spiritual revival supervenes.

BABY OF THE FAMILY, by Tina McElroy Ansa. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $18.95.)
This genial first novel renders the life of a black Georgia family of the 1950's
in rich detail; but humdrum it's not, for the protagonist is a little girl who
talks with ghosts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BESTSELLERS: December 10, 1989

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 918 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction
 Q
 1     4    THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon.
            (Warner, $5.95.) Four nuns become pawns in a
            struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque
            separatists. Q
 2     2    SAVAGE THUNDER, by Johanna Lindsey.
            (Avon, $4.95.) A young English widow finds
            romance with a Cheyenne in 19th-century Arizona. Q
 3     7    MIDNIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $4.95.)
            Inexplicable deaths and strange horrors take over
            a once-idyllic California town. Q
 4     2    STOLEN BLESSINGS, by Lawrence Sanders.
            (Berkley, $4.95.) The scandalous life of the
            Hollywood superstar Marilyn Taylor. Q
 5     5    ANYTHING FOR BILLY, by Larry McMurtry.
            (Pocket, $5.50.) The exploits of Billy the Kid. Q
 6     11   BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler.
            (Berkley, $5.50.) The many facets of a 28-year
            marriage are revealed during a drive to a funeral. Q
 7 *   6    KOKO, by Peter Straub. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.)
            Three Vietnam veterans on the trail of a friend
            who may be responsible for a series of murders. Q
 8 *   2    THORNYHOLD, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett,
            $5.95.) Mysteries, witchcraft and romance await a
            woman who inherits an English cottage. Q
 9     1    A SEASON IN HELL, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket,
            $5.50.) A young widow's quest for her stepson's
            killers results in horrendous adventures across
            Europe. Q
10     2    CAT'S EYE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam,
            $5.95.) A woman's visit to her native Toronto leads
            her to reflect on the changes time has wrought. Q
11     43   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher.
            (Dell, $4.95.) A woman and a painting tie together
            three generations of an English family. Q
12     5    MITLA PASS, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $5.95.) A
            writer's struggles with his heritage and two loves
            reach a climax during the 1956 Sinai war. Q
13     11   SO WORTHY MY LOVE, by Kathleen E.
            Woodiwiss. (Avon, $10.95.) The abduction of a
            woman leads to romance in Elizabethan England. Q
14     20   THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
            races to the rescue of an American secret agent. Q
15     4    DEMON LORD OF KARANDA, by David
            Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.95.) The third
            volume in the ''Malloreon'' fantasy saga.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction Q
 1     3    ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED
            IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy,
            $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday
            matters. Q
 2     3    THE BLOODING, by Joseph Wambaugh.
            (Bantam, $5.95.) The murder of two teen-age girls
            in an English village is solved through genetic
            clues. Q
 3     31   SMALL SACRIFICES, by Ann Rule. (Signet/NAL,
            $4.95.) A police-procedural account of a case
            involving murder and incest in an Oregon town. Q
 4     11   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss. (Signet/NAL,
            $5.95.) The family tragedy that came to light after
            the 1984 murder of a Toms River, N.J., woman. Q
 5     4    GRACIE, by George Burns. (Penguin, $7.95.) The
            life of the comedian Gracie Allen, recalled by her
            widower and show business partner. Q
 6    320   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $10.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. Q
 7 *   16   THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by
            Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $6.95.) A self-styled
            curmudgeon's memoir of a cat. Q
 8     35   CHAOS, by James Gleick. (Penguin, $8.95.) A
            ''new science'' that makes it possible to see order
            and patterns in what appears to be erratic. Q
 9     81   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
            Siegel. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The
            importance of a patient's mind and emotions. Q
10     2    ''WHAT DO YOU> CARE WHAT OTHER PEOPLE
            THINK?'' by Richard P. Feynman with Ralph
            Leighton. (Bantam, $9.95.) A physicist's memoirs.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous Q
 1     10   THE PREHISTORY OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary
            Larson. (Andrews & McMeel, $12.95.) The
            cartoonist's sketches and notes from the past 10
            years. Q
 2     10   THE CALVIN AND HOBBES LAZY SUNDAY
            BOOK, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews & McMeel,
            $9.95.) A new collection of cartoons. Q
 3     72   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie.
            (Hazelden/Harper & Row, $8.95.) Solving your
            own problems while caring for other people's
            afflictions. Q
 4     2    RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand
            McNally, $6.95.) The 1990 edition of a guide to the
            United States, Canada and Mexico. Q
 5 *   1    THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS
            1990. (World Almanac, $6.95.) The latest edition of
            a reference work.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 912 words



THE TURBAN FOR THE CROWN: The Islamic Revolution in Iran, by Said Amir Arjomand.
(Oxford University, $9.95.) A sociologist specializing in Islam tries to explain
the mystifying Iranian revolution, in which people rose up to demand less
freedom and fewer material things. Last year our reviewer, Robin Wright, called
this ''a thought-provoking work and a major contribution to serious scholarship
on Iran, modern revolutions and the role of religion in contemporary politics.''


MEMORIES OF AMNESIA, by Lawrence Shainberg. (Ivy, $3.95.) A surgeon suffering
from creeping neurological damage becomes convinced that his mind is sabotaging
his brain. Last year our reviewer, Diane Johnson, called this novel ''an
exercise in paradox, with interesting ruminations on the nature of thought
itself. . . . The surrealism of the operating theater reminds one of Kafka's
schematized world, pared to its elements of torture and terror -
electroencephalographs, optic lobes, oscilloscopes. . . . One also learns a lot
about the brain.''

A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $4.95.) A search for a
missing anthropologist leads Lieut. Joe Leaphorn and Officer Jim Chee of the
Navajo Tribal Police to a ring of archeological thieves. The novel ''transcends
the conventions of the simple whodunit and plunges the reader into a fully
realized world, populated by complex, fascinating characters,'' Michael Dorris
said here last year.

BALM IN GILEAD: Journey of a Healer, by Sara Lawrence Lightfoot. (Merloyd
Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $9.95.) A Harvard professor tells how her mother, Dr.
Margaret Morgan Lawrence, endured years of racism to become a child psychiatrist
in New York. ''The wound within is the real subject of 'Balm in Gilead,'
although that may not be Sara Lawrence Lightfoot's primary intent,'' H. Jack
Geiger said here in January. ''It is a daughter's loving biography.''

THE CARETAKERS, by Bernard Mathias. Translated by Freeman G. Henry. (Penguin,
$7.95.) The son of a family of Holocaust survivors is torn between the dark
world of the synagogue and the Parisian intellectual life. This novel ''movingly
depicts the dilemmas and complexities faced by postwar Jews haunted by the
unimaginable,'' Joyce Howe said here last year.

GREY IS THE COLOR OF HOPE, by Irina Ratushinskaya. Translated by Alyona
Kojevnikov. (Vintage International, $8.95.) A pre-glasnost poet sentenced to
prison for ''anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda'' tells how she and her fellow
prisoners carved out a psychological space where at least their minds could be
free. This memoir has ''an idyllic, exultant tone unprecedented in camp
literature,'' Francine du Plessix Gray said here in 1988.

SPIRIT OF THE HILLS, by Dan O'Brien. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $6.95.) In
the Black Hills of South Dakota, a Vietnam vet out to revenge his brother's
death meets up with the last of the great wolf hunters and a beautiful Sioux
political activist. Dan O'Brien ''writes with great confidence, and his story,
no matter how twisty or lurid it becomes, is always credible,'' Richard Goodman
said in The Book Review last year.

THE CLUSTERING OF AMERICA, by Michael J. Weiss. (Perennial/Harper & Row,
$10.95.) More important perhaps than New York, California, Minnesota or Maine
are Blue Blood Estates, Money & Brains, Furs & Station Wagons, Bohemian Mix and
the other demographic clusters that make up the socioeconomic map of the United
States. Earlier this year our reviewer, Roy Blount Jr., said he enjoyed
''lingering over various bits of information [like] the clearly demarcated
'mayonnaise line' across the national map, which supposedly 'separates the
creamy Hellman's mayonnaise buyers to the South from the tart Kraft Miracle Whip
salad dressing lovers to the North.' ''

THE MOTHER OF DREAMS. And Other Short Stories: Portrayals of Women in Modern
Japanese Fiction. Edited by Makoto Ueda. (Kodansha, $6.95.) To transcend the
roles expected of them in Japanese society some of the women in these stories
take lovers, others commit suicide. ''Throughout the placid prose there is
strong emotion,'' Susan Minot said here in 1986. ''The women themselves are
quite powerful, whether they are waitresses, secretaries, art dealers,
ballerinas or housewives.''

WOMEN OF THE WORLD: The Great Foreign Correspondents, by Julia Edwards. (Ivy,
$3.95.) An erstwhile foreign correspondent tells the stories of colleagues like
Marguerite Higgins, Martha Gellhorn, Gloria Emerson, Margaret Bourke-White and
Mary Roberts Rinehart. Last year our reviewer, Marvine Howe, called this book
''engaging and spirited.''

THE AUTOMOTIVE HISTORY OF LUCKY KELLERMAN, by Steve Heller. (Anchor/Doubleday,
$7.95.) A master mechanic hopes to raise the spirits of his disenchanted son by
leaving him a 1932 Model 18 Ford Deluxe Roadster. In 1987 our reviewer, Garrett
Epps, called this a ''quiet and often beautiful book, [with] unspoken moments
between father and son [that] create an unforgettable image.''

FORBIDDEN JOURNEY: The Life of Alexandra David-Neel, by Barbara M. Foster and
Michael Foster. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $12.95.) After leaving Paris to study
with a tantric wizard in a Himalayan cave, Alexandra David-Neel devoted herself
to importing the ideas of Tibetan Buddhism to the West. ''Hers was a great human
life, very well written up in 'Forbidden Journey,' '' Janwillem van de Wetering
said here last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Lawrence Shainberg (susan Brockman)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION;
SOME TEMPERANCE MOVEMENT!

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LICHTENSTEIN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 237 words


In the mid-1860's, officers at the United States Naval Academy were disturbed by
reports of drinking and carousing by midshipmen. The brass concluded that
healthier diversions were needed for the future officers and gentlemen, and
football was introduced in 1869. The sport's popularity grew, and in the fall of
1890 Annapolis challenged the United States Military Academy to a game. The West
Pointers obliged, and a grand rivalry was born. This rivalry is celebrated in
100 YEARS OF ARMY-NAVY FOOTBALL (Donald Hutter/Holt, $24.95), illustrated with
more than 100 black-and-white photographs. Gene Schoor, a sports journalist,
chronicles each game of the series, its key plays and such players as Felix
(Doc) Blanchard and Glenn Davis, Army's famed ''Mr. Inside, Mr. Outside'' tandem
of the 1940's; Pete Dawkins, West Point's All-American halfback in the late
50's; Navy's Joe Bellino, who scored three touchdowns in the 1959 Army-Navy
game; and Roger Staubach, the midshipmen's legendary quarterback of the 60's.
(Mr. Staubach went on to an outstanding professional career with the Dallas
Cowboys.) Reminiscences from notable alumni enhance Mr. Schoor's narrative. The
author also recounts the heroism and leadership of former players from the
Spanish-American War to Vietnam. The book thus honors not only this national
sporting classic but also those whose duty and sacrifices far outweigh any feats
on the gridiron.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Action in the 1965 Army-Navy game.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Government Must Be Respecter of Due Process in War on Drugs

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


To the Editor:

A recent Federal Court of Appeals ruling raises the question whether the
judiciary is pitted against the Presidency in the newest phase of the
executive's ''war on drugs'' (news story, Nov. 18). While upholding the
forfeiture of a private farm in upstate New York allegedly linked to drug
trafficking, the court held that the owner's constitutional rights were violated
because he was not afforded a hearing before the seizure.

In decisions involving national security, the judiciary is easily misunderstood
as myopically interfering with executive policy. For example, in the legendary
steel seizure case of 1952, the Supreme Court ruled unconstitutional President
Truman's executive order seizing and operating the country's steel mills under
the threat of a labor strike during the Korean War. While recognizing the
''expanding importance of the concept of the 'theater of war,' '' the Supreme
Court found that the President, albeit Commander in Chief, lacked the power to
seize private property absent a Congressional grant of authority.

In the equally famous Pentagon Papers case of the early 1970's, the Supreme
Court permitted publication of the classified policy studies of the Vietnam War
despite claims of risk to national security. Although the decision seemed to
some more principled than practical, the nine separate opinions in the case
indicate that a majority of the Supreme Court would have barred publication in
the face of a significant and identifiable threat to our national interests in
time of war.

There is no more cause for alarm now than there was then. The steel seizure case
merely reinforced the principle of separation of powers, the system of checks
and balances that guards our Republic against the tyranny of any branch of
government. The Pentagon Papers case protected the First Amendment right of free
expression, voicing near-absolute dis-favor of prior restraints on speech.

Similarly, the Court of Appeals decision on drug enforcement seizures simply
upholds the Fifth Amendment's guarantee that ''No person . . . be deprived of
life, liberty, or property without due process of law.'' By enacting a drug
forfeiture statute, Congress has provided the executive branch with express
authority to act - unlike the situation confronting President Truman when he
seized the mills - provided such actions fall within the constitutionally
permissible limits of due process. Even in ''war,'' there are rules - as
formulated in the Constitution.

Blind efficiency should never become the ultimate goal of a constitutional
democracy. Our founders consciously designed a form of government that protects
basic civil liberties and some property rights, even at the expense of smooth
administration. While it is nice to have the trains run on time, it is equally
important that national policy goals be implemented constitutionally.

IRVING R. KAUFMAN
U.S. Circuit Judge, 2d Circuit
United States Court of Appeals
  New York, Nov. 24, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

We Must Help Besieged Salvador

BYLINE: By Vin Weber; Vin Weber, Republican of Minnesota, is secretary of the
House Republican Conference.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For more than a month, Americans have watched El Salvador turn ugly. Staring at
the blood and chaos, Americans are now asking, once again, whether U.S. policy
there is working. It is. Ten years ago, El Salvador was ruled by a military
junta. Today, it is a working democracy that has held four fair elections.

Ten years ago, political killings skyrocketed to nearly 800 a month. Before the
recent outbreak of violence, political murders - though still too frequent - had
dropped to under 20 a month.

Ten years ago, El Salvador's criminal justice system was in tatters. Today, the
rule of law, though still uneven, is taking root.

Some in and out of Congress have pointed to the recent violence as justification
for limiting or cutting off U.S. aid. Instead, the attack on democracy in El
Salvador today makes our assistance even more critical.

U.S. policy has been successful in El Salvador because it has been bipartisan.
And the continuing aid formula, which Ronald Reagan and Democratic leaders
agreed to in the early 1980's ($3 in economic aid for every dollar in military
help), has made a difference.

U.S. aid gave us the leverage to help El Salvador hold its first free election
in decades, in 1984. And it has given us the leverage since then to help
democracy last.

The proof: 56 percent of El Salvador's registered voters cast their ballots in
1989 (higher participation than our last Presidential election), despite
widespread death threats from the rebels. International observers declared the
election valid and the presidency changed party hands, peacefully, for the first
time in El Salvador's history.

In fact, it is El Salvador's democratic success, not its failure, that motivated
the latest rebel offensive. Watching their own influence decline as each
election bestowed new legitimacy on the Government, the guerrillas concluded
that they faced political extinction. Their surprise attack, like the Tet
offensive in the Vietnam War, was designed to win a political victory even if it
failed militarily.

We must not let that happen. The rebels showed their true stripes when they took
American civilians captive at the Sheraton Hotel. Their reign of terror against
small town mayors and sitting judges rivals that of the Colombian drug cartels.
If there remained any doubt, the crash of a plane carring Soviet-made
surface-to-air missiles confirmed that the rebels are being supplied by
Nicaragua. Such incidents, considered alongside their boycott of elections, make
the rebels' call for peaceful negotiations dubious.

The leftist guerrillas will succeed only if we draw the wrong conclusion from
the cold-blooded murder of six Jesuit priests. Those who argue that we should
eliminate aid say that the killings overshadow the progress of the last 10
years.

In fact, just the opposite is true. Cutting off aid would undermine the rule of
law, weaken the Government and siphon power to the extremes on the left and
right. The result would mean more, not fewer, killings.

Instead, we need to renew our support for El Salvador's criminal justice system
in order to track down, prosecute and punish those who commit such crimes.
Though that system is fragile, U.S. aid is helping to improve it. For example,
not one demonstrator has been killed in organized marches since 1986, thanks to
improved training for El Salvador's police force, paid for with U.S. funds.

Reacting quickly to the latest killings, El Salvador's President, Alfredo
Cristiani, immediately called in a U.S.-funded special investigative unit. So
far, the unit's members have been slow to interview military units, a step the
U.S. has insisted they take. We need to speed up that process. But if we
eliminate U.S. aid, the unit will evaporate, along with our best chance of
controlling extremists.

Less-than-perfect democracies often must contend with political violence; more
than 100 were killed in the recent Indian elections. Although violence has not
disappeared in El Salvador, our policy is working. We must not forget the
lessons of the last 10 years and abandon this fledgling democracy when its life
is most threatened.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Rice Crop Up

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 10


Vietnam has produced 18.02 million tons of unmilled rice this year, 4 percent
more than expected and 8.5 percent more than last year's crop, the official
Vietnam News Agency said in a report made available Friday. The high output was
attributed to three good harvests and to policy changes made in 1988 after riots
forced the Government to abandon an unpopular drive toward group cooperation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Forcibly Returns 51 Boat People

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Tuesday, Dec. 12


In a secret operation that began just before dawn, 100 Hong Kong prison
officers, many dressed in riot gear, today herded 51 Vietnamese refugees aboard
a plane bound for Hanoi in the first forced repatriation of boat people to the
country that they risked their lives fleeing.

The Government of the British colony, which had said the first group's return
would be concealed from reporters and the public for security reasons, confirmed
that forced repatriation began today.

''The plane carrying the first Vietnamese to be returned took off at 5:09 A.M.
with 9 men, 16 women and 26 children,'' a Government spokesman said. ''The
repatriation went very smoothly. Everyone was calm and went quietly.'' Asked who
would monitor the safe return of the Vietnamese once they landed in Hanoi, the
spokesman replied, ''We have no information on that.''

Under the new policy, Hong Kong expects eventually to return tens of thousands
of boat people, perhaps as many as 40,000, who have streamed into the colony in
the last year and a half.

Britain and the colonial administration in Hong Kong had repeatedly stated that
they planned to begin the forced repatriation before the end of the year despite
objections from the United States, which called the policy ''odious,'' and the
condemnation of refugee and human rights groups.

Most of the 44,000 Vietnamese who have arrived in Hong Kong in the last 18
months are poor fishermen and farmers from the north, and many are young
children. Relief workers say they came here fleeing the repression and poverty
of Vietnam, sailing northeast in fragile open boats across the South China Sea.

The Vietnamese who were returned today had been held in Phoenix House, an old
factory building converted into a detention center. They were awakened about 3
A.M. Reporters who had kept a 24-hour watch outside the center said that the
men, women and children were crying as they were ushered onto buses to be driven
to Kai Tak Airport, but that no physical force was used. The police then
barricaded the road in front of the center, effectively preventing the reporters
from following the buses.

Earlier, some of the detainees spotted the journalists and began wailing through
the windows. They also tore up pieces of cardboard and scribbled signs that
read, ''We would rather die that go back to Vietnam'' and ''We are all refugees
and not boat people.'' #13,000 Classified as Refugees While the Government had
gone to great pains to conceal the operation, there had been rumors the first
group to be sent back would leave today.

The British colonial Government of Hong Kong has said this first flight will
mark the beginning of a repatriation program that it hopes will eventually empty
the crowded detention centers here that now house the 44,000 boat people who
have arrived since June 1988, when the colony began its tough screening process,
treating all arriving Vietnamese as illegal immigrants. Of the 57,000 Vietnamese
in Hong Kong, only 13,000 are classified as refugees and are awaiting
resettlement in another country.

Government officials said the boat people who were returned today had all been
screened according to criteria established by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and found to be illegal immigrants, not true refugees
fleeing religious or political persecution. But relief workers and human rights
groups have criticized the screening process here, charging that it is careless
and inefficient and weighted against the Vietnamese.

Government officials said most of the 44,000 Vietnamese who have arrived since
June 1988 are expected to be classified as illegal immigrants, though only a
small fraction have been processed so far.

Only about 600 Vietnamese in the centers have returned home under a voluntary
repatriation program begun last March.

Recently, as repatriation rumors flashed through the detention centers, relief
workers reported that some Vietnamese were so fearful they would be taken out
and sent home they had been sleeping in their shoes so they could run when the
guards came for them. Others have been switching their beds nightly to make it
harder for the guards to keep track of them.

There was no announcement of any group to monitor the refugees' return. While
officials said Hanoi had agreed not to punish those forced to return,
Christopher Bale, the Hong Kong director of OXFAM, the relief organization,
recently denounced the plan.

''At the moment,'' Mr. Bale said, ''the bottom line with the Government appears
to be to get an agreement where boat people can get out of the plane without
being shot.''

Baker Meets With Thatcher
WASHINGTON, Dec. 11 (Special to The New York Times) - Secretary of State James
A. Baker 3d met in London today with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and
Foreign Minister Douglas Hurd and discussed the deportation of Vietnamese
refugees from Hong Kong, British officials here said. Officials in Washington
and London declined to comment further on the talks.

President Bush has in recent months expressed strong objections to the British
Government about its plans to deport the refugees.

Members of Congress and representatives of human rights groups here were sharply
critical of the airlift.

''It's a disgrace,'' said Senator Claiborne Pell, the chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee. ''It reminds me a bit of after World War II when we sent
the Russian soldiers who fought on the German side back to the Soviet Union
against their will.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese refugees being forcibly returned from Hong Kong.
(AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Thatcher Defends Refugee Policy

BYLINE: By STEVEN PROKESCH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 386 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Dec. 12


Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said today that forced repatriation of
Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong would continue, to deter other Vietnamese
from fleeing to the colony in the hope of making their way to the West.

Mrs. Thatcher defended the Government policy in the face of criticism from
abroad and discomfort at home after the first refugees were expelled under her
policy yesterday. She was joined by her Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd.

Lull Is Temporary

While Mr. Hurd said there would be no more deportations until the House of
Commons held a major debate on the issue next Tuesday, he made it clear the lull
was temporary. Indeed, he indicated that the Government was eager to talk with
Vietnam about ways to return people at a faster rate.

Mr. Hurd stressed that the 51 people flown to Hanoi today did not qualify as
refugees under international agreements. About 4,000 of the 57,000 Vietnames in
detention camps on Hong Kong have already been through a screening and appeals
process and are awaiting involuntary repatriation. Ultimately, as many as 40,000
of the 57,000 are expected to be deported.

''Illegal immigrants have to be returned to their country of origin,'' Mrs.
Thatcher said in a debate in the House of Commons. She added that the people of
densely populated Hong Kong could not cope with the flood and were ''suffering
greatly.'' Other British officials added that overcrowding in the detention
camps had to be relieved.

The Government also came under attack from human rights groups like Amnesty
International, which questioned the adequacy of the screening that determined
which Vietnamese were really refugees who had fled their country for fear of
persecution.

But in general, Mr. Hurd and Mrs. Thatcher shrugged off criticism. Other Western
countries were unwilling to take the Vietnamese, and a nearly yearlong effort to
persuade them to return voluntarily failed.

In the debate in Parliament, several politicians lashed out against the United
States. Its war with Vietnam had played a big role in creating the economic
misery behind the boat people crisis, and its hard-line policy against Vietnam
since the war had only added to the misery, they said.

''Until American policy changes, the flow of refugees will continue,'' one
Member of Parliament said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. AIDES CRITICAL OF BRITAIN'S MOVE

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 527 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


The Administration and Congressional leaders today criticized as unacceptable
Britain's forced repatriation of Vietnamese refugees from Hong Kong.

''The U.S. position is that involuntary repatriation is unacceptable until
conditions improve in Vietnam,'' said the White House spokesman, Marlin
Fitzwater, although he said the Administration recognized that ''large numbers
of Vietnamese asylum seekers in Hong Kong have strained their resources.''

The State Department also protested the action. The spokesman, Richard Boucher,
said, ''We believe British authorities should continue to grant asylum to all
those persons from Vietnam who seek it.''

Deportations Defended

The British Embassy here defended the deportations, asserting that only
Vietnamese who were in Hong Kong illegally were being removed from the country.

The British decision to repatriate the refugees went into force Monday with the
expulsion of 51 boat people to Hanoi.

Shortly after the Administration statements were made, Britain announced that
because of international protests it would suspend the repatriation plan for one
week.

Lawmakers and representatives of human rights and refugee groups said the
deportations violated an international agreement.

Hopes for Reconsiderations

Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island and chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, called the move a ''disgrace,'' and said, ''I hope and pray
the Hong Kong authorities will reconsider this most unfortunate action.''

Representative Chester Atkins, Democrat of Massachusetts, said, ''What the
British did was a clear violation,'' of the Comprehensive Plan of Action, a
compact among nations endorsing voluntary repatriation for those boat people
declared to be migrants.

Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, who drafted a recent statement
by Congress against forced repatriation, sent a telegram to Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher of Britain early today urging her to ''end this inhumane
practice.''

Halt to Plans Urged

Amnesty International, called for a halt to the deportation plans saying that
Hong Kong's ''refugee procedures are critically flawed.'' The organization, a
human rights advocacy group, said that a delegation it recently sent to Hong
Kong found evidence that the screening of those seeking asylum was
''inadequate'' and that these refugees experienced intimidation and ''assaults
by police and other officers.''

Robert P. Winter, director of the United States Committee for Refugees, a
private human rights advocacy group, also wrote Prime Minister Thatcher today to
support Amnesty International's assertions as well as those of other groups that
the process of seeking asylum in Hong Kong ''remains overly restrictive and
seriously flawed.''

Mr. Winter said Britain's repatriation plan ''trampled on several fundamental
human rights belonging not just to Vietnamese, but to all asylum seekers.''

''Among them,'' Mr. Winter continued, ''are the right to seek and enjoy asylum,
the right not to be returned to a country where their life or freedom may be
threatened, as well as the right to return home in safety and dignity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Music;
More Nostalgia Than Rock In Paul McCartney's Return

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 655 words


Paul McCartney knows that his years with the Beatles made him a historic figure.
On his current tour, which arrived at Madison Square Garden on Monday for the
first of four nights, he wants to make sure everyone else knows, too. The
concert starts with an 11-minute film of performances by the Beatles and by Mr.
McCartney's 1970's band, Wings, alongside contemporary news footage. Yet the
effect of, for instance, juxtaposing ''The Long and Winding Road'' with Vietnam
War scenes, is to show Mr. McCartney crooning obliviously as people suffer and
die.

Then Mr. McCartney emerges with his band, and 13 years after his last tour he's
the same old Paul - tuneful, amiable, still boyish, still able to hit the high
notes, but increasingly reluctant to rock. For about two hours and 15 minutes,
Mr. McCartney and his five-member group re-create Beatles and Wings records,
with Robbie McIntosh copying George Harrison's guitar solos and Paul (Wix)
Wickens and Linda McCartney filling in orchestral arrangements from keyboards.
Interspersed with the old songs are half a dozen new ones from Mr. McCartney's
current album, ''Flowers in the Dirt.'' The set carefully avoids any songs by
John Lennon.

Some of the old songs are irresistible. Because the Beatles didn't play concerts
after the mid-1960's, Mr. McCartney's tour offers the first chance to hear live
versions of ''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band,'' ''Fool on the Hill''
(pointlessly interspersed with Martin Luther King's ''I have a dream'' speech)
and the ''Golden Slumbers/Carry That Weight/The End'' medley that closes the
''Abbey Road'' album. In the medley, Chris Whitten played Ringo Starr's drum
solo and Mr. McCartney, Mr. McIntosh and Hamish Stuart shared round-robin guitar
solos.

Yet those songs and other Beatles selections including ''Good Day Sunshine,''
''I Saw Her Standing There,'' ''The Long and Winding Road,'' ''Can't Buy Me
Love'' and ''Yesterday'' didn't spark any Beatlemania relapse among an audience
mostly in its 30's and 40's. Even the sing-along finale to ''Hey Jude'' was
halfhearted.

For most of the concert, the emphasis was not on rock spontaneity (or a
convincing facsimile) but on proficiency. On that account, Mr. McCartney
faltered only once, when his high notes gave out in ''Maybe I'm Amazed.'' The
band also played Wings songs and Mr. McCartney's solo hits, competently sticking
to the recordings. Only in non-Beatles oldies, ''Ain't That a Shame'' and ''20
Flight Rock,'' did the music loosen up.

Even in tepid versions, Mr. McCartney's songs are brilliantly made. He is one of
the century's great tunesmiths, a master of the utterly natural-sounding melody.
The Wings hits he chose - ''Jet,'' ''Band on the Run'' and ''Live and Let Die''
- are mini-suites, lavishing three songs in the space of one. And while most of
Mr. McCartney's lyrics proffer ordinary (if neatly encapsulated) romantic
sentiments, songs like ''Back in the U.S.S.R.,'' ''Get Back'' and ''Jet'' show a
gift for humor and enigma.

Yet while the Beatles' craftsmanship made their songs durable, it wasn't the
only thing that made the band historic. The Beatles won the world's affection
with the spirit of their music - its wit, its cheekiness, its sense of
liberating possibility, its joy.

Those may be attributes of youth, but not necessarily. The 47-year-old Mr.
McCartney's contemporaries, the Rolling Stones, still manage to make a ruckus on
stage, and when Mr. McCartney broke out of the show's midtempo rut for an
occasional rocker, both audience and band perked up. Mr. McCartney doesn't have
to prove he's an inventive songwriter, and he still has the voice that made him
Liverpool's answer to both Little Richard and Elvis Presley. But by leading
note-for-note re-creations of his songs instead of taking risks with them - by
treating a rock concert as a recital - Mr. McCartney turns great repertory into
museum pieces, embalmed in respect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul McCartney

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

From Guns to Butter;
With Cutbacks Likely in Military Spending, Debate Will Center on Where Cash Will
Go

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1282 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


No one knows how much money will become available or when. But a consensus has
emerged here that improving relations with the Soviet Union will permit the
United States to spend tens, perhaps hundreds, of billions of dollars less on
the military in the 1990's than was believed possible only weeks ago.

The question facing the Bush Administration and Congress is: How will this
windfall be allocated? The debate is likely to dominate American politics in the
next decade.

Some, like Senator Phil Gramm, a Texas Republican, see the lessened need for
military spending as an unparalleled chance to cut taxes and pump new money into
the private economy.

Lobbyists for social causes say the United States has a golden opportunity to
use what is being called the ''peace dividend'' to meet problems in education,
housing, drug control and other areas that were overlooked in the hard-fisted
Reagan Administration.

Indeed, many who follow politics see this as a rare turning point, when the
focus of policy making in America is dramatically shifting from an emphasis on
the military to a concentration on social and economic issues.

''This moment in history,'' said Senator Jim Sasser, the Tennessee Democrat who
heads the Budget Committee, represents ''the dawn of the primacy of domestic
economics.''

The debate will be joined when Congress reconvenes next month. Will a lack of
design prevail as it did when new money came on the books as the Vietnam War
wound down? Will the money go to those who shout the loudest or pay lobbyists
the most or develop the most memorable slogans? Or will the politicians agree on
a plan for distributing the windfall?

Many analysts wonder whether the politicians are up to the challenge. They
observe that President Bush, who must chart the course, has shown little
appetite in his first year in office for making long-range, controversial
choices and that Congress has repeatedly failed the test of self-discipline.

''The word 'plan' has gone out of style,'' said Prof. James David Barber of Duke
University, one of the nation's preeminent political scientists. ''What has
happened in American politics is its drift to sentimentality and emotion, which
substitutes for the facts that face you at the moment.''

Some See Squandering

Prof. Alan S. Blinder, chairman of the economics department at Princeton
University, who is a student of Government policy making, is equally
pessimistic. He said Mr. Bush and Congress would correctly identify that the
money would be needed for highways, bridges, sewer systems, water projects and
other areas where the nation's structures are crumbling. But he said he was
confident the money would be spent not where it was needed most but in the
districts of powerful members of Congress or in the parts of the country hardest
hit by military cutbacks.

The Senate Democratic leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, said this week he
would try to coordinate the efforts of lawmakers, but he conceded this would be
difficult. ''Democracy,'' he said, ''is frequently an untidy process in which
the interests of various sectors, both geographically and in terms of our
economy, compete for limited resources.''

Many economists and politicans are trying to dampen the enthusiasm over the
potential windfall. They warn that in the first few years the money saved will
be needed to eliminate the huge budget deficit, and they caution that a
recession would make moot the projections based on continued economic growth.

President Bush added his voice in this vein recently. ''When I hear now 'peace
dividend,' '' he said, some people think ''if you cut defense spending by $10
billion, we can take that money and spend it on something else. They all have a
wide array of programs. We can't do that. We've got enormous budget problems.''

But the amount of money available late into the next decade is likely to be
sizable. Two military experts from previous administrations - Robert S.
McNamara, Defense Secretary in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, and
Lawrence J. Korb, an Assistant Defense Secretary in Ronald Reagan's first term -
told Congress on Tuesday that the $300 billion annual military budget could
safely be cut in half by the turn of the century. That anticipates a 5 percent,
or $15 billion, reduction in Pentagon spending each year below this year's
level, adjusted for inflation.

Other experts are not convinced that such deep cuts can be achieved, but they
agree that absent a reversal in the world events, large reductions can be
expected each year.

A $10 billion cut in the fiscal year 1991, which begins Oct. 1, 1990, would, as
the President observed, amount to only a quarter of the $40 billion needed to
meet the requirements of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings balanced budget law. But if
another $10 billion is cut each year, that would mean $20 billion in 1992 for
other uses, $40 billion in 1994, $60 billion in 1996 and $100 billion in 2000.

The Government had a similar opportunity 20 years ago. From 1968, during the
height of spending on the Vietnam War, to 1976, the military budget fell, in
1990 dollars, from $302 billion to $195 billion. The way it was spent was hardly
noticed. Without a plan or a much public debate, most of the money went to
increased Social Security benefits and Medicare payments.

More spending on Social Security and Medicare are not likely this time around.
But there is no shortage of unmet needs.

Pressure has been building for years for money to meet the public health
emergency of AIDS, to provide day care for working parents, to improve
education, to help the elderly finance long-term care, to house the homeless and
to address the many environmental problems. Almost without exception, economists
believe the long-term prospects for the economy are dismal if the country and
its citizens do not save and invest more money.

In addition, the General Accounting Office, the auditing arm of Congress, has
identified these ''unavoidable'' costs, among others, in the future:

* Repairing or replacing the nation's 240,000 deficient bridges will cost about
$50 billion, and maintaining highways in their 1983 condition will cost an
additional $315 billion. These costs are shared by Federal and state
governments.

* Cleaning and modernizing the troubled nuclear weapons plants could cost
between $100 billion and $130 billion.

* Modernization of the air traffic control system could cost $25 billion.

* Eliminating hazardous waste on military bases could cost as much as $14
billion.

* Tens of billions of dollars must be spent to upgrade the computers of the
Internal Revenue Service and other agencies and to replace the Government's
long-distance telephone system.

* It will cost more than $20 billion to repair the deteriorating stock of public
housing and billions more to prevent privately owned, subsidized low-income
housing from being used for other purposes.

Moreover, Senator Gramm is not alone in wanting to cut taxes. A cut in the
capital gains tax rate, which President Bush and a majority in the House and
Senate supported this year, could cost billions of dollars in lost revenue by
the middle of the next decade.

Support is building in Congress for a more generous tax break for individual
retirement accounts, at a cost of billions more. And the most vocal advocates of
the poor are pressing for expanded tax credits for workers. To sort out these
priorities and ''spend the money in the way it would be most productive for the
nation,'' Professor Blinder said, ''we'd have to have especially skillful
leadership.''

Will it happen? ''I don't see it coming from this President or this Congress,''
Mr. Blinder said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

British Say Deportations Will Resume in 1990

BYLINE: By STEVEN PROKESCH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 523 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Dec. 13


A senior British Government official said today that there would probably be no
more deportations of Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong to Vietnam this year.

''My guess is we will be into the new year before they start again,'' he said.

But the official stressed that no planned deportations have been canceled and
that the Government is not changing its plans in the face of international
criticism of the involuntary repatriation of 51 Vietnamese from the British
colony on Tuesday. The 51 people were the first to be forced to return.

''It will continue,'' the official said of the deportation program.

Asked when the next involuntary deportations might occur, a Foreign Office
spokesman said: ''We have no dates. There are no immediate plans for further
ones.''

There will be two more flights of people who have volunteered to return to
Vietnam, leaving Hong Kong before the end of the year, a Government official
added. Each flight will have as many as 120 returnees, with the first leaving
Dec. 21 and the second probably after Dec. 25, he said.

According to British officials, 630 volunteers have already returned to Vietnam
in the last year. They consider that low rate a failure, which is why the
Government resorted to forced repatriations, they said.

British leaders said on Tuesday that they must press ahead with the involuntary
repatriation program as a deterrent to people in Vietnam who are now thinking
about illegally going to Hong Kong in the hope of using it as a stepping stone
to a better life in the West. The busy season for emigration typically begins in
about two months.

There are about 57,000 Vietnamese in detention camps in Hong Kong. The British
Government has said that some 4,000 of those have been through a screening and
appeals process and have been determined to be economic migrants who will be
returned to Vietnam. But as many as 40,000 are ultimately expected to be
deported as economic migrants who are not genuine refugees fleeing from
persecution.

Demonstration in Hong Kong

HONG KONG, Dec. 13 (AP) - More than 6,000 Vietnamese held in detention centers
here demonstrated today against the involuntary return of 51 other boat people
to Vietnam, a Government spokesman said.

Some shouted that they would rather die than return to Vietnam, local radio and
television stations reported.

About 3,000 Vietnamese marched around the camp on the outlying Hei Ling Chau
island, a former leper colony, and another 3,000 demonstrated at Whitehead camp
in the New Territories. About 300 staged a protest at the Chi Ma Wan center on
the offshore Lantau island.

The demonstrations were peaceful and none lasted more than two hours, said
Lionel Rodrigues, the Government spokesman.

Vietnam, in a commentary monitored in Bangkok, partly blamed economic embargos
imposed by non-Communist nations for the flight.

The broadcast cited a ''policy of hostility and economic sanctions'' pursued
''by some against Vietnam over the last 10 years as one of the reasons causing
economic difficulties in Vietnam.''

''This led to the fact that some people fled the country,'' the broadcast said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Agrees to U.N.-Controlled Election

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 11


The Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia is ready to disband its Council of
Ministers before a United Nations-controlled election in an effort to end the
11-year civil war, a leading editor with close ties to the Government said.

The editor, Khieu Khanarith, expanded Monday on a surprise announcement Sunday
by Prime Minister Hun Sen that the Government would accept a so-called Namibia
formula for elections in Cambodia.

Mr. Hun Sen's statement was the first time the Government had accepted an
international role in Cambodia's internal affairs.

The statement also marked a reversal of the Government's repeated rejection of
demands to dismantle Mr. Hun Sen's Government before elections.

''We will accept the United Nations to supervise the country and run the
election,'' said Mr. Khieu, editor of the influential weekly magazine Kampuchea.

In return, the Phnom Penh Government wants the United Nations to remove the
Sihanouk-backed delegates that hold Cambodia's seat on a delegation representing
anti-Vietnamese guerrilla groups and leave it vacant.

''We are ready to dismantle the Council of Ministers,'' which includes
Cambodia's Cabinet, Mr. Khieu said, adding that Mr. Hun Sen's role would be
discussed.

Khmer Rouge Role in Elections

Mr. Khieu said the Government would accept the participation of the Khmer Rouge
in the elections if the international body approved.

Previously, the Government ruled out any participation by the Khmer Rouge, which
ruled the country from 1975 until 1979 and was responsible for the deaths of
more than a million Cambodians.

The Khmer Rouge is the strongest faction in the three-party coalition that is
waging civil war against the Phnom Penh Government. The guerrillas are reported
to have made some gains in fighting in recent months.

''We wash our hands,'' Mr. Khieu said. ''If the international body decides the
Khmer Rouge can participate as a faction, we don't care.''

The head of the anti-Vietnamese coalition, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, rejected Mr.
Hun Sen's proposal immediately, according to a report by the British
Broadcasting Corporation.

Mr. Khieu said the proposal, under preparation for several weeks, came as a
response to international criticism that Cambodia blocked a settlement at the
recent peace talks in Paris because of its insistence that the Khmer Rouge be
excluded.

''We now agree to discuss the internal situation,'' he said. ''Before we said
the internal aspect must be discussed by the Cambodian factions.''

Land Redistribution Program

The move comes amid a flurry of diplomatic meetings set off in part by a
proposal last month by Foreign Minister Gareth Evans of Australia, who suggested
a United Nations trusteeship for Cambodia.

One of Mr. Evans's deputies met on Saturday with a Phnom Penh official in
Vietnam. Andrew George, a British diplomat in Phnom Penh, said Mr. Hun Sen's
announcement was a good sign.

''It's a good thing there are new initiatives and ideas being discussed,'' said
Mr. George, who is on the first official visit by a British official to Cambodia
since the Vietnamese invasion in 1979.

Mr. Khieu said the Government was confident of victory in any election. ''If we
lose, we are ready to step aside,'' Mr. Khieu said. ''During the last 10 years,
the Phnom Penh Government has learned how to conduct an election campaign. If we
lose, it is our own fault.''

The Government's main appeal in a campaign would be that it is the only force
strong enough to prevent the return of the Khmer Rouge. In addition, the
Government has bolstered its popular support through a land redistribution
program that is giving virtual private land ownership title to peasants.

The stated motivation for the policy was to encourage farmers to increase crop
production, but Mr. Khieu said there were political benefits. ''It is part of
the electoral campaign,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Black Combat Bravery in the Civil War

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1350 words


Before the Battle of Antietam on Sept. 17, 1862, Robert Gould Shaw, a young
white Bostonian with strong abolitionist sentiments, wrote to his mother, ''We
fight for men and women whose poetry is not yet written.''

Less than a year later, with Shaw's help, those men (if not their women) would
be fighting for themselves.

Shaw, 25 years old and a full colonel, would be leading into battle the 54th
Massachusetts Regiment, one of the first black fighting units to be enlisted in
the Union cause in the Civil War. Garth Wilkinson James (the younger brother of
William and Henry), was among the officers of the 54th. Lewis H. Douglass, son
of the great black abolitionist Frederick Douglass, was among its first
enlistees.

Against all popular expectations, the 54th and the other black regiments proved
their valor and discipline in engagements throughout the war, most spectacularly
in the bloody assault on Fort Wagner, at the mouth of Charleston Bay, on the
afternoon and evening of July 18, 1863. With Colonel Shaw at the head of his
troops, the 54th was given the honor of initiating that assault.

It might have seemed that liberation was at hand. The Emancipation Proclamation
(announced on Sept. 22, 1862), promised freedom for all slaves in territories
then ''in rebellion.'' By the end of the war, 178,895 blacks had served in the
Union Army, 10 percent of the total Union forces. Approximately one-third of the
Union Navy's 3,222 casualties were black men.

Yet 75 years later, during World War II, a large number of America's black
soldiers were still members of segregated units. The Navy had a place for
blacks, but preferably as mess stewards. In June 1964, one young black man and
two white men were murdered outside Philadelphia, Miss., at the height of a
drive to obtain for blacks the rights that had been theirs by law for 99 years.
Not until Korea and then Vietnam, the lost war, were black troops allowed to
fight and die for their country with something approximating equality.

These associations help give an almost overwhelming emotional impact to
''Glory,'' the new, beautifully acted, pageantlike movie that tells the story of
the Massachusetts 54th.

''Glory'' is the first serious American movie about the Civil War to be made in
years. There haven't been that many anyway - D. W. Griffith's ''Birth of a
Nation,'' Buster Keaton's ''General,'' David O. Selznick's ''Gone With the
Wind'' and John Huston's ''Red Badge of Courage.'' Almost everything else has
been balderdash or has used the war peripherally.

Although ''Glory'' employs the devices of fiction and sometimes is as brightly
colored as a recruiting poster, it seems as severe as a documentary alongside
those earlier films.

Kevin Jarre's good, lean screenplay is based on Colonel Shaw's letters and on
two books, Lincoln Kirstein's ''Lay This Laurel'' and Peter Burchard''s ''One
Gallant Rush.'' The director is Edward Zwick, the co-creator of television's
''Thirtysomething,'' whose only other film credit is ''About Last Night,'' the
forgettable screen adaptation of David Mamet's ''Sexual Perversities in
Chicago.''

Nothing either of these two men has done before is preparation for the success
of ''Glory.''

Their cast is superior. As Colonel Shaw, Matthew Broderick, whose face in repose
looks like a Mathew Brady photograph, gives his most mature and controlled
performance to date. Denzel Washington (''The Mighty Quinn''), an actor clearly
on his way to a major screen career, plays Trip, the escaped slave who functions
as the film's (probably necessary) late-20th-century black sensibility. Morgan
Freeman is the film's black conscience.

They are the stars, though the movie is really an ensemble piece that is more
about the time and the circumstances than it is about the eccentricities of
particular characters. As in a pageant, the characters serve principally to
illuminate a glorious moment of history, which they do with consistent
conviction.

''Glory'' begins in the manner of one of those re-enactments one sees at
battlefields where, in cause of tourism on summer weekends, local citizens put
on period costumes and play at history. The uniforms in the movie seem awfully
clean and well pressed. During the first charge at Antietam, which opens the
film, the boys' faces are prettily smudged, as if by a volunteer makeup artist.
One seems to be looking at a tasteful re-enactment even though bodies are cut in
two and one head disintegrates.

Very quickly, however, the strength of the idealism that fired these men becomes
apparent and dramatically urgent. Though pageantlike, ''Glory'' has mind as well
as soul.

The movie unfolds in a succession of often brilliantly realized vignettes
tracing the 54th's organization, training and first experiences below the
Mason-Dixon line. The characters' idiosyncracies emerge.

In addition to Mr. Washington's Trip, there is Searles (Andre Braugher), the
very proper, Boston-born-and-bred young black man, an intellectual, who is
called Snowflake by his comrades and who sleeps with his glasses on. Mr.
Freeman's Rawlins is the regiment philosopher. Sharts (Jihmi Kennedy) is a
country boy who stutters and turns out to be a crack shot.

Shaw's troubles have a bit of the white man's burden about them. His
responsibility sets him apart from his subordinate officers and from old
friends, including the baffled Searles, a boyhood chum. He is not, however, a
martyr. He deals with specifics. When, as happened, his men are denied the pay
given white soldiers, he joins them in refusing any pay. (One of the crazier
injustices suffered by the black troops was the Government's decision to pay
them $10 a month, out of which $3 would be withheld for clothing. White troops
received $13 a month, plus a $3 clothing allotment.) Shaw's black troops are
further discriminated against when shoes are not issued to them. It is assumed
they will never see battle anyway.

''Glory'' is best when its focus is kept short. One of the film's least
effective sequences is historically true: a raid on the tiny South Carolina
village of Darien during which Shaw was forced by a superior officer to order
his men to plunder and burn all buildings.

The movie adds a little raping to the sequence and quickly becomes far more
hysterical and melodramatic than the same event reported in Shaw's measured,
profoundly distressed letter home.

The attack on Fort Wagner, which is the climax of the movie, comes as close to
anything I've ever seen on screen to capturing the chaos and brutality that were
particular to the Civil War battles. Weapons maimed as often as they killed.
Soldiers were so disciplined that they marched in firm lines into the sights of
guns fired at point-blank range. Hand-to-hand combat was commonplace.

The toll taken in each battle was, of course, enormous. Yet still the men
continued to move forward. They had to believe in what they were doing. For all
of the carnage and suffering, the Civil War was a time of limitless optimism for
many, something that now seems immensely sad.

''Glory'' is celebratory, but it celebrates in a manner that insists on
acknowledging the sorrow. This is a good, moving, complicated film.

The Brutality And the Chaos

GLORY, directed by Edward Zwick; screenplay by Kevin Jarre, based on the books
''Lay This Laurel'' by Lincoln Kirstein and ''One Gallant Rush'' by Peter
Burchard and the letters of Robert Gould Shaw; director of photography, Freddie
Francis; edited by Steven Rosenblum; music by James Horner; production designer,
Norman Garwood; produced by Freddie Fields; released by Tri-Star Pictures. At
Gemini Twin, 64th Street and Second Avenue. Running time: 122 minutes. This film
is rated R.

Robert Gould Shaw ... Matthew Broderick
Trip ... Denzel Washington
Cabot Forbes ... Cary Elwes
Rawlins ... Morgan Freeman
Sharts ... Jihmi Kennedy
Searles ... Andre Braugher
Mulcahy ... John Finn
Morse ... John David Cullum
Russell ... John David Cullum
Governor Andrew ... Alan North
General Harker ... Bob Gunton
Colonel Montgomery ... Cliff DeYoung

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a scene from the movie ''Glory,'' which portrays the Civil War
exploits of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment; Matthew Broderick, plays Col.
Robert Gould Shaw, the white commander of the black unit.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Feud Between The Nation and The New Republic

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words


The New Republic and The Nation, once almost indistinguishable as the country's
principal journals of liberal opinion, have for several years now intensely
disliked each other as only former members of the same political family who have
taken diverging paths can. Lately, there have been more than the usual number of
sniping incidents as the ideological battle of the magazines goes on.

It is in the context of mutual skewering that some might read an account by The
Nation's editor, Victor Navasky, about a little-known attempt made some 40 years
ago to merge the two magazines. Mr. Navasky, whose brief history of that episode
is to appear in the magazine's next issue, does not snipe. But he expresses a
certain joy that the proposed merger did not take place, and along the way
argues that the differences between his magazine and The New Republic are far
older than most people may have thought.

The story Mr. Navasky tells is briefly this: In 1949 and 1950, there were
several periods of negotiations between Michael Straight, editor and publisher
of The New Republic, and Freda Kirchwey, editor and publisher of The Nation,
aimed at creating a joint product called The Nation and The New Republic. The
idea was that the magazines were, as a memorandum of 1949 put it, ''very much
the same.'' Among the similarities was the fact that both lost money. A joined
product would save costs, be larger and thus be in a better position to meet the
''challenge and opportunity for American liberalism.''

Beginnings of a Divergence

The effort failed when the two sides could not agree on such things as the
location of the editorial offices; The Nation was in New York City and The New
Republic in Washingon, as they still are. But Mr. Navasky takes time out in
telling the tale to say that what has become obvious now - the political
divergence of the two publications - was taking shape decades ago.

The suggestion is that what seemed the same to many people was, in Mr. Navasky's
words, ''not all that much the same.'' The Nation, he said, already distrusted
President Harry S. Truman, whom The New Republic supported, because of
''Truman's cold warriorism.'' The Nation, Mr. Navasky said, ''sounded a piercing
alarm'' on McCarthyism, while The New Republic ''was somewhat more sanguine.''

Now the list of differences between the magazines has come to reflect the two
basic directions taken by the American left since the antiwar 1960's, the
essential difference being their views of the American role in the world. It is
not that either writes major essays on the sins of the other. The rivalry, which
is in its way still for leadership of the liberal movement in the country, is
more a matter of asides, innuendos and little digs that reflect views of the
world that have become deeply different.

The Nation often argues, with many in the 1960's generation, that the United
States is at least equal as a menace to the world as the Soviet Union, perhaps
worse; that the United States has been the primary culprit in fueling the arms
race and that it has fomented much of the atmosphere of the Cold War; that the
United States has perpetrated injustice in places like Central America and the
Middle East because of blind anti-Communism.

The New Republic, by contrast, has become the home of those of the anti-Vietnam
War generation who have rethought their views and shifted to the right. The
magazine is strongly anti-Communist, has seen the Soviet Union as the main
threat to world peace, favors a strong American defense, is firmly pro-Israel,
and is highly skeptical of the Arabs and of many of the demands of the third
world.

The moderation of Mr. Navasky's assessment of the differences between the two
magazines was an exception to The Nation's usual tone in discussing its rival.
In this week's issue, for example, Alexander Cockburn, author of the ''Beat the
Devil'' column, refers to the contents of The New Republic as ''the weekly
catchment of drivel.''

In a Column

Mr. Cockburn recounts a recent fainting spell suffered in Paris by Martin
Peretz, The New Republic's editor in chief. The column makes much of the fact
that Mr. Peretz was dining in an expensive Paris restaurant (where ''sumptuous
viands were shoveled down'' and the ''plutocrats'' are ''so bloated that they
have to be rubbed down with Vaseline to squeeze through the door''). When Mr.
Peretz recovered consciousness, Mr. Cockburn says, he ''returned to his version
of sentience, and a typically toxic column over his name appeared in The New
Republic for Nov. 20.''

Mr. Peretz, from his side, has taken the occasional swipe at The Nation. When in
March, Mr. Cockburn wrote a column dramatically revising downward the number of
deaths attributable to Stalin, Mr. Peretz -along with many others - was quick to
respond, saying Mr. Cockburn ''has a sentimental interest in this controversy
but not the credentials to evaluate it.'' Mr. Peretz clearly saw in Mr.
Cockburn's revisionist account of the Stalinist era a tendency to soft peddle
the crimes of Communists while exaggerating the misdeeds of capitalists.

The Nation, Mr. Peretz had already said some years ago, is ''a radical magazine,
sympathetic to left authoritarianism.'' Last month, Morton Kondracke, a New
Republic senior editor, wrote that The Nation ''seems to think that America and
its works are the scourge of the earth.''

About Fidel Castro

Asked about this, Mr. Navasky argues that the differences of opinion within the
Nation are often ''more virulent'' than those between it and The New Republic. A
recent public feud between Mr. Cockburn and a fellow British-born columnist,
Christopher Hitchens, seems to bear him out.

In September, Mr. Hitchens wrote a column criticizing Fidel Castro for
suppressing writers in Cuba. Mr. Cockburn, referring to ''Hitchypoo'' called the
criticism ''rather pompous,'' suggesting that it arose because The Nation had a
fear of ''being seen as too left wing.''

Mr. Hitchens replied, ostensibly defending Mr. Cockburn against assertions among
unnamed ''friends'' that he is a Stalinist, by listing a long series of what
appeared to be highly Stalinist opinions.

Surveying the dispute between the two columnists for The Nation, a conservative
commentator, Neal Kozodoy, wrote that it was like ''tiny ferocious creatures
devouring each other in a drop of water.''

Mr. Hitchens accuses Mr. Cockburn of ''ridiculous inconsistencies,'' arguing
that ''there is no core of principle at stake in the positions he has found
himself adopting.'' Shepaugd(Nation)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Easing Business Cycles: The Wichita Experience

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1355 words

DATELINE: WICHITA, Kan.


This plains city of 300,000, which once boomed as a railhead for Texas cattle,
runs these days on airplane production. But unlike the time of the Chisholm
Trail, Wichita is far from a one-industry town, and its albeit bumpy ride in the
1980's illustrates a mix of forces that operate in today's diversified economy
to blunt both boom and bust.

Confounding those who have repeatedly predicted an imminent lapse into
recession, the United States economy has now been growing for seven years, more
than three times as long as the average peacetime expansion and second only to
the expansion from 1961-69 that encompassed the Vietnam War.

Although few if any experts would say that recession has been permanently
banished from American economic life - indeed, some analysts see a slump already
under way -many of them note that this remarkable stretch of sustained growth
has coincided with some fundamental economic changes, like a larger role for the
service sector and an increased international exposure for American business.
These shifts in the structure of the American economy suggest that downturns
have become fewer and probably less severe.

Uncontrollable Events

Wichita's experience also provides an example of how statistics gauging a $5
trillion national economy mask a myriad of individual gyrations of growth and
slump that are often more pronounced than in the nation at large.

Indeed, Wichita demonstrates that a city's fortunes, even allowing for the
leveling effects of an increasingly service-oriented economy, owe much to the
way uncontrollable or unforeseeable events affect its specific business
structure.

''I describe our economy as a five-cylinder engine,'' Gerald S. McDougall,
professor of economics at Wichita State University, said, referring to the
city's five major industries -small-airplane manufacture, oil and gas,
agriculture, military aircraft and the hospitals that make Wichita a regional
health-care center.

The overall American economy, except for the second quarter of 1986, when there
was a small and belatedly recognized decline in the gross national product, has
expanded for 84 straight months. Even with the recent faltering in the
manufacturing sector, many analysts say there is a good likelihood of continued
growth. The odds, they say, have been considerably enhanced by the changes that
have prompted a rethinking of the American business cycle.

Thus, instead of sharp boom-to-bust cycles, the United States economy in recent
years has fluctuated within a more narrow range. ''It's been a series of
mini-expansions and mini-setbacks within the national expansion,'' said Francis
H. Schott, chief economist for the Equitable Life Assurance Society. This muted
pattern, he added, is ''the key reason why the recovery has lasted seven
years.''

'Rolling Readjustment'

Innumerable down-and-up Wichitas, in other words, have counterbalanced
up-and-down Houstons, Peorias, Detroits and Spartanburgs in a process economists
have come to call ''rolling readjustment.'' Indeed, only Florida ''has been
completely free of having some sort of slowdown'' during the 1980's, said James
F. Smith, an economist who teaches finance at the University of North Carolina.

Most specialists also commend the Federal Reserve for its conduct of monetary
policy, particularly when it moved aggressively to cut interest rates at the
time of full-blown recession alerts in late 1984 and mid-1986.

Here in Wichita, where manufacturing's share of the work force has fallen to 26
percent of jobs from 32 percent a decade ago, service jobs have increased
sharply with the rise of industries like telemarketing and franchising and the
growth of health services. It is true that some of this increase reflected a
trend in which manufacturers began to contract with service companies to perform
payroll, janitorial and other functions they formerly did for themselves. Still,
the gain in service jobs helped minimize the pain when the light-airplane
business went sour in the early 1980's.

Service jobs, while often paying less, are generally less subject to shifts in
the business climate than production jobs.

A Manufacturing Boom

Despite its unusually diversified economy, Kansas's biggest city lagged badly in
coming out of the 1981-82 national recession. It was jolted again in 1986 when
the price of oil collapsed. Now, showing that economics, like politics, is
intensely local, the city is enjoying something of a manufacturing boom even as
American factory activity sags.

Wichita's main producers of small aircraft - the Beech Aircraft Corporation, the
Cessna Aircraft Company and the Learjet Corporation -produce more such planes
than the rest of the country.

The city also gets economic contributions from the 10 franchise operations that
have headquarters here, including locally founded Pizza Hut; from the McConnell
Air Force Base, and from the state university, which has 17,000 students.

'We Got Clobbered'

Growth was strong during the 1970's, skirting even national downturns, but just
after that four of the ''cylinders'' conked out. ''We got clobbered,'' Professor
McDougall said.

The market for small planes all but disappeared, plummeting 50 percent in dollar
value - much more in number of units - between 1981 and 1983.

This debacle was the result of stratospheric interest rates, fears about fuel
supplies and liability lawsuits, recession belt-tightening by corporate buyers
and a product-cycle transition from pistons to jets.

Agriculture and oil and gas suffered here as elsewhere in the great disinflation
of the early 1980's, when the Fed's credit-tightening to bring down inflation
led to steep drops in commodity prices. Wichita's oil companies, most of them
small and many with marginal properties, suffered disproportionately as prices
tumbled below costs of production.

Even revenue from medical care slumped after the Government tightened Medicare
reimbursements.

This left Boeing Military Airplanes, benefiting from the Reagan Administration's
military buildup, as the only major expansionary force.

A Slow Recovery

Although Wichita's unemployment rate at its worst averaged 8.5 percent in 1982,
a point below the national average, the early part of the decade was a grim
period here and the city did not start to pull out of recession until about 18
months after the nation at large. Indeed, it was not until 1987 that employment
here regained its pre-recession peaks.

The three small-plane producers, now employing 11,000 workers, appear to have
been significantly strengthened by their takeover during the first half of the
decade by outsiders who could finance research and development. Beech, now
beginning to deliver its new Starship business turboprop, was acquired by
Raytheon, while Cessna was acquired by General Dynamics and Learjet by
Integrated Acquisitions, a Wall Street entity.

Wichita's vast Boeing operation is likely to get plenty of new commercial
business to make up for any contraction in military spending, so the city finds
itself well positioned for any new downturn.

''We've got a manufacturing base in the only industry in which the U.S. is still
the world's dominant player,'' said Marvin L. Wynn, chief operating officer for
Wi/Se, a city-county development agency.

Mood Is Cautious

But for all the signs of resurgence, including a continued assault by new
developments and shopping malls on the wheat fields at the edge of town, the
mood among Wichita's business people and shoppers is one of caution.

Retail sales have grown scarcely at all in recent years, after adjustment for
inflation, and the baffled salesmen at Bulger Cadillac-Oldsmobile on
down-at-the-heels East Douglas Street suspect that the lack of customers
reflects much more than a hangover from the recently settled Boeing strike.

Roy Jones, retired from his truck dealership in nearby Hutchinson, was asked
recently at the Towne East Square mall about his mood. Gesturing toward the
stores, where his wife and another relative had disappeared, he said: ''There's
belt-tightening. I told 'em not to buy anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of plant in Wichita, Kan. (NYT/John Freeman)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 952 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-19

An East German call for U.S. help was made by the country's new Communist Party
leader. He asked for help in keeping his country from being absorbed by its
powerful West German neighbor.    Page A1



Once privileged East Germans now risk assault    A16


West Germany postpones agreement on open borders    A16



Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia are there under an agreement that is invalid
because it was concluded under duress, Prague's new Foreign Minister said.    A1



News analysis: The Soviet Union may at some point have a Communist Party that
does not have a constitutionally guaranteed primacy, or so seems the direction
of President Gorbachev's thinking.    A18



Shevardnadze to visit NATO headquarters    A18


Skeptical Bulgarians defy Communists    A17


Poles draft bills to slow inflation    A17



The candidate in the Chilean election who appears headed for victory is Patricio
Aylwin, the head of a coalition made up of his own Christian Democratic Party,
the Socialists and numerous smaller parties.    A1



New analysis: Salvador's release of an American woman arrested when a rebel arms
cache was found on her rented property underscores the growing sensitivity of
the Government to its international image.    A14



Freed American is bitter at U.S.    A14



Brazil will vote with eye on Army    A13



The return of the boat people to Vietnam earned Hong Kong much international
criticism, but residents there strongly approve of the radical measure.    A11



War on drugs by Malaysia and Singapore has mixed results    A12



Gunmen in Manilla hit U.S. compound    A8



P.L.O. guerrillas mounted an attack against a Syrian Army garrison in southern
Lebanon, and the police said 6 people were killed and 20 wounded. The attack was
believed to be the first Palestinian frontal attack on a Syrian position in 13
years.    A3



Iran rejects Iraqi demand to redraw border in a peace pact    A7


Libya cuts some ties with France    A5


France goes on alert against terror    A3


U.N. backs guidelines for a Pretoria democracy    A19


Pakistan wearies of Afghan burden    A9


Kashmir officials criticised for yielding to Muslim abductors    A10



NATIONAL    A20-34, D17

Many Northeast banks are reeling from heavy losses caused by bad real estate
loans. But analysts do not expect a crisis of the magnitude that led to many
bank closings in the energy states.    A1



An airborne military command post will be halted under Pentagon plans after
three decades of being a grim symbol of America's preparation to wage nuclear
war even if the President and other political leaders were killed in a surprise
attack.    A1



A Jewish veteran of World War II should not receive a Medal of Honor that was
denied him in 1945 because of what his advocates say was anti-Semitism by a
senior officer, an Army review board concluded.    A20



Washington at Work: Lane Kirkland, head of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., has helped unions
reap benefits from their long support of Solidarity, but big labor in America
still faces many problems.    A24



Senate panel pressing inquiry on Durenberger    D17


Poindexter's lawyers assail Bush and Reagan strategy    A30


Bush bars reduction in Social Security Administration staff    A20



Health claims on food packages would be limited under an F.D.A. proposal, which
regards many claims as too broad and in some cases fradulent.    D17



Scientists puzzled by unusual Neptune rings    A22


Louisiana panel votes to ease prisoner's term    A23


Philip Morris to end support for important research prize    A26


A-plant operator told to post bond    A32


The freeway it took decades to build in Michigan    A20


Dry spell prompts South Florida to plan curbs on water use    D17



REGIONAL    B1-7

Autopsies will test for AIDS under a plan by the New York City medical examiner
to help measure and confine the epidemic.    A1



New York State's drug-abuse agency gave more than $2 million in contracts to
treatment programs run by friends of the head of the agency, even though those
programs failed to treat a single addict, a state commission asserted.    B1



A New York State income tax cut should be delayed, according to a recommendation
that Governor Cuomo's committee of economic advisers is expected to make.    B1



Dinkins appointee sees no new tax incentives    B3


Labor leader sets demands for new pact in early talks    B3


New York State Republican counsel ordered arrested    B8


Holtzman wants a housecleaning    B3


Father Ritter says allegations are ''nonsense''    B2



The tent city of the homeless in Tompkins Square Park was torn down by city and
park police officers. Officials said homeless people could still sleep in the
park but without tents.    B1



New Jersey's economy has slowed to the point where the state stands a greater
risk than the nation of sliding into a recession next year, a panel of economic
advisers warned.    B1



A former nurse was found guilty of murder, manslaughter and criminally negligent
homicide for killing four patients as part of a scheme in which he hoped to be
seen as a hero.    B2



Producer flees court on learning of new set of charges    B2


M.T.A. warns Connecticut not to deny fare increases    B6



NEEDIEST CASES    B5

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

HONG KONG OPINION AGAINST REFUGEES

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Dec. 14


As foreign governments and international relief agencies condemn Hong Kong's
forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people, Hong Kong residents are
expressing their approval of the radical measure, and even at times suggesting
that harsher measures are needed.

''I don't think sending them back is inhumane,'' Chan Wai Shing, a Hong Kong
electrician, said today. ''Keeping them in Hong Kong is a waste of taxpayers'
money.''

Threatening and Cajoling

For months now, legislators, community leaders and citizens' groups have been
threatening and cajoling the British and Hong Kong Governments, demanding that
they rid the colony of the 44,000 Vietnamese boat people who have crowded into
the territory in the last year and a half, joining 13,000 already here and
awaiting resettlement. Now that forced repatriation is under way, few here are
debating the morality of the operation or even its possible political
repercussions.

When the colony's Legislative Council met on Wednesday - one day after the
forced repatriations began - council members discussed fire ordinances in
boarding houses, kidney donor cards and trips abroad for district board members.
In the middle of the session, the Chief Secretary made a brief statement
defending repatriation.

Concerned About Cost

One member, concerned about the cost of returning the boat people, tried to ask
a question about the repatriation, but he was ruled out of order, and nothing
more was said on the subject. But politicians here are already preparing to
fight new battles over the boat people, complaining that Hong Kong ought not to
have to pay for the forced return of the Vietnamese, and arguing that other
measures will be needed to curb the flow of Vietnamese.

''Mandatory return will not solve the root problem,'' said Kingsley Sit, a
legislator who advocates scrapping the colony's policy of first asylum so that
any new boat people arriving in Hong Kong's harbor would be pushed back to sea.
And opinion polls show that Mr. Sit's position is popular with Hong Kong's
residents. A recent poll by political leaders in the Central and Western
districts - downtown Hong Kong and a heavily Chinese neighborhood adjacent to it
- showed that 90 percent favored forcible repatriation of the Vietnamese and
almost half wanted any new boats of Vietnamese shoved away. Other polls have
shown even wider margins of support for that extreme measure.

A possible explanation for those views may lie in the makeup of Hong Kong's
population of 5.7 million, which is 98 percent ethnic Chinese whose sympathies
lie more with the thousands of mainland citizens who try to sneak across the
border into Hong Kong each year. About 50 mainland Chinese a day are rounded up
here to be shipped back across the border, handcuffed and under guard. Even
though more than half the Chinese here were refugees themselves, fleeing the
repression and poverty of China, they do not identify with the the Vietnamese
who are fleeing similar problems in Vietnam. Instead, they have signed petitions
and staged demonstrations against the boat people, and formed neighborhood
vigilante groups to patrol in areas where Vietnamese are housed in squalid camps
behind high-barbed wire fences.

'Britain Takes Responsibility'

While the British Government has ultimate responsibility for the harsh
repatriation policy, British officials privately say that while they have no
desire to send home the Vietnamese, Hong Kong's citizens have been growing
mutinously angry over the situation and the Government had no other choice.

''Britain takes responsibility, as it should, for this act, but with a wink and
a nudge and a nod at the Hong Kong Chinese,'' said one Chinese political analyst
here. ''They say they fear we would become ungovernable if the Vietnamese
problem were allowed to persist. I don't know if that is true, but I do know
that China has made it very clear they want this problem cleared up before they
take over.''

When confronting forced repatriation, the Chinese here tend to pick their way
through a thicket of paradoxes, ignoring thorny, contradictory issues. The
colony's liberal conscience, the lawyer and legislator Martin Lee, is one of the
very few here who have pointed out similarities between the desperate Vietnamese
who sail here in their tiny open boats and the prosperous Chinese who were once
refugees themselves here.

The hard line taken against the Vietnamese comes at a time when Hong Kong, which
will be handed back to China in 1997, is asking British officials for assurances
that its citizens will have a haven if the Chinese regime proves harsh and
repressive. Rita Fan, a staunch supporter of forced repatriation and an
outspoken critic of Britain's failure to grant Hong Kong citizens right of
abode, has said: ''Some people try to connect the two issues, but there really
is no connection between the Vietnamese coming here and Hong Kong people, who
are British subjects, wanting the right to go and live in Britain. I see no
connection.''

Mrs. Fan says Hong Kong must simply face the criticism that comes with forced
repatriation and offer ''a thorough explanation of the difficult situation it
faced.'' But Mr. Lee has warned that the operation was not only morally wrong,
but could well endanger the Hong Kong people's quest for safety after 1997.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Intensive War on Drugs by Malaysia and Singapore Shows Mixed Results

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1625 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


The television drama was hardly sophisticated, but the point was clear: A young
man writhes on his bed, howling from drug withdrawal, while his family agonizes
and finally decides to go to the authorities.

Malaysia's war on drugs is an intensive effort of education, advertising,
testing, rehabilitation, harsh mandatory penalties for drug use and the death
penalty for possession of relatively small amounts of heroin, cocaine or
marijuana.

But results from the Malaysian program, put into effect in 1983, and a similar
one adopted in nearby Singapore in 1975 have been mixed.

Malaysian officials can report only that the country's addiction rate rose again
last year, though they believe that over the last six years it has started to
stabilize. The number of addicts in Singapore has decreased from a high in 1976,
but the problem is by no means solved there either.

Decline in Singapore Studied

Still, experts are looking with interest at the programs - particularly
Singapore's - since it is one of the few urban centers in the world where
addiction appears to be declining over the long term. Paradoxically, Amsterdam -
which takes the opposite approach and permits the use of heroin in some cases -
is another.

It is the death penalty in the Singapore and Malaysian programs that has
received the most attention in the world's press, especially when foreigners are
hanged. Since Malaysia imposed the death sentence for trafficking, 235 people
have been sentenced to death and 81 have been hanged. The rest await appeals or
execution. In Singapore, 37 people have received the death sentence, and 25 have
been hanged.

Kerry Lane Wiley, a 37-year-old Californian, was arrested on Nov. 4 on grounds
of possessing 18.2 ounces of marijuna, and he thus became the first American to
await a hearing on the Malaysian drug charge that carries the mandatory death
sentence.

With drug use rising rapidly in the early 80's, the Government of Prime Minister
Mahathir Mohamad identified ''dadah'' - the Malay word for drugs - as a threat
to national security on a par with Communism and as a major incitement to
violence.

Whipping for Smaller Amounts

Malaysia and Sinapore both impose capital punishment for ''trafficking,'' which
is defined as the possession of 0.53 ounces or more of pure heroin or morphine,
7.05 ounces of marijuana or hashish, 2.2 pounds of opium or 1.41 ounces of
cocaine. Those caught with lesser amounts get a whipping with the rotan, a
bamboo cane.

Officials of both nations believe that without the death penalty and without
rehabilitation efforts their drug problems would be far worse.

This, they say, is especially so because of both countries' proximity to the
''Golden Triangle'' of Burma, Laos and Thailand, where much of the world's
heroin poppies are grown. They contend, too, that their drug programs have
discouraged the use of Malaysia and Singapore as transit points for
international smuggling to the West.

''Punishment must be strict, or otherwise the penalty has no meaning,'' said Poh
Geok Ek, the director of Singapore's Central Narcotics Bureau.

The view in Malaysia is as harsh, if less polite. ''We hang anyone convicted who
exhausts their appeals,'' said Tey Boon Hwa, assistant director of the
Anti-Narcotics Task Force. ''We also hang old ladies, even if we don't normally
publicize it. If you get caught, you face the music.''

Both countries also use a British colonial legacy, preventive detention without
trial, to imprison those strongly suspected of involvement in drug trafficking
when sufficient evidence cannot be obtained to guarantee conviction.

History of Opium Use

Opium use has a long history in the area, especially among migrant Chinese
laborers imported by the British, who controlled the opium trade early in this
century. But with the increased popularity of drugs during the 1960's and the
Vietnam War, the number of those addicted to heroin grew sharply.

In an interview, the Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, said: ''Death is
the best deterrent we have. We have fewer addicts now than five years ago, and
fewer then than we had 10 years ago.''

According to Mr. Poh, Singapore, with about 2.6 million people, now has roughly
9,000 addicts, about 85 percent of them using smokable heroin.

From 1974 to the end of 1976, Mr. Poh said, the number of heroin addicts
exploded in Singapore from about 100 to 13,000. As part of a plan to reduce
demand as well as supply, Singapore then decided to incarcerate as many addicts
as possible for treatment and rehabilitation. By the end of the next year, 9,000
people were taken into custody, and those who tested positive for drugs were
immediately sent to treatment centers by executive action; the courts were
bypassed entirely, a practice which continues.

Singapore now arrests about 4,000 addicts a year, about 70 percent of them
repeat offenders, and about 300 traffickers, of whom 20 to 30 are subject to the
death penalty.

Situation Is 'Stabilized'

Malaysian officials, who began their campaign eight years after Singapore in a
much larger territory of 17 million people, say that at best they have
''stabilized the situation.'' Mr. Tey estimates that the number of addicts in
Malaysia now is something under 100,000, though Western diplomats think the
figure may be as much as twice that.

Although 9,710 new addicts were detected last year, the highest figure since
1984, Malaysian officials contend that the 1988 experience was temporary and
that drug use overall is leveling off.

Malaysia's main problem is money. Roughly $22 million a year is being spent on
the drug war, but even by the end of this year, there will only be about 4,000
beds in rehabilitation centers for the 100,000 addicts.

Singapore is richer and much smaller and thus has fewer budget constraints.
Given its labor shortage, it can promise jobs to addicts who have been through
rehabilitation.

Singapore's problem is different, and it goes to a concern about ethnic tension
that beats just beneath the skin of a Chinese-dominated city-state surrounded by
Malays. The Chinese make up 76 percent of the population, Malays only 15
percent. But 52 percent of the addicts arrested now are Malays, a trend that
began three years ago. Mr. Poh worries about racial stereotyping, and in fact
Singapore is making significant efforts to engage Malays, from political leaders
to religious ones, in helping with the problem.

Addicts Not Called Criminals

In Singapore, addicts, though arrested, are not given criminal status. They are
put into rehabilitation centers and segregated by their pattern of drug use. All
who are fit and under the age of 55 are put through ''cold turkey''
detoxification in spare rooms for a week. There is medical supervision, but no
medication is provided to ease withdrawal. The point, said Mr. Poh, is to
remember the pain. Drug maintenance programs, he said, merely perpetuate
addiction. Nor are addicts regarded as patients; they are seen as people with
behavioral problems.

A week of recuperation from detoxification follows, plus orientation to a
regimen of paramilitary discipline. Once they are judged ready and able to quit
drug use, the first-time addicts are put into two weeks of intensive physical
training in the tropical sun and equally intensive personal, group and family
counseling.

The entire experience is designed as ''a short, sharp shock,'' to wean them from
drugs and to make them afraid to try again. Between 30 and 50 percent of
first-time addicts are then sent home, and for two years they must report to the
police for urine tests on a regular schedule, undergo counseling and be
subjected to surprise urine tests.

The others are at this point put in a two- or three-month course at another,
harsher center. They then enter a four-month day-release program, during which
they are permitted outside employment. The two years of urine tests and
counseling come after that for this group.

High Rate of Repeaters

For those who fail these programs or who are repeat offenders, there is a longer
program that can keep them incarcerated up to three years.

About 70 percent of the Central Narcotics Bureau's annual budget of $11 million
is spent on treatment and rehabilitation. Even so, Mr. Poh said, about 70
percent of repeat offenders go back on drugs - ''but at least 30 percent kick
the habit.'' Among first-time addicts, he said, only about 35 percent currently
relapse, though he admits the program is still new.

The figures on repeat offenders for Malaysia are about the same, Mr. Tey said.
Malaysia does not isolate new addicts from the others.

In addition to rehabilitation and harsh law-enforcement procedures, both
countries also stress preventive education in the schools, the press and the
temple or mosque.

Pain of Rehabilitation

At Singapore's center for first-time addicts, it was not hard to see the pain of
rehabilitation at work. A man of 30, older than the average, squatted in the
regulation blue shorts and white T-shirt, his hair shorn boot-camp style. He had
been smoking heroin for three weeks when he was caught with five friends.
Because he had probably not yet become addicted, the detoxification period was
not hard, he said, but the physical training was.

He had worked for the subway system, a semipublic agency, and would now lose his
job. Why had he started to smoke heroin? He could not explain, except that he
was divorced and bored, and his friends were smoking.

Did he have any children? Three, he said, his voice breaking. How would they
react? ''I don't want to think about that,'' he said. ''I just feel so stupid.''

Outside the room, the supervising officer smiled. ''I think we can save him,''
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kevin Barlow and Brian Chambers (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Salvador Signals Its Sensitivity to Image Abroad

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Dec. 14


The decision to release an American woman arrested when a rebel arms cache was
found on her rented property underscores the growing sensitivity of the
Government to its international image.

The surprise decision, announced by President Alfredo Cristiani during a hastily
called news conference at midday Wednesday, appears part of a campaign to seize
the propaganda initiative and restore the Government's reputation for
pragmatism.

The stakes, some Western diplomats said, are nothing less than the long-term
survival of President Cristiani's rightist administration and United States
policy, the longest sustained American effort to subdue a Communist insurgency
since the Vietnam war.

Deep Pitfalls Ahead

But Mr. Cristiani and the long-debated policy inherited by the Bush
Administration still face deep pitfalls in the case of six Jesuit priests, who
were slain last month by gunmen presumed to be members of the armed forces.

The slayings were a chilling reminder of the death squads that thrived here in
the early 1980's and fueled the decade-old civil war. The killings seemed to
confirm the assertions of many Government critics that President Cristiani was
little more than a facade for fascists and right-wing fanatics within the
governing party, which was founded a decade ago by an anti-Communist
paramilitary group.

Mr. Cristiani, a Georgetown-educated political beginner and heir to a coffee
fortune, was chosen as the standard bearer for the party as a way of recasting
its repressive image and making itself acceptable to Washington, which had twice
blocked its previous presidential candidate from becoming President.

More Pragmatic Than Expected

President Cristiani's Administration, which was inaugurated six months ago,
proved much more pragmatic than critics expected. The Government, composed
largely of wealthy technocrats, took an independent line from the party, the
Nationalist Republican Alliance, which is known as Arena. Its founder and
several other leaders have been linked to the death squads that in the early
1980's killed almost anyone who organized against or criticized the
military-controlled Government.

''When Cristiani was elected, everybody saw it as a victory for Arena and the
tough right-wing party with death squads,'' said a Western diplomat who said he
had been deeply worried by the results of the election. ''But what you had was a
Government semi-detached from the party.''

The number of human rights abuses attributed to the right and the armed forces
did increase after the inauguration of the Cristiani Administration. Overlooked
by many of its critics, however, was an even sharper jump in the rates of abuses
attributed by monitors to the leftist guerrillas, although the total number of
violations by the Government's security forces remained higher. Who Controls the
Extremists?  But the killings of the Jesuits, who were among the country's most
eloquent proponents of a negotiated settlement to the war, renewed questions
about the fundamental character of the Government. For the first time since Mr.
Cristiani was elected, there also was sharp debate over his ability to control
the party's extremists.

''Before we started our offensive, we said the Cristiani Government had some
credibility abroad and also within some domestic sectors,'' the leftist rebels
said in analyzing the results of their month-old military campaign. But, they
added, a Government crackdown on religious workers and the Jesuit killings
exposed the administration and showed it ''is a wolf in sheep's clothing.''

The killings for the first time in recent years cracked the Congressional
consensus that had sustained United States policy. They reinvigorated what had
been a stumbling effort to cut off the $1.5 million a day in American aid that
keeps the Salvadoran Government afloat.

United States Ambassador William G. Walker acknowledged that continued American
aid probably depended on quickly solving the case and bringing the killers to
justice. A senior member of the Cristiani Administration said the Government
felt it had to find the gunmen by mid-January, when Congressional debate on
United States aid is to resume.

Looking for Ways to Recover

The Cristiani Administration's image was also badly damaged by the armed forces'
handling of the rebel offensive. It rocketed and strafed guerrilla strongholds
in several residential areas and cracked down on church groups and international
relief organizations.

President Cristiani demonstrated a commitment to solving the Jesuit case by
offering a $250,000 reward for information leading to the arrest of the gunmen.
He also promised to renew peace talks with the guerrillas.

At the same time, he announced he would send back to the National Assembly new
legislation restricting dissent. That was a sharp reversal. He had supported the
penal code legislation despite domestic and international criticism. Finally,
Jennifer Jean Casolo, in whose rented house an arms cache was found, was ordered
released for lack of evidence by the same judge who last Friday had ruled there
was enough evidence to proceed to a trial.

The decision to release Ms. Casolo is unlikely to earn many favorable points.
But some Western diplomats said it almost certainly will aggravate already tense
relations between the President and hard-liners within his party and the army,
who had seen the case as a test of the Government's independence from
international pressure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Army Cites Strong Evidence in Barring Medal

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


The Army said today that there was ''incontestable evidence'' that a Jewish
World War II veteran did not perform the heroic actions that he had claimed in
seeking the Medal of Honor.

The Army rejected a request to award the nation's highest combat decoration to
David S. Rubitsky, a 72-year-old retired merchant seaman, who had said he was
denied the nation's highest combat medal decades ago because of anti-Semitism.

Pentagon official said today that Army Secretary Michael P. W. Stone concurred
with the finding of Army officers who investigated the case. The investigators
also said Mr. Rubitsky was not deprived of the medal because of anti-Semitism.

Congressional supporters of Mr. Rubitsky accepted the Army's findings, issuing a
statement saying the veteran's claims ''turned out to be a myth.''

Mr. Rubitsky had asserted that he killed more than 500 Japanese soldiers in a
single battle.

In a reflection of the delicacy of the matter, the legislators said the
investigation did not go directly to the issue of anti-Semitism. Army officials
and members of Congress were careful not to portray Mr. Rubitsky as a deliberate
liar, saying instead that he had acted honorably in the war but that he and his
supporters were victims of memory fogged by the passage of years.

After a long briefing by the Army on Capitol Hill this morning for Congressional
staff aides and lawmakers, Senator Herbert H. Kohl and Representative Les Aspin,
both Democrats from Wisconsin, and Senator Robert W. Kasten Jr., Republican of
Wisconsin, and Representative Nita M. Lowey, Democrat of Westchester, said in a
statement, ''The investigation establishes as conclusively as possible that
there was no mass killing of Japanese attackers at Buna in New Guinea in 1942.''

The lawmakers went on to say, ''While the report does not fully resolve the
issue of anti-Semitism, it does demonstrate that the charge of anti-Semitism is
not relevant to the fact that no medal was awarded to Mr. Rubitsky.''

Decision Is Assailed

The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, a Jewish organization that has
supported Mr. Rubitsky, called the decision ''unconscionable.'' Abraham H.
Foxman, national director of the organization, said he had asked to see the
report on which the decision was made and was told it would not be made
available at this time.

Asked why he called the decision ''unconscionable'' while he had not seen the
evidence on which it was based, Dec. 15 Mr. Foxman said: ''Because something is
still being hidden. If the facts are sufficiently clear to convince members of
Congress, why can't they be made public. They deal with events 45 years ago.''

Mr. Foxman said the Anti-Defamation League would urge Mr. Stone to reverse the
ruling. But Army officials pointed out that Mr. Stone had concurred with the
finding.

Among the reasons for not awarding the medal to Mr. Rubitsky, the Army cited a
''spurious'' and ''fraudulent'' inscription on the back of a photograph that was
said to have been removed from the body of a Japanese officer 47 years ago.

Mr. Rubitsky, who lives in Milton, Wis., continued to press his case. Through
his wife, Katherine Roethe, he issued a statement asserting: ''It did happen. I
think there is some sort of coverup.''

In Oshkosh, Wis., Joseph M. Stehling, a retired brigadier general who once
commanded Mr. Rubitsky's company, said he was dumbfounded by the decision. ''The
Army can say what it wants,'' he said, ''but let me say this: The stench of
those decaying bodies that day in the jungle stayed with me for years.''

'Fogging of Many Memories'

The legislators said: ''What we are dealing with here is not a lie fabricated by
the generals and Mr. Rubitsky. It is simply the unfortunate result of the
passage of many years, the fogging of many memories and the reliving of many
difficult memories from a war long past.''

The Army officers who briefed the lawmakers avoided the subject of whether Mr.
Rubitsky was purposely fabricating the story and declined to speculate on his
motivation, said Scott S. Fleming, an aide to Representative Lowey.

''They said that he had performed in an exemplary fashion as a comunications
officer,'' said Mr. Fleming, who attended the briefing. ''They carefully avoided
addressing how this all came to be. They did not want to characterize him one
way or another. They were very sensitive about that.''

Lieut. Col. Terrence Adkins, the officer in charge of the inquiry, said in an
interview that American military records, Japanese records, information from
Americans at the scene and interrogations of Japanese prisoners of war were
among the body of evidence that the ''action did not occur as alleged.''

Critical to Mr. Rubitsky's claim was the photograph of a group of Japanese
soldiers with a message in Japanese on the back saying, ''Six hundred fine
soldiers died because of a solitary American soldier.''

But Edward J. Drea, a military historian fluent in Japanese, cited internal and
external evidence to assert that the inscription was ''spurious'' and
''fraudulent.''

Colonel Adkins said his inquiry, with the help of a warrant officer and five
civilians, took two years as they dug back through archives, obtained evidence
from forensic specialists and took statements from Mr. Rubitsky and 20 others
who were at the scene.

When that team had reached its conclusion, Colonel Adkins, who is chief of the
military awards branch, sent his recommendation to senior Army officers and
civilian officials until it reached the Chief of Staff, General Carl E. Vuono,
and the Secretary of the Army, Mr. Stone. All concurred in the decision.

Over the two years a growing roster of public officials and other groups,
including the Anti-Defamation League, have been pressing the Army to review Mr.
Rubitsky's case.

Although not all veterans' groups championed his cause, he has received strong
support from Vietnam veterans. At the insistence of a group of Vietnam veterans
who live near Mr. Rubitsky, the Vietnam Veterans of America passed a resolution
at their annual convention last summer calling on the army to give him the
medal.

Rubitsky Tells of Fight

In his account, Mr. Rubitsky said that as a sergeant in the 32d Division, he
fought off waves of attacking Japanese soldiers in an all-night fight and thus
saved his battalion from being overrun.

In an interview on National Public Radio in October, he said Japanese bodies
''were lying there, on branches, roots, piled like cordwood, atop one another.''

He gave this account: ''Some were still alive. Some I just hit in the shoulder
and couldn't move, some in the legs. So I would just shoot them and bayonet
them, shoot them and bayonet them.

''I was completely an insane man. To think that a human being would do that to
another human being, what I did.''

But Colonel Adkins said that both American and Japanese military records and
statements from soldiers there at the time ''all agree that the Japanese were in
defense and that no major attack took place.'' Japanese records showed, he said,
that fewer than 500 soldiers were effective at the time because their ranks had
been depleted by malaria and dysentery.

The Americans outnumbered the Japanese at Buna, Colonel Adkins said, and were
hampered by shortages of ammunition, heavy weapons to attack Japanese bunkers,
communications gear and medical supplies. ''The times were desperate on both
sides of the line,'' he said.

On the inscription about 600 Japanese soldiers' being killed by one American,
Mr. Drea said: ''The handwriting is not that of a native Japanese. The format of
the document is incorrect either as an official report, an unofficial letter, a
last will or a memorandum.''

He sent a copy of the message to Japan, where Hisashi Takahashi, a military
historian at the National Institute for Defense Studies, Japan's top military
college, and two associates studied it. ''We three of us,'' Mr. Takahashi wrote
back, ''all agree 100 percent that this letter is a forgery.''

Both the American and the Japanese historians noted strange, almost juvenile
handwriting, improper forms of Japanese names, the lack of honorifics and the
use of romanized words.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Drug Smugglers And the Marines Exchange Shots

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


A United States Marine Corps reconnaissance team, which has been quietly
patrolling the Southwest border since Thanksgiving, exchanged fire with drug
smugglers for the first time late Wednesday night along the Arizona border,
Administration officials said today.

The Marine unit was part of a contingent of about 50 marines assigned to assist
the Border Patrol. While the Defense Department announced in October that it
planned to deploy marines to help halt drug smugglers crossing the border from
Mexico, direct conflict has been avoided until this week.

The border clash comes as Defense Secretary Dick Cheney is moving ahead with
plans submitted by his 10 top military commanders for greater involvement in
drug-fighting missions. The effort is a marked contrast to the attitude of Mr.
Cheney's predecessors, who avoided military involvement in anti-drug efforts.

'Discretionary Authority'

Military officials said the plans include wider use of planes to detect aircraft
carrying drugs, and naval combat ships, among other things. CBS News reported
Thursday night that Mr. Cheney had authorized military units to capture
fugitives, wanted on drug charges, in foreign countries.

While not confirming that report, a Bush Administration official said today that
American special operations forces did have ''certain discretionary authority in
dealing with drug traffickers.''

Officials said the Marine unit, believed fewer than a dozen men, suffered no
casualties. The officials said the smugglers fired first on the marines, who
then fired back over the heads of the smugglers. The smugglers, on horseback,
escaped into the darkness, eluding the marines, who were on foot. The smugglers
left behind a horse and 535 pounds of marijuana, officials said.

The Defense Department and Marine Corps Headquarters in Washington refused to
comment on the clash, but Pentagon and other officials said that it came in a
night patrol and lasted less than a half hour.

The plan calls for Army, Marine Corps and National Guard units to support
civilian drug law-enforcement agents. The troops are to provide information
about the location and movement of smugglers on the border with Mexico.

The Southwest border is the overland entry area that Colombian drug
organizations use to ship cocaine to the United States. It is used by Mexicans
to bring marijuana into the United States.

Army Planning to Send Troops

The National Guard began surveillance patrols early this year; the Marines began
patrols late last month. The Army has plans to send in patrols.  The patrols
move secretly into their areas of operation and conduct reconnaissance and
surveillance of suspected smuggling routes for up to a week. The services
previously announced plans for routine military training in the Southwest to
help deter narcotics trafficking, but plans to conduct reconnaissance missions
to locate smugglers were not widely known.

Pentagon officials say the patrols do not violate prohibitions that bar the
military from acting as a law-enforcement agency. Patrol members are armed and
authorized to fire in self-defense. But the officials say that intercepting and
apprehending suspected drug smugglers is left to civilian narcotics agents.

Cocaine at Tens of Millions

One official said the combined teams have already seized cocaine with ''tens of
millions of dollars in street value.'' While the exact number of marines
involved Wednesday night has not been made public, similar clandestine
reconnaissance patrols by the Marines in the Vietnam War usually consisted of a
team of four to eight men.

An official outside the Defense Department said that while on patrol the
marines, with by a Border Patrol officer, spotted a group of horsemen in the
barren region of southern Arizona not far from the Mexican border.

When ordered to halt, the horsemen turned and galloped off. The marines then
launched illumination flares to light up the area. At that point the horsemen
dismounted and fired at the marines. The marines returned fire, but, directed by
the Border Patrol team, they fired over the smugglers' heads.

Three Headquarters on Coasts

The Pentagon has established three headquarters with personnel from all services
in the South and on the West Coast. These headquarters direct and coordinate
military support to civilian drug law-enforcement authorities.

One is at Key West, Fla., under Vice Adm. James C. Irwin of the Coast Guard.
That command seeks drugs coming in by sea and air via the Caribbean and the Gulf
of Mexico.

A similar task force in Oakland, Calif., headed by Rear Adm. William P. Leahy
Jr. of the Coast Guard, monitors drug traffic in the Pacific. The newest task
force, the one that coordinates military activity along the Southwest border, is
at Fort Sam Houston, Tex., under Lieut. Gen. George R. Stotser of the Army.

The task force headquarters plan and coordinate military countering operations
with the headquarters for Operation Alliance in El Paso, where plans to seal
borders to drugs are drawn up by officers of the Immigration and Naturalization
Service, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Customs Service, the Border
Patrol and sheriffs' departments.

Services' Change of Heart

In mid-September, after President Bush announced his national drug strategy, he
ordered major military commands to draw up plans to help stem the flow in the
countries that are the sources of the drugs - and along the transit routes from
those countries to their markets here.

The military plans, requested by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and including
proposals on intelligence collection, electronic surveillance with early-warning
aircraft and logistic and operational support to Colombia, Peru and Bolivia,
were submitted to the Pentagon in mid-October.

The services, at first reluctant to become involved, are now willing
participants, providing technical assistance to the three Andean Governments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Beijing Plan for Hong Kong Dims Hopes for a Democracy

BYLINE: By STEVEN PROKESCH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Dec. 15


Hong Kong's hopes to establish a democratic government after it reverts to
Beijing's authority were diminished today when China declared that only
one-third of the post-1997 legislature would be directly elected.

The British Government reacted calmly to the report on the decision by the
China-dominated constitutional subcommittee, which is responsible for drafting
Hong Kong's future constitution. The 55-member committee made the announcement
in Canton, the southern Chinese city in Guangzhou province.

Quoting a Hong Kong member of the drafting committee, Reuters reported today
that the subcommittee would permit Hong Kong citizens to elect directly only 18
of the 60-members of the legislature.

Without being able to confirm the Reuters report, a British Foreign Office
spokesman said that even if it were true, it was only a preliminary
recommendation. He noted that there are five such subcommittees involved in the
drafting of the future constitution.

'A Preliminary View'

''This is a preliminary meeting, giving a preliminary view,'' the Foreign Office
spokesman said. As a result, the British Government did not see it as a cause
for deep concern, he said.

The most important recommendation would come from a meeting of the full drafting
committee, which is expected to take place in late January, he said. That
recommendation then goes to China's National People's Congress.

Currently, only 10 of the 58 members of Hong Kong's legislature are directly
elected. The rest are either appointed by the colonial government or by various
groups, like doctors, lawyers, teachers and the business community.

The Reuters report also said the subcommittee would recommend that the electoral
system remain largely as it is for 10 years after 1997.

Issue of Special Passports

Hong Kong leaders had hoped to increase significantly the portion of the
legislature that was directly elected.

Long a sensitive issue, the question of democracy under Chinese rule became a
highly emotional one on Hong Kong after China's violent suppression of student
demonstrations in China last spring.

Nervousness over Hong Kong's fate after China has resulted in a worrisome exodus
from Hong Kong. At least 45,000 people emigrated from Hong Kong last year, and
the number this year is expected to be at least as large.

Of Hong Kong's 5.7 million people, 3.25 million have special Hong Kong passports
that do not give them right to live permanently in Britain. The issue of how
many will get that right of abode has been a highly sensitive one in Britain and
Hong Kong. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher is expected to make a decision on
the number before Christmas.

She would like to grant enough to stanch the drain on educated, skilled and
professional people. The thinking is that if professionals and entrepreneurs
knew they could go to Britain if the Chinese became repressive, they would not
panic and leave now.

On the other hand, Britain is a crowded island, and many Britons adamantly
oppose letting in huge numbers of people from Hong Kong. Indeed, there were
reports in British newspapers today that Mrs. Thatcher would have to contend
with a revolt from the ranks of her Conservative Party if she introduces
legislation to let in 150,000.

Mrs. Thatcher's decision will come at a time when she is already having to
contend with criticism from abroad and discomfort at home over her Government's
decision to begin forcibly returning the boat people in Hong Kong to Vietnam.

The first 51 were flown to Hanoi on Tuesday, and as many as 40,000 of the 57,000
in detention camps in Hong Kong are expected to be returned eventually.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: As the residents of Hong Kong wrestle with an uncertain future,
Vietnamese refugees demonstrated about theirs. The first 51 boat people were
returned to Hanoi on Tuesday, and as many as 40,000 of the 57,000 in detention
camps are expected to be sent back. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Frederick Nolting Jr., U.S. Envoy To Saigon in 60's, Is Dead at 78

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 594 words


Frederick E. Nolting Jr., who was United States Ambassador to South Vietnam from
1961 to 1963, died on Thursday at the University of Virginia Medical Center in
Charlottesville, Va., a spokesman for the center said.

Mr. Nolting was 78 years old and lived on an estate near Charlottesville in
Albemarle County, Virginia.

The spokesman, Jeffrey N. Ware, said he was admitted to the hospital Nov. 13
suffering from heart problems and died of cardio-pulmonary arrest as a result of
an aneurism, or swelling, of his aortic artery.

President Kennedy named Mr. Nolting, a veteran diplomat, as Ambassador to Saigon
during the administration of Ngo Dinh Diem.

After taking up his duties, Mr. Nolting voiced the view that military efforts
against the Vietnamese Communist forces were more important than political
reforms. #1962 Speech Criticized In a 1962 speech in Saigon, he said, ''What a
marvelous transformation would take place in this country if all those who
criticize their government would decide to work with it and for it.''

The Asia expert Stanley Karnow, in his 1983 book ''Vietnam: A History,''
contended that the statement was ''an astonishing display of naivete'' and that
Mr. Nolting had carried out a policy of appeasing Mr. Diem.

Mr. Nolting's tour as Ambassador ended in August 1963. In a statement when he
left Saigon he praised what he called the progress made in South Vietnam in
agriculture, education, health and commerce and ''in the inculcation of
democratic principles.''

But critics have contended that Mr. Diem's authoritarianism undercut support for
his Government and therefore hampered efforts against the Communist forces.

Born in Richmond

Mr. Nolting was succeeded as Ambassador by Henry Cabot Lodge. Mr. Diem was
overthrown and slain in a coup mounted by South Vietnamese generals in 1963.

Frederick Ernest Nolting Jr. was born on Aug. 24, 1911, in Richmond to Fredrick
Ernest Nolting Sr. and Mary Buford Nolting. He grew up in Richmond and earned a
B.A. degree in History in 1933 from the University of Virginia, in
Charlottesville, where he went on to earn a master's degree and a doctorate in
philosophy. He earned a second master's degree in philosophy from Harvard.

After being a member of a Richmond investment concern and a Navy officer in
World War II, Mr. Nolting joined the State Department in 1946 and went on to be
special assistant to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles for mutual security
affairs.

Before he became Ambassador in Saigon, his other diplomatic assignments included
serving as deputy chief of the United State mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organiztion and to the Organization for European Economic Cooperation.

Retired From Service in 1964

He retired from the Foreign Service in 1964 with the rank of Career Minister,
was for some years an executive of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, based in
Paris and New York, and went on to hold teaching and administrative posts at the
University of Virginia. He retired there in 1982.

Mr. Nolting was the author of a 1988 book ''From Trust to Tragedy'' and a former
board chairman of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation.

He is survived by his wife, the former Olivia Lindsay Crumpler, whom he married
in 1940; four daughters, Molly Nolting Bruner and Jane Nolting Meniktos, both of
Charlottesville, Grace Lindsay Nolting of Columbia, Va., and Frances Nolting
Temple of Geneva, N.Y., and seven grandchildren.

A memorial service is to be held at 11 A.M. on Monday at Saint Paul's Church in
Ivy, Va., near Charlottesville.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Frederick Nolting Jr. (1963)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

East's Turn to West Puts Comecon in Peril

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1498 words

DATELINE: BUDAPEST


As the countries of Eastern Europe rush to strengthen their economic ties with
the West, Comecon, the trade organization that has been a pillar of the Soviet
bloc, is rapidly disintegrating, many Eastern European officials and economists
say.

Many economists say the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, as the group is
formally known, will soon become an empty shell. Others suggest that it could
survive, but only as a wholly different organization, one with much - perhaps
most - of its trade in hard currency. Hungary has recently suggested to the
Soviet Union that the two nations carry out their trade in dollars instead of
rubles. [In the Soviet Union's Congress of People's Deputies in Moscow on
Wednesday, Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov called for trade at world market
prices by 1991.] In recent years, the cracks within the 10-nation system have
become glaring. But in 1989, as a result of the Soviet Union's economic
troubles, the increased independence of Eastern Europe, and the region's growing
desire to trade for hard currency, Comecon has fallen into crisis.

'Decline Has Become Visible'

''It has ceased to be a functioning organization,'' said Laszlo Lang, deputy
director of the Hungarian Institute for Foreign Relations. ''Its decline has
become visible and open.''

Founded with great fanfare in 1949 with the professed aim of promoting
multilateral cooperation to make the Soviet bloc the industrial equal of the
capitalist West, Comecon did foster development of heavy industry like steel and
machine tools in its first two decades. But now it is little more than an
umbrella for the Soviet Union to make bilateral trade agreements, usually
involving primitive barter, with its Eastern European partners.

Indeed, last year, as trade worldwide rose by a buoyant 8.5 percent, trade among
the Comecon partners, constrained by five-year plans and bilateral annual pacts,
was stagnant. Meanwhile, Soviet exports to Eastern Europe are expected to drop
for the third year in a row, and Polish and Hungarian officials are predicting
that their trade with the Soviet Union could fall by 5 percent or more this
year.

Eggs for Cosmetics

Miraculum, a Polish-Soviet cooperative venture that makes cosmetics, provides an
example of the primitive level to which Comecon trade has fallen. One recent
day, Tadeusz Jopek, general manager of the Cracow-based company, acknowledged
that in exchange for a cosmetics shipment to the Soviet Union, Miraculum was to
receive a truckload of eggs.

''You have to expect that in the coming year or two there could be a total
breakdown unless there is an adaption to a new form of trade,'' said Adam
Barszczewski, director of Comecon affairs for Poland's Ministry of Foreign
Trade.

Poland and Hungary are leading the drive to revamp the Comecon trading system so
that it would be based on hard currencies and market prices and not on barter,
nonconvertible currencies and artificial prices. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev
of the Soviet Union has also pressed to reform Comecon, calling it a ''garbage
can'' for backward products that cannot be sold to other countries. But some
economists say Comecon's arteries are so clogged that a rescue may be too late.

If Comecon exists in three or four years ''it will be a completely different
organization,'' said Andras Koves, an economist with the Institute for Economic
and Market Research in Budapest.

Little Incentive Seen

Many Eastern European industry executives say there is little incentive to
improve their products because production is sent to markets with little or no
competition and is often determined years in advance by Comecon agreements.
Indeed, some East bloc companies have two product lines, one of high quality for
export to the West, and an inferior line for Comecon.

A well-known story in Hungary concerns Ikarus, a bus manufacturer that asked
Soviet officials if they would want a new, improved generation of buses at a
slightly higher price. The hard-pressed Soviets rejected the idea, saying they
could muddle through with the older Ikarus buses.

The Hungarian Government is so dismayed with its ballooning trade surplus with
the Soviet Union - Hungary, like Czechoslovakia, expects a surplus of about $1
billion this year -that it imposes heavy financial penalties on companies that
increase their Soviet exports over last year's levels.

Envious of Rival's Growth

Comecon's sense of crisis is also fed by the envy that its members -East
Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Vietnam and
Mongolia, along with the Soviet Union and Cuba - feel toward the rapid
integration and growth of its rival trading bloc, the 12-nation European
Community.

''There is a possibility to rebuild Comecon, but my feeling is there is no need
to if we can enter into a common European home with the European Community,''
said Milos Zeman, an economist in Prague.

''The moment you start unveiling breathtaking economic reforms you see that the
Comecon structure is basically incompatible with a market economy,'' said Jan
Vanous, research director with PlanEcon, a Washington-based research group
specializing in centrally planned economies. ''What they have to put up with
would drive American managers nuts. Many Eastern European companies have to deal
with three different prices - one for their domestic market, one for the West
and one for Comecon nations.''

No Sense of Profit or Loss

In Comecon, the price of oil, cars and other goods is based, with a lot of
political negotiating thrown in, on a five-year rolling average of prices for
comparable items in the West. Government officials typically negotiate bilateral
trade agreements for hundreds of items; industry executives say they do not know
the value of what they are receiving in exchange for their exports. This, they
say, distorts their business - and any notion of economic efficiency - because
they have no idea whether they are making a profit or a loss on the transaction.

''The Comecon trade system reflects the 1950's system of central economic
control, where money and accounting had very little meaning,'' said Maria
Bogacka, a director of socialist bloc trade with the Polish Government.

One of the few remnants of mutual assistance within Comecon is financial
assistance to help build pipelines from the Soviet Union. Moscow has also used
Comecon to cement the bloc, seeking to foster dependence and loyalty by
providing assistance, often in the form of inexpensive oil and natural gas.

In exchange, Eastern European nations skewed their economies so that they
focused on exports to the Soviet Union to pay for those raw materials.
Czechoslovakia specialized in machinery, for example, while Hungary made buses
and shoes, and the Eastern bloc countries fell farther and farther behind on
crucial technologies like telecommunications and computers.

A Crisis for Exporters

But the disarray in the Soviet economy, brought about in part by the decline in
oil prices in recent years, has created a crisis for Eastern European exporters
who rely on the Soviet market. Ikarus, the Hungarian bus manufacturer, and Czech
machine tool manufacturers face cuts of some 20 percent in exports to the Soviet
Union.

That is one reason why many Eastern European countries are straining to sell
more to the West. Poland, East Germany and Hungary have huge hard-currency debts
and are eager to sell goods to hard-currency countries to help repay those
debts.

In addition, many government officials are pressing companies to sell more to
the West in the hope of upgrading efficiency, quality and product development.

Many Eastern European consumers are eager to buy from the West because of the
greater variety, quality and technological sophistication of its goods.

Many companies are working harder to meet domestic consumer needs, and thus are
placing less emphasis on Comecon exports. And managers at new enterprises being
formed as market-oriented economies replace centrally planned ones often
complain about Comecon's strictures.

'Transfer Rubles'

When Hungary sells more goods to the Soviet Union than it imports it receives
''transfer rubles'' in return. But Hungary cannot use these rubles, which are
merely a Comecon accounting unit, to buy ham from Poland or machinery from
Czechoslovakia.

''The transfer ruble is everything but transferable,'' said Mr. Koves, the
Hungarian economist.

Many economists say that in a few years trade could pick up in Eastern Europe,
irrespective of what happens to Comecon. And even as many Eastern European
nations loosen their political ties with Moscow, many see no reason to turn
their backs on trade with the Soviet Union.

''Why should we cut our trade with the Soviet Union, which is a huge market
hungry for our products?'' said Vladimir Dlouhy, an economist with the Economic
Forecasting Institute in Prague. ''The biggest shock for our people would be if
we lose the Soviet market.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tadeusz Jopek, general manager of Miraculum (NYT/Aleksander
Wiechowski)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Asks Hong Kong to Delay Deportations

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Dec. 16


United Nations refugee officials are asking Hong Kong not to forcibly return any
more boat people to Vietnam until an international meeting next month tries to
come up with a new approach to the problem.

But United Nations officials reject claims that the British colony's forced
repatriation of 51 boat people on Tuesday violated international law regarding
refugees.

''The 51 who were sent back were determined by the Hong Kong authorities as well
as us to be non-refugees,'' said Raymond Hall, a spokesman for the office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. ''There was no question of a
violation of refugee law in that case.''

The meeting in Geneva on Jan. 18 and 19 is to be attended by representatives of
more than 25 nations, including the United States, Vietnam, Britain and
Southeast Asian countries. They make up a panel named at an international
conference here in June to seek a new strategy to resolve the problem of the
boat people.

The committee has been deadlocked since its establishment, largely because of
United States opposition to forced returns. Britain, which says the forced
repatriations have been temporarily suspended, insists that the colony has no
choice but to carry them out.

At the June conference it was unanimously agreed that the Vietnamese should be
screened and that those determined to be economic migrants and not legitimate
political refugees should return to Vietnam. Those at the meeting agreed that
refugees should be persuaded to return ''voluntarily.'' But participants could
only agree to a vaguely worded proposition that ''alternative'' solutions should
be found if voluntary repatriation did not work ''after a reasonable period of
time.'' Amnesty International and other human rights groups have protested that
the deportations should end because screening is not done fairly. United Nations
officials share some complaints about the speed of the procedure and the quality
of language interpretation for the Vietnamese.

But they say Hong Kong officials have been improving the screening process. ''We
have safeguards in Hong Kong which don't necessarily exist in other countries,''
said Dennis McNamara, deputy director of refugee law and doctrine at the High
Commissioner's office.

Under an agreement with the British colony, the High Commissioner's office has
played a large role in screening the boat people.

The United Nations criteria are based on a 1951 refugee convention that defines
a refugee as anyone outside his or her country who has ''a well-founded fear of
persecution'' on political, ethnic, religious or other grounds.

Cases Subject to Review

The United Nations has about 20 lawyers stationed in Hong Kong monitoring the
screening and intends soon to increase the number to 35. Under an agreement with
the British colony, the High Commissioner's office may review the cases of all
Vietnamese determined by Hong Kong to be non-refugees.

Whenever United Nations officials believe a determination is mistaken, they have
the right to change that person's status to that of a refugee. Hong Kong is
allowing those determined to be refugees to remain on its territory until they
are resettled by a country of permanent asylum. About 8,000 of the nearly 57,000
boat people in Hong Kong have been screened so far, according to the High
Commissioner's office. Eight hundred forty-one were granted refugee status by
Hong Kong officials, and another 65 by United Nations refugee officials.

Although the repatriations have been suspended by Britain, Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher has defended the practice and said it will continue.

British officials have accused the United States of hypocrisy on the issue. In
November, after a meeting with President Bush, Mrs. Thatcher pointed to the
United States policy of intercepting boats filled with Haitian asylum-seekers
and forcing them back to Haiti.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Protests Over Boat People

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 308 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 16


Vietnam opposes the forced return of boat people who sought refuge in Hong Kong
and reserves the right to send them back to the British colony, the official
Hanoi press agency said.

The agency said on Friday that a Foreign Ministry official delivered a note on
Vietnam's position regarding the boat people to Emrys Davies, Britain's
Ambassador in Hanoi.

A Foreign Office spokesman in London said today that Britain would not comment
because it had not received confirmation of what the note said.

First Group Accepted

A group of 51 Vietnamese was flown from Hong Kong to Hanoi on Tuesday in the
first forced repatriation.

The Vietnamese authorities accepted the group and said the refugees would not be
mistreated, but officials also criticized the forced repatriation program.

According to the agency, the Foreign Ministry note strongly rejected forced
repatriation and said Vietnam would only accept ''those who volunteer to return
or who are not opposed to the repatriation.''

It said the ministry official cautioned Ambassador Davies that ''any violation
of these principles may hamper and even completely disrupt the process of
cooperation to resolve this problem step by step'' as agreed to at a conference
on Indochinese refugees held in Geneva in June.

Reserves Right to Return Them

According to the agency, the ministry official said that ''if Vietnam discovers
any case of 'forced repatriation,' it reserves the right to return them to Hong
Kong.''

Many of the 44,000 Vietnamese who have sailed into Hong Kong since June 1988 are
considered illegal ''economic migrants'' unless they can prove they fled their
Communist homeland to escape persecution.

Thousands have demonstrated to protest the decision by Britain and its colony to
force the return of the refugees, a decision criticized by the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DIPLOMATS STEP UP DRIVE IN CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Dec. 16


With warfare continuing inside Cambodia after the announced departure of
Vietnamese troops, diplomatic activity to resolve the war is increasing again,
with a senior Australian Foreign Ministry official arriving here on Sunday and a
Soviet delegation expected next week.

As the main diplomatic and military supporter of the Communist Khmer Rouge
guerrillas and the country most opposed to any negotiated solution that cuts
them out, China is regarded as the most crucial actor in resolving the
stalemate.

It was partly because of China's importance in the search for a Cambodian
solution that Washington last weekend ended a suspension on high-level contacts
with Beijing, imposed over the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June.
Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, to meet with senior Chinese
officials here.

China's proposal for an interim government in Cambodia that includes the Khmer
Rouge with the other warring factions has been opposed by the Soviet Union,
Vietnam and their ally, the Phnom Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen.

The United States and many other countries have also opposed a return to power
by the Khmer Rouge, the strongest Cambodian guerrilla faction, under whose
brutal rule a million Cambodians died in the 1970's.

But Washington supports Prince Norodom Sihanouk, leader of one of the two
non-Communist factions in an uneasy coalition with the Khmer Rouge, even though
the Prince has called for Khmer Rouge participation in an interim government.
The United States has backed Chinese policy for a decade as the best way to
force a Vietnam pullout.

The Australian Proposal

While China has given no indication it is prepared to alter its position, an
Australian proposal for a United Nations trusteeship over Cambodia to prepare
for new elections, making a four-party interim government unnecessary, has drawn
increasing interest from other parties.

At the request of the Australians, the Chinese have agreed to welcome Michael
Costello, deputy secretary in the Australian Foreign Ministry, who arrives on
Sunday for two days of talks. A Soviet Embassy spokesman, Yuri Lysenko, said
today that Valentin Falin, head of the international relations department of the
Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, is expected here, probably on
Dec. 23.

While the Soviet group is formally reciprocating for a Chinese delegation that
went to Moscow in October, Eastern bloc diplomats said Mr. Falin is sure to
bring up Cambodia.

Responding to international concern about the Khmer Rouge, the Australian
Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth Evans, proposed on Nov. 24 that the United
Nations run Cambodia on an interim basis, insure that all Vietnamese troops had
left, monitor and enforce a cease-fire and organize free elections for a new
government.

Australian Idea Welcomed

All four Cambodian factions - the Phnom Penh Government and the coalition
opposing it, made up of the Khmer Rouge and the followers of Prince Sihanouk and
former Prime Minister Son Sann - would be allowed to participate in the
elections and would agree to abide by their results. Few expect the Khmer Rouge
to get more than 5 or 10 percent of the votes, a showing not likely to be enough
to allow the faction to have a coalition part.

While many also expect the Khmer Rouge to continue to wage war after an
election, it would be isolated, and China would be more likely to cut off its
supply of arms.

Both Moscow and Hanoi have welcomed the Australian idea. Last week in Hanoi, Ho
The Lan, a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, said the Australian proposal ''is worth
considering seriously.'' In Phnom Penh on Tuesday, according to the official
Cambodian radio, Igor Rogachev, the Soviet deputy foreign minister for Asia,
said an interim United Nations authority in Cambodia should be discussed.

U.N. Rule Envisioned

While Mr. Hun Sen seems unwilling to dismantle his Government, Australia
envisions the United Nations administering Cambodia.

The Hun Sen Government was installed by the Vietnamese, whose invasion in late
1978 had driven out the Khmer Rouge.

Previously, Mr. Hun Sen had ruled out any formal role for the United Nations,
because Cambodia's seat in the organization is still held by the Khmer Rouge and
its coalition partners. Australia envisions the seat as vacant under the United
Nations trusteeship, a suggestion that is bound to have attracted Mr. Hun Sen.

Prince Sihanouk, himself the object of Western criticism for his alliance with
the Khmer Rouge, has given his own nod to the Australian proposal as an
alternative to China's. But in an interview he said he would be prepared to
declare Cambodia's seat vacant only if Mr. Hun Sen agreed to dismantle his
Government and administration in favor of a United Nations trusteeship. The
exiled coalition government led by the Prince and holding the seat would also
agree to disband, he said.

But both China and the Khmer Rouge oppose the Australian initiative, the Prince
said, and still favor a four-party interim government in which the Khmer Rouge
would play a role.

So China's attitudes are crucial. If Beijing, largely isolated after the June
crackdown, is prepared to move away from the Khmer Rouge is unclear.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Misery Replaces Hope in a Battered Afghanistan

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2587 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


As a volley of guerrilla rockets pounded the airport in the Afghan capital on a
bitterly cold December day, a conscript in the Government army standing sentry
near the runway laid down his Kalashnikov rifle, spread a blanket on the ground,
and prostrated himself in prayer.

In the 12th winter of their war, the Muslim faith is all that many Afghans have
left to sustain their battered morale. Hopes for peace that flickered when
Soviet troops withdrew from the conflict in February have dimmed, replaced by
fears that the killing will go on indefinitely.

Since they defied predictions of an early collapse by fighting off a rebel
attack on Jalalabad in March, Government forces have proven repeatedly that they
can withstand the heaviest attacks that the rebels can mount.

Rebels Gain Little Ground

Sustained by the planeloads of Soviet weapons that pour into Kabul daily,
Government troops have fought off rebel pressures at Charikar, Ghazni, Kabul,
Kandahar, Khost and Herat, denying the rebels control of any major center that
they did not already hold when Soviet forces withdrew.

As the war goes on, prospects for peace seem dependent on how soon negotiations
between the two sides, with the United States, Pakistan and the Soviet Union
also involved, can lead to the removal of the Kabul leader, President
Najibullah.

The United States insists that he must go; the Soviet Union has demanded that he
stay until the establishment of a coalition government with the rebels. Reports
persist that Washington and Moscow are considering bringing the deposed King,
Mohammed Zahir Shah, into the negotiations, if not into the new political
structure of the country.

Each day, new victims have joined the 1.3-million civilians estimated to have
died since the Communists seized power in 1978. In Kabul alone, perhaps as many
as 1,000 people have been killed since January by powerful American-supplied
rockets that the guerrillas fire into residential areas from mountain redoubts.
In Jalalabad and other cities, officials cite similar casualties among the
civilian population.

Poor Prospects for Peace

While no count is kept of noncombatants killed by the Government's Scud-B
missiles, a Soviet battlefield weapon with a one-ton warhead, more than 1,000 of
the missiles have been fired from Kabul this year. as well as from a new missile
base in the northern stronghold of Mazar-i-Sharif. Reports of accidental strikes
on villages and other civilian targets abound.

Compounding the misery now that winter has returned, food is scarce and so is
fuel. In Kabul, where temperatures from December through February can plunge to
20 degrees below zero, many families, including thousands of rural refugees
living in hillside shanties, face nights without heat and days standing in
bakery lines for portions of nan, the bread that is the staple of the Afghan
diet.

Hospitals are filled to the corridors with civilian wounded, and war widows with
children beg in every bazaar. On many streets, men, women and children can be
seen hopping on homemade crutches, limbless from the blasts of war.

But for many Afghans, the bitterest thing is the sense that prospects for peace
are slipping away. In nine months of reporting on the war from the Government
and rebel sides, this reporter has had hardly a day without being approached in
bazaars and mosques and military encampments by people eager for news that might
indicate that an end to the killing could be near.

''What do you bring us?'' a bearded old man shouted in the forecourt of the
Pul-i-Heshti mosque, Kabul's largest, after a recent session of Friday prayers.
Asked what he meant, the worshipper replied: ''I want to know, what is the
chance for peace?'' The Government View Plotting a Future: What of Najibullah?

The question reflected a feeling that the war can end only when there is a major
push by the United States and the Soviet Union. Early this month, as President
Bush met Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Malta, thousands in Kabul rose before dawn to
hear the short-wave news broadcasts that ''Voice of America'' and the British
Broadcasting Corporation relay in Persian and Pashto, Afghanistan's principal
languages, hopeful that the meeting would in some way ease the diplomatic
deadlock that has developed over the war.

But the broadcasts reaching Kabul made virtually no mention of Afghanistan,
leaving many Afghans with the sense that they have been overlooked in the
superpowers' haste to dismantle confrontations elsewhere.

''We have become a relic of the cold war,'' Abdul Wakil, Kabul's Foreign
Minister, said in an interview. ''Everywhere else, peace is breaking out. Only
in Afghanistan must we have war.''

American policy makers have said that the country may have to go through at
least one more ''season'' of fighting, meaning until the end of 1990. By that,
the officials seem to mean not that the rebels are likely to win the war
outright, but that it may take a year or more to secure the condition that
Washington and the rebels have set for negotiations - the removal of the
43-year-old Kabul leader, President Najibullah, and of some of his top
associates.

Fear of the Secret Police

Among rebel leaders, they are held responsible for the war, and for their
alleged involvement, particularly that of Mr. Najibullah, who headed the secret
police from 1980 to 1986, in the killing of thousands of people in Kabul's
interrogation centers and prisons.

Mr. Najibullah has said that nothing he may have done is any worse than the
rebels' excesses, and he has set out to cultivate a new, affable image, saying
that there were ''big mistakes'' in the past, that Marxism was a mistake, and
hinting that he was opposed to the Soviet military intervention.

But memories are kept alive by the still-pervasive power of the secret police.
Their unmarked vehicles still roar through Kabul's dusty streets, bearing
grim-faced men in khaki uniforms without insignia. Nor has the fear of brutality
been erased.

An official contemplating defection was asked why he delayed. He said that he
had heard of another Government official who quit his job this summer in
protest. ''Some men came to his door, asked his son to fetch him, and shot him
in the face,'' he said.

For now, top officials emphatically reject the rebel leaders' proposal that Mr.
Najibullah give way to a new Kabul government headed by ''good Muslims''
associated with the current Government, but not linked to past excesses. Mr.
Wakil, the Foreign Minister, said the United States, by backing a demand it knew
would not be accepted, was disguising that what it really sought was a rebel
military victory.

''They want revenge on the Soviet Union for Vietnam,'' he said. ''Their side was
totally defeated in Saigon, so they want our side to be totally defeated here.''
The Soviet View Kremlin Questions, And Coup Attempts In practice, the position
may not be so fixed. For one thing, there are indications that Mr. Najibullah
has escaped at least two coup attempts this year. A senior general in one of the
Kabul Government's provincial commands, killed within the last month by a rebel
mine, told a Western reporter not long before he died that Mr. Najibullah had a
narrow escape in April when a plot by Government troops to turn guns on him
during the annual Revolution Day parade was uncovered. At the last minute, the
general said, the parade was moved up a day, to April 26, and the plotters were
arrested.

In July, another coup attempt apparently was foiled, that one reportedly
involving the Defense Minister, Col. Gen. Shanawaz Tanai. The same general who
told of the April plot said that General Tanai and other members of the
governing party's hard-line wing had conspired to overthrow Mr. Najibullah.

According to that account, the Defense Minister and other plotters were jailed,
but were released after the Soviet Ambassador in Kabul, Yuli M. Vorontsov, since
recalled to Moscow, visited Mr. Najibullah in the Arg-i-Shahi palace and
demanded their reinstatement.

Soon after, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, made a hasty,
heavily guarded visit to the Afghan capital, ostensibly to reassure Mr.
Najibullah of Moscow's support.

But according to a Government official, Mr. Shevardnadze's secret task was to
impress on the feuding camps that the Kremlin would cut off the $250 million in
arms that Moscow is airlifting to Kabul each month if the factionalism was not
suppressed. By that account, Mr. Najibullah, General Tanai and other top
officials involved were required to shake hands in Mr. Shevardnadze's presence
and renounce any further plots.

A Nightmare for the Kremlin

Since July, little has been heard of General Tanai as Defense Minister, and Mr.
Najibullah has been put under tighter security than ever. Mostly, he moves
outside the palace only during the nightly curfew, in an armored Mercedes-Benz
supplied by the Soviet Union. Bodyguards with machine guns, dressed in Soviet
paratroop fatigues, surround him wherever he goes.

For the Kremlin, finding a safe footing in this quagmire has been a nightmare.
On the record, Soviet officials in Kabul, like Boris N. Pastukhov, the new
Ambassador, insist that Mr. Najibullah will be supported as long as it takes to
get the kind of settlement Moscow has proposed, which would include the
provisions for a coalition government, to be followed by elections under United
Nations supervision.

But a senior Kabul official traveling abroad within the last week told
associates recently that Mr. Najibullah has had several secret meetings in
Moscow this year with Mr. Gorbachev, involving 24-hour round trips aboard Soviet
military planes, and that on a recent visit the Soviet leader asked him to sign
a statement affirming that his Government would quit once an outline settlement
is worked out.

The story implied that the Kremlin may no longer be asking whether Mr.
Najibullah should be replaced, but how. If so, the time may be approaching when
Mr. Najibullah's pledges on the subject will be tested.

''Give me a guarantee of peace, then, if Najibullah is the problem, I will step
aside,'' he said in an interview in June. If there has been skepticism about the
pledge, it is partly because the personal costs seem likely to be high. To
assure his safety, and that of his wife and two daughters, it seems almost
certain that any deal that takes Mr. Najibullah out of the palace will carry him
to exile in the Soviet Union. The Rebel View Feuding, Disarray, A Turn to Opium
The factionalism is no less acute on the other side of the war. In recent
months, so much of the rebel groups' energies have been expended in fighting
among themselves that outsiders have been left to wonder if anything united them
other than their resolve to rid Afghanistan of Soviet troops.

Instead of the common front that the United States and Pakistan hoped to forge
in February when they pressured the seven Pakistan-based rebel parties into
establishing a provisional government, the main rebel groups - in addition to
the Pakistan-based groups, there are eight smaller parties based in Iran - have
resorted to what has often seemed like a full-scale war of their own.

Some of the bitterest fighting has involved battles between two rebel groups
that gained staunch reputations for their effectiveness against Soviet troops,
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's faction of the Islamic Party, and the Islamic Society, led
by Burnahuddin Rabbani.

In widely separated regions of the country, the two groups have traded ambushes,
and killed some of each others' most experienced field commanders. In Peshawar,
the Pakistan city that serves as the main rebel headquarters, a new round of
political assassinations has swept through rebel ranks, with prominent figures
machine-gunned in rickshaws, bombed in their cars, or shot in the head and
dumped into the city's canals.

Rebels Turn to Opium Trade

Elsewhere, other rebel groups have virtually given up fighting, either because
they have made deals with Mr. Najibullah, they want to save their weapons for
the power struggle that many foresee when the Kabul Government collapses, or
because they have found more promising enterprises.

Among those is a flourishing trade in opium. At least 700 tons of opium were
exported from rebel-controlled areas of Afghanistan last year, making the
country the world's second-largest source of the raw material that is processed
into heroin, after the ''golden triangle'' of Southeast Asia.

In one region, around the old royal city of Kandahar, the Government and one of
the main rebel groups, Ahmad Gailani's National Islamic Front of Afghanistan,
have arranged a truce.

In the face of bitter opposition from other rebel groups, which continue to
bombard the city and to attack Government convoys, Mr. Gailani's men move freely
in and out of the city, leaving their weapons at Government checkpoints on the
way in and collecting them as they depart.

The Government commander, Lieut. Gen. Nurul Haq Ullumi, a graduate of American
and Soviet military training schools, meets regularly with Gailani commanders in
his office in what was once the King's palace, and holds banquets in their
honor.

''Here, the war is all but over,'' the general, a man of 46 who is often talked
about as an interim successor to Mr. Najibullah, told a recent visitor.

Role for the Afghan King

What appears to have brought General Ullumi and his rebel associates together is
a common link, as members of the Durrani aristocracy that has provided
Afghanistan with its kings, to the exiled monarch, Mohammed Zahir Shah. In that
sense, what they have worked out is a local anomaly, since Kandahar has long
been a royal stronghold. But recently, the Kandahar arrangements have come to be
seen as a prototype for something broader.

That the Soviet Union is interested seemed clear when Mr. Shevardnadze broke
away from an official visit to Italy with Mr. Gorbachev that preceded the Malta
summit to meet with the 75-year-old King, who lives in Rome on a generous
stipend from the Saudi royal family.

Mr. Najibullah has repeatedly invited the King, who reigned for 40 years before
his overthrow in 1973, to play a role in ending the war, and the King has said
that he is willing if he can be convinced that there is broad enough support.

In the bazaars of Kabul, Kandahar and Herat, interviews with merchants and their
customers in recent months indicated vigorous support for the return of the
King, if only from nostalgia for a time when the country was at peace. But apart
from Mr. Gailani's group, most of the rebels have been unenthusiastic, and one
faction, Mr. Hekmatyar's, has opposed the idea to the point of assassinating
Peshawar-based royalists who have pressed for the restoration.

For now, most diplomats who have followed the war see little prospect of an
early return to peace, under the King or anybody else. Even the removal of Mr.
Najibullah, a point on which there appears to be the widest agreement, might not
bring peace closer, since it could be the prelude to new and still more complex
strife in which the Kabul Government could split into warring factions, taking
with it any semblance of central authority.

One Westerner who has watched events here for nearly 30 years sees that as the
final tragedy of the war.

''Afghanistan has already ceased to exist, in the sense of a country that
anybody governs,'' he said. ''And whatever happens now, it will not rise again
for a very long time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Afghan rebels in Jalalabad (Reflex/David Stewart-Smith);
President Najibullah (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lifestyle;
Little Pigs On Move From Sty To Parlor

BYLINE: By JED STEVENSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 77, Column 4; Style Desk

LENGTH: 687 words


Llamas and boas, ferrets and parrots have led the exotic pet parade in years
past. The latest status symbol is a miniature pig that stands 14 to 18 inches
high and weighs about 40 pounds.

The Vietnamese potbellied pig is the smallest of several breeds of miniatures
that are native to Asia and are regarded as a delicacy there. In this country,
where the pig is a novelty priced at $5,000 to $7,500 for a mature sow and
$1,500 for a neutered boar, owners are not likely to turn them into pork chops.

For those who have always wanted to own a pig but do not have a sty to call
their own, the potbellied pigs may be appealing as household pets. Although they
have been touted as an apartment-size pet, they are illegal in New York City and
other municipalities. The pigs are black, sometimes with white markings, and
have a straight tail. They are said to be quite affectionate and combine some of
the best qualities of the dog and cat.

It has long been known that pigs rank high on the intelligence scale of the
animal kingdom, and breeders and owners of the potbellied strain say the animals
can be taught to use a litter box and will easily learn every trick or command
commonly taught to dogs. ''Once I found out that my pig loved peanuts, I taught
him how to sit up and beg in 20 minutes,'' said Vicki Adams, a breeder in
Franklinton, N.C.

Bad Habit: Rooting

Breeders and owners say they have taught the pigs to walk on hind legs, and they
tell stories of skateboarding and piano-playing pigs.

Fans of the potbellies cite other advantages of the pigs as pets: they are
clean; they have hair, not fur, and so do not cause allergic reactions in
people, and they are unaffected by most diseases of cats and dogs. However, they
are subject to all swine diseases and should be vaccinated if they will be
exposed to other pigs.

Another drawback: They root around, shoveling their noses into and under
anything that may hold food. Usually the rooting is done outdoors, and the habit
can play havoc with a well-manicured lawn. And then, of course, the pigs are,
well, pigs.

Leilani Appleyard of Rochester has owned her Vietnamese potbellied sow, Gretel,
for almost two years. She said that around food the pig is incorrigible, eating
peanut butter, birdseed, chocolate - anything. ''She got stuck in a window well
trying to eat the birdseed from our window feeder,'' Mrs. Appleyard said.

Gretel, who now weighs 110 pounds, is on a diet. Breeders agree that many of the
potbellieds, especially sows, will grow to 130 pounds or more if not kept on a
strict diet. The pigs got their name, it is said, because the bellies of sows
have been known to drag on the ground.

Another point to ponder: This will not be a short-lived relationship. Potbellied
pigs have a lifespan of 20 to 35 years. Urban Pigs? Betty Beeman at the
Potbellied Pig Registry Service, an Indiana organization that registers purebred
pigs and recommends breeders with pigs for sale, said there are more than 3,000
of the Vietnamese pigs and piglets in the United States. The pigs originally
were imported from Vietnam to Canada, and then to the United States, as
scientific specimens. The original group of 13 has been supplemented in the past
year by 63 others, Ms. Beeman said. Some of the pigs were bred with larger
breeds, resulting in the potbellied strain.

Dr. Stephen Zawistowski, science adviser for the A.S.P.C.A. in New York City,
takes a dim view of farm animals as household pets. Dr. Zawistowski, who lives
with an 11-year-old mixed-breed dog, a turtle, a rabbit, a mouse, several
parakeets and goldfish, said the average person is not prepared to care for a
pig, and the average city veterinarian is not trained to deal with pig diseases.
Piglets have occasionally been given as gag gifts in Manhattan, only to be taken
to the animal shelter when they grew too large, he said.

Vietnamese pigs are fine for someone who is familiar with pigs, is willing to
care for one for 30 years and has a three- or four-acre backyard for the pigs to
root in, Dr. Zawistowski said. To help put it into perspective, he added, ''They
are swine.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Shannon Adams of Franklinton, N.C., with Scarlett, a Vietnamese
potbellied pig. The family pet has been taught to sit up and beg (The New York
Times/Bob Bridges)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ron Kovic Today: Warrior at Peace

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 573 words


''It was an incredible experience,'' Ron Kovic said of watching Tom Cruise
portray him on the set of ''Born on the Fourth of July'' in Dallas last year.
''I was looking at myself live through the most difficult periods of my life. I
was forced to deal with the reality of the hell that I had lived through in a
way that I never dealt with it before.''

''Born on the Fourth of July'' is based on Mr. Kovic's autobiography of the same
title, published in 1976. The author also shares the credits with Oliver Stone,
the director, for the film's screenplay.

For some, reliving such experiences might only reopen old wounds; but for Mr.
Kovic, now 43 years old, it proved cathartic. ''The movie has helped me make
sense of my life,'' he said.

In a 90-minute telephone conversation with a reporter who knew him when Mr.
Kovic lived on Long Island, Mr. Kovic said: ''Soon after the book came out in
'76, I got a call from my agent in New York who said that there was a production
company interested in making a movie out of 'Born on the Fourth of July.'

''Everything was set, and then, with four days to go before filming, the movie
was canceled. I think it was because they couldn't raise the money.

''I was brokenhearted. I knew that a movie would really be able to reach people
who would not pick up my book. I decided to go and see friends in California;
and there, in a sidewalk cafe in Venice, I met Oliver Stone. He was a nobody
then. I mean, he had just completed 'Midnight Express,' but nobody knew what a
genius he was.

''I told Oliver what had happened with the movie, and he said, 'Ron, if I ever
break through, I'll come back for you.' ''

What followed for Ron Kovic were, as he put it, almost 10 years of ''wandering
and drifting.''

''Every time my monthly compensation check came in, I was on a jet,'' he said.
He lived in cheap hotels and in the extra rooms of friends' homes, but never, he
said, for longer than six months in any one place. During this time, he began
novels and plays, sometimes working in manic spurts of energy that kept him
awake for days on end.

In 1986, he said, his anguish and frenzied life style caught up with him. He
fell ill with a high fever and a bladder infection that kept him hospitalized
for several months. He was released around the time of his 40th birthday and
decided to ''stop running and put down roots.''

Mr. Kovic purchased a small three-bedroom ranch house with a big back yard in
Los Angeles. ''It's very simple,'' he said of the house. ''It is an old
remodeled Levitt-type house on a quiet street, vaguely similar to Toronto Avenue
in Massapequa, where we grew up. ''It was the beginning of the healing
process,'' he said.  But he didn't sit still for long. ''I bought a piano and
began to play. I started painting in acrylics on 40-foot canvases five feet
high. I would drag the canvas across the picnic table in my backyard and, a la
Jackson Pollock, I'd create these brightly colored, celebratory, expressionistic
pieces.''

He spent hours in his garden, planting tomatoes and zucchini and roses. ''I
lived very privately, alone, by myself. I had friends, but they respected my
privacy.''

A year after Ron Kovic moved into his house, he got a call from Oliver Stone,
who by this time had won an Academy Award for another Vietnam movie,
''Platoon.''

''Oliver said just three words. And since then, nothing's really been the same.
He said, 'Ronnie, I'm ready.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ron Kovic on a California beach near his house last week (Outline
Press/Neal Preston)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Heroes of 'Glory' Fought Bigotry Before All Else

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2127 words


The history books show a certain Col. James Montgomery, who commanded a black
Civil War regiment in the vicinity of Charleston, talking about his soldiers in
a particularly instructive way.

''I was the first person in the country to employ nigger soldiers in the United
States Army,'' said the colonel, who once owned slaves in Kentucky. His choice
of words makes it seem as though he was addressing a convention of Confederate
rednecks. In fact, this officer of the Republic was giving his considered
opinion to members of a regiment of black troops, the same black troops who are
depicted in the movie ''Glory,'' which opened in New York last week. The black
regiment, the 54th of Massachusetts, had just suffered horrific losses in a
brave, futile frontal assault on Fort Wagner, an episode that forms the climax
of the film. But the movie does not include what Colonel Montgomery later had to
say about their performance.

''You have not proved yourself as soldiers,'' he said, apparently ignoring the
fact that the men had stood their ground under withering enemy fire. ''I've had
a lot of niggers and a lot of mules,'' he said, ''and you know a nigger and a
mule go very well together.''

There is no indication of the reaction of the black soldiers to this remarkably
offensive speech, which is recounted in ''One Gallant Rush,'' by Peter Burchard,
one of the major sources of historical information for the film. But whatever
their reaction, Colonel Montgomery, who is depicted in ''Glory'' undertaking a
different but equally heinous action - putting a harmless Southern town to the
torch - is a useful reminder of the spiritual background of the film and
therefore of much of the historic meaning of the events it shows.

''Glory,'' directed by Edward Zwick, the creator of the popular television
series ''Thirtysomething,'' and starring Matthew Broderick, Denzel Washington
and Morgan Freeman, tells the story of one of the black regiments that fought
against the Confederacy in the Civil War. Based on information in books by Mr.
Burchard and Lincoln Kirstein as well as on Harvard University's collection of
the letters of Robert Gould Shaw, the regiment's commanding officer, it is a
refreshing, rare example wherein a Hollywood film tells a good story while
remaining true to the actual events of history.

The regiment was organized by abolitionists in Massachusetts and commanded by
the 26-year-old Shaw (Mr. Broderick's role), who was the son of one of them.
Some of the impetus for its formation came from Frederick Douglass, the black
leader, whose two sons volunteered to serve in it. Douglass believed that blacks
should be involved in a fight that was, at least in part, for their own freedom.
Abolitionists, like John Albion Andrew, Governor of Massachusetts, believed that
the regiment would be a step toward a wider acceptance of blacks by whites, a
proof of their claim on full citizenship in the America of just a few months
after the Emancipation Proclamation.

In depicting these little-known events, ''Glory'' serves as a reminder of what
America was like in those days and of where so many of the problems we still
live with today originated. The movie focuses on the experience of the regiment
itself, concluding with its brave, nearly suicidal assault on Fort Wagner. It
also sketches in the background of doubt and even consternation in the dominant
white society, which quite simply believed that blacks were not equal to whites
and would probably cut and run at the first flash of musket fire from the enemy.

The theme of ''Glory'' then is the struggle of a group of black men, fully aware
of the contemptible attitudes that surrounded them, to prove themselves as good
as whites. Both in the film and in history, when the men of the 54th
Massachusetts stood their ground, there should no longer have been any doubt
about their bravery or their patriotism, or, indeed, about their contribution to
the Union victory, given that 10 percent of the Union Army, some 180,000 men,
was black. ''Glory,'' the movie, promises to rescue for the large public that
goes to the movies an almost lost lesson in American history.

In many respects, ''Glory'' marks a return to an earlier conception of
movie-making about war. It is a large-scale panorama with a cast of literally
thousands depicting battle as the supreme test of manhood. This alone is a
change. For several years now, as the movies have focused on the Vietnam War,
combat has come to be portrayed as destructive not only of life and limb (which
obviously it always is) but also of personal values, morals and the very spirit
of comradeship. The battlefield in the Vietnam War movies is pictured as a place
where the conflicts among soldiers on the same side go from bad to worse and the
spirit of brotherhood dissolves in the general horror.

In ''Glory'' war is clearly hell. The battle scenes of this movie seem
graphically true to a historical reality, reflected in a simple statistic. Some
700,000 soldiers died in the Civil War, more than half the total number of
deaths, 1.2 million, suffered in all of the wars of the United States combined.
Half a dozen or so major battles during the Civil War produced casualty rates in
the vicinity of 20 percent, a massacre by today's standards. Nonetheless, the
battlefield in ''Glory'' is presented as an arena wherein individual men come to
have respect for one another. War is a place of ultimate questions and ultimate
confrontations that both destroy men and forge brotherhood among them.

In this respect, ''Glory'' follows a plot commonly used in World War II movies.
A group of recruits, fallible, flawed, frightened men, come together and mold
themselves into soldiers; they fight among themselves and with the fears that
haunt them, with weakness and exhaustion and the humiliating treatment of the
drill sergeants, and, in the end, they emerge spiritually whole, mature, having
conquered the smallness within. Among them, in ''Glory,'' is Trip, played by
Denzel Washington, who seems at moments to be a somewhat back-dated Black
Panther, full of cynicism and rage at the living insult of history. There is
Rawlins (Morgan Freeman's character), who starts as a gravedigger and becomes a
sergeant major. Another character is Thomas, a young, highly educated free black
from Massachusetts whose interests include the transcendentalist philosophers.
Thomas is a soft intellectual who almost breaks down under the cruel rigors of
training, but he steels himself in the end and fights well.

All these characters, who are fictional, could be found in a movie about World
War II, with the important difference that they are black in the America of
1863, pioneers in the area of equal opportunity for all people in American life.
And while the movie is entirely clear about this focus, it is not the vehicle
for a full account of the obstacles placed in their path, which, if anything,
were more difficult even than ''Glory'' shows.

Shelby Foote, the author of the three-volume ''Civil War: A Narrative'' and a
consultant on ''Glory,'' provided an interviewer with several illustrations of
this point of view. Sherman, he said, did not have a single black soldier among
his thousands of men. When asked whether a black man couldn't stop a bullet as
well as a white one - in other words, whether it wouldn't be smarter to draw on
the supply of black men available for combat duty - Sherman replied: ''Yes, he
can, and a sandbag can do better than either.''

Perhaps even more to the point, Howell Cobb, a Confederate senator from Georgia,
put the matter of the black soldier at the racist heart of the Confederacy. ''If
the black can make a good soldier,'' Mr. Foote quotes him as saying, ''our whole
system of government is wrong.''

It would be comforting to think that the 54th Regiment of Massachusettsput an
end once and for all to these notions, whose ultimate premise is the superiority
of whites. But even though the system of government of the Confederacy - with
its adherence to slavery - was wrong, it was still a long time before blacks
received official equal treatment in the United States Army - not really until
the Korean War. What the 54th Regiment of Massachusetts started took a long time
to complete.

Is ''Glory'' history? Certainly, there are things invented in this movie.
Audiences might find it a rather extraordinary coincidence that the black
gravedigger whom young Shaw meets on the killing fields of Antietam in Virginia
turns up in his Massachusetts regiment, where he becomes sergeant major. Mr.
Burchard's book, complete with maps, shows the assault on Fort Wagner actually
coming from the south with the sea on the right, not, as the movie shows it, the
other way around. The recruits received their uniforms when they arrived in
training camp, not later. Most of the black soldiers in the film are fictional,
perhaps only because the historical records provide very little information
about them. Mr. Burchard said he had doubts that Shaw would have allowed a
recruit, and a former slave at that, to be whipped as punishment for attempted
desertion. The movie does show such an episide.

And yet historians of the Civil War who have seen the movie credit it with
accurately reflecting the tenor of the times while remaining true to the most
important episodes that it depicts. The black soldiers of the Massachusetts 54th
did angrily refuse their pay slips when informed that they would receive $10 a
month, while comparable white soldiers got $13. Shaw was indeed horrified by
what he saw in the first aid station at Antietam, so much so that he doubted his
own capacity for bravery in battle. And when the fateful battle of Fort Wagner
approached, he really did dismount from his horse and run forward at the head of
his men, dying on the ramparts of the fort. Unlike the other white officers
killed at the time, he was, as the movie shows it, buried with his black
recruits in a sandy, common grave.

'' 'Glory' reflects a larger truth than any written history of the 54th has ever
done,'' said Mr. Burchard. ''It took great heart and an extraordinary breadth of
vision to tell the story of the 54th as it is told in 'Glory' - from the point
of view of the regiment's rank and file.''

Mr. Foote agreed. ''I thought they did a good job,'' he said in a telephone
interview. ''I expected it to be well done, because I spent six days going
through the script with the director, Edward Zwick, and there was never a time
when I saw anything wrong that he wasn't perfectly willing to set straight even
if it meant giving up a bit of dramatic effect.

''There were a lot of small things that attention was paid to,'' Mr. Foote
continued, ''and while not a single one of the little things has much of an
effect, the cumulative effect is great. For example, when the men of the 54th
get shoes, you see that each shoe was just like the other. There was no left or
right. After you wore them for a while they became left or right. That's an
example of the kind of accuracy that they had.''

The battle details, Mr. Foote believes, were also realistically depicted, such
matters as the loading and firing of muzzle-loading rifles, the closeness of
battle formation.

''They believed at that time that in order to mass your fire you had to mass
your men,'' he said. ''Today you'd never allow your men to walk shoulder to
shoulder across a field. Now we would advance by rushes with individual soldiers
advancing 10 or 12 yards at a time and firing. But in the Civil War they didn't
do it that way. That's why the casualties were so high.''

It is on this subject of high casualties that the meaning of the battle for Fort
Wagner lies. It was such a slaughter that the black regiment's display of
courage seems militarily pointless. Mr. Foote calls it a ''useless military
assignment.'' With the sea on one side and swamps on the other, the men were
forced to run up a narrow ally in the face of strong enemy fire. In the end,
1,550 Union soldiers died in the attack, as opposed to 181 on the Confederate
side.

And yet the very futility of the charge in a sense binds together the black and
the white experience. Even with 600 men of the Massachusetts 54th leading the
charge, more whites died in the charge than blacks. The notion of the frontal
assault, the breakthrough, stayed with Civil War generals on both sides for the
entire four years of the war. Thousands of men, black and white, were sent
stupidly to their deaths.

''It couldn't have succeeded, Mr. Foote said. ''And even if it had succeded it
wouldn't have mattered much anyway. What it proved was that a black man could
make a fighting soldier, that he could stand up well while people are being shot
and killed around him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Members of the 54th Massachusetts regiment in battle in a scene from
the film ''Glory'' (pg. 15); Matthew Broderick as a colonel and Denzel
Washington as a volunteer (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

The Private War of Tom Cruise

BYLINE: By PAUL CHUTKOW; Paul Chutkow is a California-based freelance

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2862 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C.


Like so many American kids of his generation, Tom Cruise came of age after
America's fall in the war in Vietnam. Tet, My Lai, Cambodia, Kent State: To him
these were just names, vague and confusing, void of any historical or emotional
charge. The war was simply not part of his concerns or his consciousness. What
the Vietnam War was all about, what the war did to America, what it did to
thousands of Vietnam veterans who came home crippled and in wheelchairs; all
these young Tom Cruise knew little or nothing about. By his own admission, when
it came to Vietnam he was a total innocent.

Until one night in Manhattan. When he had dinner with a charismatic man named
Oliver Stone. Mr. Stone had been a United States Marine twice decorated in
Vietnam. But Tom Cruise knew him better as the brilliant director of ''Wall
Street'' and ''Salvador'' and the Academy Award-winning Vietnam movie,
''Platoon.'' What Mr. Stone talked to young Cruise about was making another
Vietnam movie, a movie even more ambitious than ''Platoon,'' a movie that maybe,
just maybe, could draw out the core of the Vietnam tragedy, in Vietnam and in
America, and make it real and lasting for generations to come.

Already Mr. Stone knew the elements he would portray: The battlefield horrors
and confusions. The mistaken killing of women and children. The wounds, the
physical, psychic and moral wounds of thousands of Marines and G.I.'s, wounds
that many of them would bring home and have to carry with them for the rest of
their lives. And then would come the veterans' hospitals and all their circles
of Hell, their squalor and degradations, their chronic and humiliating problems
of understaffing and underfunding. And then Mr. Stone would focus in tight on
what the war was doing to America at home. He wanted to show the politicians and
the rise of the antiwar movement, and how it was joined by Vietnam veterans who
had brought their wounds home to American towns and families who could not even
muster them a heroes' welcome. This, he felt, was their second war over Vietnam,
and Oliver Stone burned to show it.

''Coming home was a second war,'' Mr. Stone recalled in a telephone interview.
''It slammed so many of us right in the back of the neck. For months over there
you'd count the days you had left, and then finally it would come, Liberation
Day, and you'd be aboard that big Freedom Bird feeling life would never be so
happy again. Then WHOOM! Another war, right in your back. It wasn't the
hostility that hurt. It was the indifference. And we all came to feel we had
made a terrible mistake.''

One of the beauties of the planned movie, to Mr. Stone's eye, was that he could
draw out the essence of Vietnam through the true story of just one man, United
States Marine Sgt. Ron Kovic of Massapequa, Long Island. Already what was clear
in his mind were the core elements and characters that have come to life in
''Born on the Fourth of July,'' Mr. Stone's new movie, opening Wednesday.  To
Mr. Stone, Ron Kovic was the perfect symbol of the Vietnam War. And as Mr. Kovic
himself first described it in his distinguished and powerful 1976 memoir ''Born
on the Fourth of July,'' he was a true Yankee Doodle Dandy. He was born on
Independence Day, grew up in a working-class Roman Catholic family steeped in
the virtues and symbols of God and country, community and flag, John Wayne and
President John F. Kennedy. And when the call came, the call of Vietnam, the call
to stop the march of Communism, Ron Kovic responded. He joined the United States
Marines and went to Vietnam, only to be wounded in action and come home in a
wheelchair. Permanently crippled. Impotent.

As Tom Cruise recalls that Manhattan dinner now, Oliver Stone let him know his
ambitious film project faced only two tiny problems: he had no star to play Ron
Kovic and he had little firm money to back the film. He and his friend Mr. Kovic
had first written a screenplay in the late 1970's, and they had lined up Al
Pacino to play the lead. But the money had fallen through at the last minute,
publicly pinning Oliver Stone to the mat in the film business. And shattering
Ron Kovic's dreams of seeing his story come to life on the screen, of seeing his
own sacrifices take on new meaning. Couldn't Tom Cruise find a way to turn those
twin defeats into redeeming triumphs?

Indeed Thomas Cruise Mapother IV could. By then he was already the hottest young
box-office draw in the business. He had broken in with an effective small part
in ''Taps'' in 1981 and then scored bigger in ''The Outsiders,'' ''All the Right
Moves'' and the surprise hit ''Risky Business.'' He had held his own with Paul
Newman in ''The Color of Money,'' and his breakthrough leading role in ''Top
Gun,'' the Navy jet-fighter thriller, had confirmed his star power and grossed
$435 million. At the age of 24! Even a piece of fluff-stuff he did called
''Cocktail'' turned in gross receipts of more than $70 million.

Plus Tom Cruise was ready for a personal declaration of independence. He had a
bellyful of Hollywood's commercial this, commercial that, and he was turning
down offer after offer to do ''Top Gun II'' and ''Son of Top Gun'' and all the
rest. Take ''Rain Man,'' for instance. Yes, even ''Rain Man.'' He and Dustin
Hoffman burned to do that picture, and it would eventually bring Dustin Hoffman
an Academy Award. But all along, the money kept slipping and sliding. Why? The
reason still chafes Tom Cruise: ''There were a few people who really fought for
that film. But there were some people who said, 'Look. Two jerks in a car going
cross-country. Who's going to want to see that movie?' They just don't get it.
They just don't get it.''

So Tom Cruise took Oliver Stone's pitch and made one of the most important
decisions of his career: to enlist. It was a done deal. With his name and face
on the marquee, the money would come in, finally, a tight budget of $17 million.
And not only would he sign on. Mr. Cruise even agreed to defer all payments
until revenues started coming in, the same provision as Oliver Stone accepted..
They were forming common bonds.

''The approach was pure Oliver,'' Mr. Cruise now says with a laugh. ''A little
hmm, hmm. Testing. Where are you? Where are you? You know, the challenge.
'Well,' I said. 'All right. The challenge is on.' ''

Yes, and ''Born on the Fourth of July'' was about to become real. And so was the
private war of Tom Cruise.

Even now you can see the pain in his eyes. Physically, Tom Cruise is sitting in
a hotel room in Charlotte, N. C., where he is making an auto racing movie called
''Days of Thunder,'' but mentally he is focusing in, getting ready to explain
his stunning personal journey into the core of the Vietnam experience, into the
psyche of sexual cripples and finally deep into the very core of his own
manhood.

This journey is the central experience of ''Born on the Fourth of July.'' The
film stars Mr. Cruise as Ron Kovic. It also stars Willem Dafoe as his paraplegic
soulmate, Charlie; Raymond Barry as Ron's father; Caroline Kava as his mother;
and Kyra Sedgwick as his teen-age love, Donna. But almost all the primal
feelings pent up in the film are expressed through Mr. Cruise.

Journeying Far, Journeying Fast

The first time you meet Tom Cruise, in his jeans and his leather jacket, your
first instinct is to think: Huh? How could a kid seemingly so young and so green
have come so far so fast? In his big climbing shoes and his gray athletic
T-shirt, he looks like he's done a permanent freeze into a Reebok caricature of
the All-American Boy.Everything about him is boyish and eager, earnest and
engaging, modest and polite, and as hard as you look you can find no trace of
either artifice or guile. And that face. Unblemished. Uncut. Cocksure. How can
this be?  And just when you're about to sigh, well, Hollywood is a world unto
itself, Tom Cruise comes forward into the light. And for the first time you can
see it. You look into his eyes and see all that raging fire. And all those
surprising depths of color. Blues and greens and browns and even flecks of
yellow. People in the movie business, insiders who have watched his talent and
his power grow, tell you he's intense. Focused. Driven. That doesn't begin to
describe it. He keeps to a strict training-table diet, gulps great handfuls of
vitamins, to keep his blood sugar steady, and every morning it's a rigorous
workout. Action. Snap to.

On the Road To Discovery

But words do not always come easily to Tom Cruise. He grew up partially
dyslexic, and when his parents divorced he started changing schools almost every
year. He never went to college. Instead he went to New York, to make it as an
actor. But his lack of verbal skills for years made reading for acting parts
very risky business, carrying with it the fear of public humiliation. And even
now he travels with a dictionary, to make sure he gets the meanings right, to
make sure he keeps on learning, learning, learning.

''I went to many different schools growing up,'' he said. ''You travel to one
school and they've already learned what nouns and verbs are and where the
periods go. So they've moved on to the next thing and I'm still going, 'What's a
verb?' That's kind of the story of my life. Catching up.'' The words might not
come easily, but mention ''Vietnam'' to Tom Cruise, and the single word works
like a trigger, igniting words and sentences and feelings and sending them
spraying forth, not elegantly sometimes, but always hitting their target. And
what those words and sentences and feelings piece together, when added to
interviews with Oliver Stone and Ron Kovic, is how these three men came together
in a tightly knit unit to make ''Born on the Fourth of July.'' And what also
becomes clear is how Mr. Stone and Mr. Kovic worked to turn ''Born on the Fourth
of July'' into Tom Cruise's own frightening rite of passage.

Questions of Motivation

''Our only concern was bringing the film to a certain level, to make it real,''
Mr. Stone said. ''I always admired Tom as an actor. I had a feeling about him.
And I had known Ron for 10 years. When you put them together, you knew. ''Both
men were motivated by a desire to be the best, to be No. 1. And they both had
high self-esteem. In the 1960's, with Ron Kovic, that took the form of joining
the Marines. And at the end of the day, I sensed with Tom a crack in his
background, some kind of unhappiness, that he had seen some kind of trouble. And
I thought that trouble could be helpful to him in dealing with the second part
of Ron's life.''

Ron Kovic's own involvement was key. It was his story, with Mr. Stone he had
co-written the screenplay, and so it was only natural that the director take his
new recruit out to see this man, crippled, confined to a wheelchair, so that Mr.
Cruise could understand the man he was going to bring to life on screen, so that
he could understand the thousands of other veterans who had come home in
wheelchairs.

''Kovic really opened up to me,'' Mr. Cruise recalled. ''It was very emotional.
I felt an immediate understanding looking at this man, talking with this man. If
it had been me, back in the 50's, back in the 60's, well, I understand that
feeling of country, of wanting to do something good for people and your country,
and I understand how easily you could be misled.'' The bond was forged.

Through the Circles of Hell

From then on, Ron Kovic served as Mr. Cruise's guide through the key aspects of
the Vietnam experience, and he worked the way Virgil led Dante through the
circles of Hell, showing him the pitfalls and where to walk next. With Mr. Kovic
as his guide, Mr. Cruise went to some veterans' hospitals and talked and worked
with paraplegics. It was total immersion, long before shooting, and the bonds
multiplied and tightened. Both men came from Catholic backgrounds, both men knew
what hunger was, both men suffered from their lack of formal education. And the
bonds hardened Mr. Cruise's sense of resolve to make this film the ultimate
Vietnam experience, for himself and for young American generations to come:

''I was nervous, excited, there were many different feelings. There was an
element of fear. There was an element of great challenge, of great emotional
commitment. But at the end of it, I just didn't want Ron to say, 'Oh, man. I
made a mistake. You shouldn't have played the role.' ''

Then came boot camp. Oliver Stone brought in a former Marine captain named Dale
Dye to lead Mr. Cruise and others on two separate weeklong training missions,
one in the United States, one in the Philippines, where the battle episodes were
to be shot. In the same spirit, but on the opposite political pole, the antiwar
activist Abbie Hoffman was brought in to help everyone understand the feelings
and dynamics of the peace movement. Mr. Hoffman, since deceased, even played a
small part in the film.

The Ordeal Of Hospitalization

Tom Cruise now remembers much of the shooting as a blur, the battle scenes, the
wounding, the sense of shame and alienation Ron Kovic felt returning home to his
family, with Mr. Stone going 12 or 13 hours at a clip and making sluggards snap
to with commands of ''Action!'' ''Do it!'' But one of the hardest parts of
making the film was shooting Mr. Kovic's, and Mr. Cruise's, ordeal in a
veterans' hospital, where the wounded United States Marine lay strapped to a bed
for four months in a desperate bid to save his leg from amputation. For Mr.
Cruise as an actor, these were some of his most grueling scenes..

''I'm not the Stanislavsky kind of actor,'' Mr. Cruise said. ''It doesn't work
for me. I just want to communicate with the people in the scene. That scene is
real. It's happening. You're there. In person. And believe me, you sit in that
bed for a while, and hear what happened, and believe what you believed about
Vietnam, believed that it was right, and then being treated that way. It's very
easy to find the rage. And we were only there a week and half. Ron was there for
four months. And when shooting was over, I could get up and walk away.''

The Loss Of Manhood

Later, near the bottom of Ron's Hell, came impotence. The scene was Mexico, at
whorehouses catering specially to crippled Vietnam veterans. Again the settings
are of filth and degradation, but this time the vets are trading that against
whatever satisfactions they can find from the touch of a woman and all that
represents. Ron Kovic, paralyzed from the waist down, with catheters running out
of his crotch, is so lonely that he risks any potential humiliation for a
woman's touch.

''The way I work best is to be totally relaxed,'' Mr. Cruise said. ''I don't
pretend to be the character, I am the character. But you know what struck me?
Intellectually, philosophically, you sit back and you go, well, I'm someone who
doesn't feel that being masculine is in my, you know, crotch. There are many
other elements to being a human being and a man. But there were moments when I
read the script when it just struck me, WHACK!, to the marrow. Hold it! The
realization of losing that. . .

''Reading those scenes, it was right there in my face: you're going to play
this. The loss of manhood. The loss of one's ability to create on a physical
level. It's not just being able to feel a woman, to be inside a woman, it's
being able to create a family. To procreate is a very important aspect to life.
And where does that take you, if you can't?''

Where it took Tom Cruise was to a strange inability to perform the key bedroom
scene: ''I went to Oliver and I said, 'I'm just not there. It's just not
working.' I remember feeling a lot of anxiety actually. Going, why do I feel all
this anxiety? Oliver said, 'Look. You got it. Just don't think about it. Just do
it, man, do it.' '' Action! Snap to! Mr. Cruise: ''I remember we just started
shooting the scene again, we were just doing it, and I just started crying.
Crying and laughing a little, too. It was an absolute relief. Essentially I just
let go.''

It was just this kind of intensity and commitment that Mr. Cruise brought to his
entire portrayal of Ron Kovic, who would later find a degree of redemption in
becoming the potent and charismatic leader of a wheelchair brigade of antiwar
activists called Vietnam Veterans Against the War. And no one esteemsTom Cruise
more than Ron Kovic.

''I'm extremely proud of his performance,'' Mr. Kovic said in a telephone
interview. ''I truly believe he actually becomes me. For 21 years I had kept my
Bronze Star in a box by my bed, and I always felt a little ambivalent about it.
On the last day of shooting, I gave Tom my Bronze Star, the medal I won in
Vietnam. I told him it was for his heroic performance.''

To Oliver Stone also, Tom Cruise is a hero. Through his performance, Mr. Stone
hopes he has been able to keep his promises. To himself. To his friend Ron
Kovic. And to tens of thousands of fellow veterans who share the wounds of
Vietnam. ''We wanted to show America, and Tom, and through Tom, Ron, being put
in a wheelchair, losing their potency. We wanted to show America being forced to
redefine its concept of heroism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article on Dec. 17 about "Born on the Fourth of July" misstated the branch of
the military that Oliver Stone, the film's director, served with during the
Vietnam War. Mr. Stone was in the Army.

GRAPHIC: Tom Cruise as Ron Kovic in the Oliver Stone film ''Born on the Fourth
of July'' (Roland Neveu) (pg. 1); Ron Kovic as a young Marine with his father,
E. Thomas Kovic, during the mid-1960's; at left, Raymond Barry in the role of
the father, carrying Tom Cruise as the paralyzed Vietnam veteran Ron in a scene
from the movie (pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 39, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 693 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

BATMAN - Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson and Kim Bassinger star in a ''shapeless,
big-screen reincarnation,'' but the designer Anton Furst has created a
''nightmare version of megalopolis.'' (Vincent Canby) 1989. Warner. $24.95.
Laser disk, $24.98. 2 hours 6 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

THE DRESSMAKER - Small-scale and exquisitely acted by Joan Plowright, Billie
Whitelaw and others, the film is ''constructed as if it were some kind of
delayed-action explosive. . . . The images and textures have the density of good
prose.'' (Canby) 1989. Capitol. $79.95. 1:32. No rating. 84 CHARLIE MOPIC -
Patrick Duncan, a Vietnam veteran, wrote and directed this portrait of war,
which mimics the making of an Army documentary. ''It is, at least most of the
time, effective and believable.'' (Richard Bernstein) 1989. RCA/Columbia.
$89.95. 1:35. R. GHOSTBUSTERS II - This sequel ''has the weight and stylishness
of designer toilet tissue, but it doesn't offend.'' (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia.
$89.95. LD, $24.95. 1:42. CC. PG.

HOTEL TERMINUS: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF KLAUS BARBIE - Max Ophuls's ''vivid,
harrowing, minutely detailed'' recollection of France under the German
occupation. ''Great.'' (Canby) 1988. Virgin Vision. $99.95. LD, $99.95. 4:27.
Not rated.

HOW TO GET AHEAD IN ADVERTISING - Bruce Robinson's ''engaging if slightly
overstretched combination of satire, science fiction, Freud and domestic
farce.'' (Canby) 1989 M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. 1:34. CC. PG.  LAWRENCE OF ARABIA
- ''It is David Lean's direction, adroitly weaving together music, scenery and
the steely force of Lawrence's personality, that gives the film its transcendent
power.'' (Maslin) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $29.95. LD, $49.95. 3:36. CC. PG.

MAJOR LEAGUE - Until the last half-hour, when it goes soft, David Ward's loopy
film, featuring Tom Berenger, Charlie Sheen and Corbin Bernsen, is ''wonderfully
unpretentious.'' (Caryn James) 1989. Paramount. No list price. LD, $24.95. 1:47.
CC. R. THE MIGHTY QUINN - Denzel Washington ''gives the kind of smooth, funny,
laid-back performance that could help make him the first black matinee idol
since Sidney Poitier.'' (Canby) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:38. R. THE NAVIGATOR -
A time-travel fantasy in which the director, Vincent Ward, ''takes every
artistic risk his bizarre premise allows.'' (James) 1988. Trylon. $89.95. 1:32.
PG.

THE PRIME OF MISS JEAN BRODIE - ''A very decent movie'' that ''must seem smaller
than the big, extraordinary performance that Maggie Smith gives.'' (Canby) 1969.
CBS/Fox. $79.98. 1:56. CC. PG. SAY ANYTHING - This romantic comedy with John
Cusack and Ione Skye is ''all charming performances and grace notes, but there
are plenty of worse things to be.'' (James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD, $39.98.
1:40. CC. PG-13.

SCENES FROM THE CLASS STRUGGLE IN BEVERLY HILLS - Paul Bartel's mordant satire
''is one long smile with an occasional belly laugh . . . full of funny lines
that are delivered with a pleased self-consciousness that defuses the
rudeness.'' (Canby) 1989. Virgin. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:43. CC. R. WHO FRAMED
ROGER RABBIT - ''A film whose best moments are so novel, so deliriously funny
and so crazily unexpected that they truly must be seen to be believed.''
(Maslin) 1988. Touchstone. $22.99. 1:43. CC. PG.

WORKING GIRL - ''Enjoyable even when it isn't credible, which is most of the
time,'' Mike Nichols's film, like its heroine, played by Melanie Griffith, ''has
a genius for getting by on pure charm.'' (Maslin) 1988. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:53.
CC. R. A WORLD APART - Beautifully acted by Barbara Hershey, the Chris Menges
film about South Africa, ''while expressing all the right sentiments, never goes
quite far enough.'' (Canby) 1988. Media Home Entertainment. $89.95. 1:54. CC.
PG.

For Children

BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's wizards,'' as a contemporary critic called them, work
their magic on Felix Salten's ''tremulous'' tale. 1942. Disney. $26.99. LD,
$39.99. 1:09. CC. G. THE LAND BEFORE TIME - Five baby dinosaurs take a dangerous
journey; cute, perhaps to a fault. (Maslin) 1988. MCA. $24.95. LD, $49.98. 1:09.
CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS FORUM: THE PEACE DIVIDEND;
What to Do With the Cold War Money

BYLINE: By SEYMOUR MELMAN; Seymour Melman is professor emeritus of industrial
engineering at Columbia University, and chairman of the National Commission for
Economic Conversion and Disarmament in Washington.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


THE idea of a ''peace dividend'' first surfaced in 1969. A Cabinet Coordination
Committee was set up to report to President Lyndon B. Johnson on what the
Federal Government should do with its savings when the War in Vietnam finally
ended. The committee proposed that the Federal Government dedicate $39.7 billion
a year from its savings - in 1969 dollars - for the upkeep of the
infrastructure.

The peace dividend was to provide money for roads, clean air, education, housing
and foreign economic aid. But the war in Vietnam dragged on into the 1970's and
the political energies needed to realize a peace dividend were exhausted. As a
result, President Johnson's plans were never implemented and critical areas of
our infrastructure, manufacturing sector and educational system fell into
disrepair.

With the end of the cold war - and a desire to terminate the 46-year-old arms
race - there is once again the possiblity of a peace dividend.

Half of all Federal tax dollars go to the Pentagon. These large expenditures
have hurt the competitive position of the United States and have kept the level
of investment in the civilian economy, as a share of gross national product,
lower than in Europe or Japan. For example, in 1983, for every $100 we spent on
civilian capital formation, including new factories, machines and tools, we
spent another $40 on the military. In West Germany, for every $100 spent on
civilian investment, the military received only an additional $13. And in Japan,
for every $100 spent on civilian investment, a mere $3 was spent on the
military. Therefore these countries were able to spend more on their civilian
needs.

As a result of years of neglect, our nation's infrastructure is failing to
support a modern industrial society. Examples of the decay are everywhere. In
New York City alone two water mains rupture every day. The scale of the problem
is vast: estimates for repairing our nation's infrastructure - its roads,
bridges, highways, waterways and so forth - are between $3 trillion and $5
trillion. The bill would have been far less had we been able to spend President
Johnson's peace dividend.

Some of these repairs are the responsibility of our municipal and state
governments, but a large part is the responsibility of the Federal Government.
According to estimates prepared by the National Commission for Economic
Conversion and Disarmament, a nonprofit research group, if we were to restore
the nation's infrastructure , the Federal Government's share of the total would
be more than $165 billion a year. This amount can be made available from savings
from ending the cold war.

From 1947 to 1987, according to the Federal Government's own estimates, the
United States spent $7.6 trillion on the military, a sum roughly equal to the
total value of the nation's plant and equipment, plus the value of its civilian
infrastructure. This means that since 1947, our military has used up resources
sufficient to rebuild nearly everything that is manmade in the United States.

The military budget represents an enormous capital fund that could be put to
productive civilian use. Military spending is 6 percent of G.N.P., but it pays
for the services of 25 to 30 percent of all our nation's engineers and
scientists and accounts for 70 percent of all Federal research and development
money, $41 billion in 1988. These are resources that can be far more productive
if used in the civilian sectors of the economy.

As a result of our military expenditures, by the close of the 1970's, the United
States was no longer a first-class industrial economy with respect to
productivity growth, research and development, the quality of infrastructure,
average wages, competitiveness and standard of living. From this second-rate
condition, the United States is headed for further decline. And if we become a
third-rate industrial economy, we will lack forever the means of production
necessary to repair our defiencies.

MANY barriers remain before we can reap the peace dividend and restore our
nation to first-rate economic status. The cold war ideological and institutional
systems remain in place and continue to influence our Government's leadership.
For example, the central administrative offices of the Department of Defense has
a staff of 120,000 and controls more than 35,000 prime contracting companies.
Such managerial organizations do not readily relinquish decision-making power.
And many members of Congress have become accustomed to functioning as virtual
marketing managers for military companies, bases and laboratories in their
districts.

That is why deliberate planning for conversion from a military to a civilian
economy has become an indispensable requirement for obtaining and utilizing the
peace dividend. Without a highly decentralized and mandatory two-year planning
requirement, conversion to a civilian economy will fail.

To realize a peace dividend it is essential to give close attention to the
proposed Defense Economic Adjustment Act (H.R. 101) sponsored by Representative
Ted Weiss, Democrat of New York. This bill mandates a decentralized planning
process in every large defense base and in our national laboratories and
factories as well. It also includes the retraining of military engineers and
managers to insure a competent changeover to civilian production. The bill
encourages the preparation of concrete plans to implement a peace dividend. A
serious peace-dividend program will raise Government revenues as a by-product of
economic rebuilding.

Some voice the opinion that whatever savings accrue from a military wind-down
should be used only to reduce the size of the Federal debt. That is a sure vote
for a third-rate economy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph outlines recommendations of National Commission for Economic
Conversion and Disarmament on reallocation of military spending (Source:
National Commisssion for Economic Conversion and Disarmament)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The U.S. Stake in the Philippines

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: MANILA


THE rebel members of the Philippine armed forces who tried to overthrow
President Corazon C. Aquino earlier this month made many political and tactical
mistakes. But perhaps their biggest error was in thinking that the United States
might remain neutral during a rebellion and support them if they prevailed.

The rebel soldiers' expectations turned out to be completely unrealistic. On
Dec. 1, after rebel planes had bombed and strafed the presidential palace and
military camps, President Bush ordered American warplanes to fly combat air
patrols. Without firing a shot, they grounded the rebel air effort and doomed
the coup attempt. Most of the military remained loyal to Mrs. Aquino even though
some of the rebels' fellow soldiers were sympathetic.

The intervention showed the extent of American determination to support
democracy in the Philippines and Mrs. Aquino as the country's elected President.
It also created a new atmosphere for negotiations on the future of United States
military bases in the Philippines, expected to begin within a couple of months.

One factor in the evident overconfidence of the Philippine rebels was that they
never expected the United States to intervene directly in a fight within the
Philippine armed forces. The American bases have been considered an instrument
of American global strategy, not a tool for influencing policy in the
Philippines. Agreements on use of the bases expire on Sept. 16, 1991, and the
terms for renewing them have become an issue here.

A Major Employer

Despite the undeniable military significance of the bases, the American view
that they are indispensable has clearly changed in the last decade. Washington
has hinted that it could relocate the bases if it really had to, and now, with
the decline in tensions between Washington and Moscow, it is unclear whether the
United States will try to justify the bases in the same terms. Last week,
American officials said the Soviets were packing up MIG-23 fighter jets based at
Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, in a move that could signal Soviet military cutbacks in
Southeast Asia.

Polls of Filipino public opinion show there is support for retaining the bases.
But many Filipinos also believe that American compensation for use of the bases
should be increased. The United States armed forces are said to be the second
largest employer here, after the national Government, providing jobs for 68,500
Filipinos and accounting for at least 3.5 percent of the gross national product.

Moderate politicians say the bases undermine Philippine sovereignty by fostering
dependence, and a small but vocal anti-American faction sees them as a symbol of
American imperialism. Critics of Mrs. Aquino say her acceptance of intervention
during the coup weakened her ability to bargain with the United States. She
denies that, but she has asked for a short postponement of talks about the
bases, saying her Government will be too busy dealing with the aftermath of the
rebellion.

Jovito R. Salonga, president of the Philippine Senate, said the United States
has lost the support of the opposition Nacionalista Party, which once favored
retaining the bases. Many party members now say the bases should be phased out
because they permitted the intervention.

Mrs. Aquino, for her part, says she is keeping her options open. Her associates
suggest that she might agree to continued operation of the bases in return for
economic and political concessions from the Bush Administration. Within the
constraints of a tight Federal budget, the Administration has shown itself
willing to consider almost any request to accommodate so close a friend as Mrs.
Aquino.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: American jet fighters at Clark Air Base in the Philippines (Sygma/Allan
Tannenbaum); map showing location of Clark Air Base and Subic Bay Naval Station,
Philipoines; table outlines U.S. military spending in the Philippines, 1987
(Source: Department of Defense); THE WORLD

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 930 words



UTZ, by Bruce Chatwin. (Penguin, $7.95.) A petty aristocrat named Kaspar Joachim
Utz becomes trapped in Czechoslovakia by the priceless collection of porcelain
that he refuses to leave behind. The last novel of Bruce Chatwin, who died
earlier this year, shows him ''at his most erudite and evocative,'' Robert Stone
said here in January. '' 'Utz' provides its readers with a rich and rewarding
meditation.''

THE MASTER OF THE GAME: Paul Nitze and the Nuclear Peace, by Strobe Talbott.
(Vintage, $10.95.) In the third installment of his chronicles of arms control,
Strobe Talbott tells how the ever-practical negotiator Paul Nitze turned Ronald
Reagan's utopian Star Wars plan into a bargaining chip. Mr. Talbott
''demonstrates his own mastery of bureaucratic drama, combining a gift for
characterization and an eye for the revealing anecdote with a firm grasp of his
subject,'' Lawrence Freedman said in The Book Review in 1988. ''His sources are
enviable, allowing him to offer an instant history that rings true throughout.''


CAT'S EYE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $5.95.) An artist goes home to Toronto
for a retrospective of her paintings and finds herself haunted by memories of a
disturbed childhood friend. ''All this is vintage Atwood,'' our reviewer, Alice
McDermott, said in February: ''the precise and devastating detail, the sense of
the ordinary transformed into nightmare, the quiet desperation of characters
trapped, silenced, utterly alone.''

DESPERADOS: Latin Drug Lords, U.S. Lawmen, and the War America Can't Win, by
Elaine Shannon. (Penguin, $4.95.) A reporter for Time magazine tells why she
thinks economic and diplomatic relations between Mexico and the United States
interfered with the investigation into the death of Enrique Camarena, the Drug
Enforcement Administration agent who was murdered in Guadalajara. This
''well-reported reconstruction of the investigation'' raises ''disturbing
questions,'' Jeff Gerth said here last year.

THE FIFTH STATION, by Kevin McIlvoy. (Collier/Macmillan, $6.95.) When their
brother is killed in a mill accident, two steelworkers move to New Mexico and
try to forget. Last year our reviewer, Patricia Dobler, said this first novel is
''rich with details of both mill life and life in a rural New Mexican
community.''

TOCQUEVILLE: A Biography, by Andre Jardin. Translated by Lydia Davis with Robert
Hemenway. (Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) This biography of the
visitor who explained the American mind to both the French and the Americans is
''written with admirable thoroughness,'' Joan Wallach Scott said here in
February.

THE VEILED ONE, by Ruth Rendell. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Like a patient with his
psychiatrist, the suspect in a parking-garage murder develops a fixation on his
interrogator. Last year our reviewer, Josh Rubins, said Ruth Rendell's
''uncompromising psychological suspense novels . . . offer harrowing, coolly
ironic excursions into the minds of genteel psychopaths and secret sex
offenders, the lonely and obsessed and deluded. . . . [Her] prose - lean, sly,
almost clinical - reinforces the bleakness.''

THE SIGNIFYING MONKEY: A Theory of African-American Literary Criticism, by Henry
Louis Gates Jr. (Oxford University, $10.95.) Looking to both ancient African
myths and contemporary literary theory, a scholar develops a new theory of black
literature. ''This somewhat intimidating, quite serious essay in literary
criticism can be enjoyed by a variety of readers,'' John Wideman said in The
Book Review last year. Oxford has also reissued Mr. Gates's 1987 book, FIGURES
IN BLACK: WORDS, SIGNS, AND THE ''RACIAL'' SELF ($10.95), in which he applies
the ideas of modern critics like Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida to the
works of Ishmael Reed, Alice Walker and other black writers. Howard University
Press has republished BLACK IS THE COLOR OF THE COSMOS: Essays on Afro-American
Literature and Culture, 1942-1981 ($15.95). The pieces, written by Charles T.
Davis and edited by Mr. Gates, analyze such authors as Jean Toomer, Richard
Wright and Ralph Ellison.

WAVERLY PLACE, by Susan Brownmiller. (Signet/New American Library, $4.95.) In a
fictionalized account of the Joel Steinberg-Hedda Nussbaum case, Susan
Brownmiller tries to fathom how a couple in her Greenwich Village neighborhood
dug themselves into a sadomasochistic life that led to the killing of a
6-year-old girl. Last year The Times's Christopher Lehmann-Haupt said that,
while the book is not satisfying as a novel, it ''serves a potentially
constructive purpose. It tries to fill the emotional void created by any
incomprehensible human act. It proposes how such a thing could have happened and
allows us to participate in the drama of its answer.''

ALICIA: My Story, by Alicia Appleman-Jurman. (Bantam, $4.95.) After losing her
family, a teen-age girl helps her fellow Poles escape the Nazis. This
autobiography is ''so profoundly observed, and the life it records so remarkably
lived, that no amount of prior immersion in the sad community of witnesses to
the Holocaust can dull the reader to its heroine,'' Sonia Taitz said in The Book
Review last year.

KOKO, by Peter Straub. (Signet/New American Library, $5.95.) Three Vietnam
veterans suspect that a member of their old platoon is the infamous Koko, a
serial killer in Southeast Asia who leaves a playing card with a picture of an
elephant in his victims' mouths. ''In this fable of men undone by the ultimate
horror, evil is anything but banal,'' Richard Fuller said here last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Paul Nitze (NYT/Jose Lopez)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


Starting with ''The Ipcress File'' in 1962 and proceeding to such virtuoso
pieces as ''Funeral in Berlin,'' Len Deighton has demonstrated again and again
that he is a master of the British (is there any other?) espionage novel. His
latest book, SPY LINE (Knopf, $18.95), will not disappoint his admirers.

It is the second volume of a trilogy that started with ''Spy Hook,'' and it
features the veteran espionage agent Bernard Samson. As the book opens, Samson's
wife, also an agent, has defected to the Russians; Samson is under suspicion of
treason and hiding out in West Berlin. He is cleared, grudgingly, and sent back
to England for what may be a desk job for the rest of his career. Nevertheless,
he soon finds himself in the field. He goes to Vienna to arrange for an exchange
of spies with the Soviets.

Naturally, his hyperactive mind starts churning. Will his wife be involved?
Samson is always asking himself questions. Perhaps that is how he has managed to
stay alive as long as he has. Espionage agents have to be suspicious about
everything. For instance, Samson is invited to a dinner party given by his
superior. He sees an unexpected face, one that he vaguely remembers. So his mind
starts working.

When and where did they meet? The man is an American. Is there a C.I.A.
connection? Is this man a trouble-shooter? What has he to do with Samson's
assignment? It is all very convincing. Mr. Deighton has always known how to get
into the minds of his spies.

The book sometimes gives the impression of just ambling along, yet there is
still a sense of purpose. At the end we get a sudden burst of bloody action and
a load of disillusion. Perhaps in the concluding book of the trilogy things will
clear up for poor Samson.

*

THE BLUE GATE OF BABYLON by Paul Pickering (Random House, $18.95) is an unusual
book. Blackly humorous, it is a character study as well as an espionage novel. A
young British diplomat who likes women too much for his own good is sent to West
Berlin to run a bordello. It is 1961, just before the Berlin wall goes up. His
job, of course, is a cover: he is there to get information through his
prostitutes from East German officers.

Things do not turn out well for the young diplomat, and he ends up a castoff in
England until he is recalled for another special assignment. Highly literate,
brooding and sad, ''The Blue Gate of Babylon'' is much more than a spy story. It
is superior literature.

*

An experienced hand is evident in Douglas Terman's ENEMY TERRITORY (Bantam,
$18.95). The plot hangs on a United States space launching. Mr. Terman was a
commander in a launching crew as well as a pilot and military intelligence
officer. He knows what he is talking about. And he is a good writer, sympathetic
to his characters, with the ability to maintain a smooth narrative flow.

Two men come face to face. One is a K.G.B. officer, the other an American pilot
shot down in Vietnam. Captured and brutally interrogated by the K.G.B. man, the
American finally breaks. Back in the United States, he is kicked out of the
service and regarded as a traitor. Jump to today. A general in the K.G.B.
conceives a plot that could kill the American space program. It has to do with
sabotaging a shuttle launching and sowing nuclear material over a section of the
United States. The K.G.B. interrogator is selected to run the operation. Whom
does he run up against? You guessed it.

The Vietnam part of the book has a lot to do with flying. The rest of it takes
place in Caribbean waters, aboard the American's sailboat, and Mr. Terman knows
as much about sailing as he does about flying. ''Enemy Territory'' is one of
those down-to-the-wire Armageddon sprints, and none the worse for it considering
how well the author goes about his business. There are one or two slight flaws
in the plotting. For a brilliant man, the Russian does some stupid things. To
which Mr. Terman might reply, well, we're all human.

*

The K.G.B. also plays a part in LAIR OF THE FOX by Daniel Pollock (Walker,
$19.95). In this first novel, Soviet canisters of poison gas have been stolen.
The K.G.B. dearly wants to get them back, but the canisters fall into the hands
of Kurdish terrorists who take over a sailing vessel near Istanbul. This vessel
is part of a planned film, and the actors and camera crew are on board. The
leading lady, who happens to be in a hotel when the ship is captured, is a Jane
Fonda type: left-wingish and full of great ideas about the plight of the
downtrodden. She offers herself as a hostage if the rest of the crew is
released, and she gets into big trouble. The ending is a little pat, but Mr.
Pollock knows all the tricks and has put together a can't-put-down book.

*

The Ed Fitzgerald series - he's a reporter for a New York tabloid - continues
with A SUITCASE IN BERLIN by Don Flynn (Walker, $18.95). It is not one of Mr.
Flynn's better novels. Ed is in Berlin to do a story about the city's 750th
anniversary. He meets a beautiful young woman, and when Ed Fitzgerald meets a
beautiful young woman he is at her command. All she wants to do is steal a
painting from an East Berlin art museum. She claims that it was painted by her
grandfather, was willed to her family and belongs to her.

There ensues a series of colossally unbelievable happenings. Call it
preposterous fun. But Mr. Flynn, who is a reporter for The Daily News, tries too
hard to be cute, and by now his characters have become stereotypes. There is
also some careless writing: '' 'Come on!' I hissed at her.'' Try hissing ''Come
on!'' With an exclamation point, yet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
Anticipated Life: How Long, O Lord?

BYLINE: By Betsy Barton Cope; Betsy Barton Cope lives in East Northport.

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 34, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


''Why no, I don't mind waiting. It seems to me I've been here no time at all. Is
Carter still President?''

''We said we would meet for lunch. While I've been standing here they've torn
down the old restaurant and built a new one. It looks nice. Shall we try it?''

''No, I don't mind saving your place on line at the supermarket. The checkout
woman and I will be yearning for your return. We'll organize a little
sing-along, ''Nearer My God to Thee' can be the first selection. Does anyone
know, ''Michael, Row the Boat Ashore'?''

''No, no, not at all. I don't mind spending my middle and sunset years in the
dentist's chair. I do think the filling has hardened and I can stop putting 50
pounds of pressure on the little wooden block. Would someone call my home and
ask if my kids have finished college yet?''

I've been waiting for the television to be delivered, for the boy to cut the
grass, for the doctor to look at my throat, for the neighbors' chldren to grow
up and leave home, for my hair to turn curly and go back to brown. It's a
waiting game, goodness knows.

I am determined to watch a pot till it boils, remembering, ''They also serve who
only stand and wait.'' May I sit down now? What with waiting for various things
I've managed to sneak up on middle age and am patiently trying to pass it.

Rip Van Winkle escaped the waiting game by going to sleep. I've almost nodded
off a few times. First I was waiting to grow up. David Copperfield and Holden
Caufileld and I now what a drag that is. Then I was waiting to get out of some
schools. Along the way I was waiting to discover the nature of reality.

Ah, this is reality: getting hit between the eyes with a baseball bat, playing
marbles for keeps, not getting bids for the prom, noticing that people were
starting to die at an unprecedented rate. I knew reality couldn't be so simple
as playing Monopoly on a front porch all summer.

Later I was waiting for a job. Real life might be around the next bend, and I
might be closing the gap on the real thing. Then I was married and waiting for
real grown-up life to begin. Then I was waiting for the baby to arrive, waiting
for the first tooth, the first step, the first Christmas, the next baby and all
the ensuing big moments -- like measles, chicken pox and mumps, school plays and
concerts.

I waited at the orthodontist's office, at the piano teacher's house, at the
ballet studio. I waited for school buses, camp buses, college acceptances. I
waited out girlfriends and boyfriends. I waited out company dinners. I waited
out final illnesses of my parents.

My life was outer-directed. I was the woman for others. Me and milions of other
women. Then I was wondering where everyone went and waiting to get my life back.
Somehow, I thought after all that waiting I would get my time back. What? I
don't get the time back? Is that an equitable arrangement? What made me hink so?
Is that law in the Decalogue or the Constitution? Listen, maybe I intended to go
in some other direction.

I spent years waiting for various wars to be over. I waited through high school
for the end of World War II. During the early years of marriage, we waited for
the Korean War to end. I waited in the ranks of protestors for the Vietnam War
to end.

Women always wait for war to end so they can get back to ordinary waiting;
waiting for bread to rise, for crops to come up, for babies to come and children
to grow. We're waiting for the rivers to clear, for the ozone to heal, for the
air to be clean.

On the local scene, I'm waiting for the ice to melt on the drive, for the
reserved book to come in at the library, for the jasmine to bloom, for the
Japanese iris to come up, for the first robin, for the last train to Bountiful.
I'm waiting for the friend in San Francisco to write a letter, for the next
Inspector Morse mystery, for the children to write or call. I'm waiting for the
next trip to England.

I'm just not going to give up waiting. I'm prepared to fight along this line if
it takes the rest of the century. I'm waiting for peace to break out and equal
rights for women. I'm waiting for the fat lady to sing. I'm waiting for Godot.
I'm waiting till hell freezes over.

Now that I've thought about it, waiting hasn't been pure, unalloyed pleasure.
O.K., I'm not waiting anymore. If nothing is going to happen I'm not going to
wait around and watch. I'd rather watch mushrooms grow.

Maybe the fat lady isn't going to sing. I'm not expecting anything to happen,
but if it does, goodness knows, I'm ready for it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
NONFICTION

BYLINE: By KENNETH J. UVA

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 302 words



AMERICAN POWER: The Rise and Decline of U.S. Globalism, 1918-1968. By John Taft.
(Harper & Row, $22.50.) The ascension of the United States as a world power,
according to John Taft, was largely due to the efforts of a Northeastern, Ivy
League-educated, internationalist elite. This group, including George Kennan,
Averell Harriman and Dean Acheson, believed that world order could be created
through the Wilsonian ideals of free trade, democracy, anti-imperialism and
world organizations. After World War II, Mr. Taft writes in ''American Power,''
they supported the containment of Communism, the Korean War and the cold war in
general. They served in the foreign-policy establishment for 50 years and shaped
the political, economic and military underpinnings of United States diplomacy.
Mr. Taft maintains that this policy was dealt a severe blow when the United
States tried to extend its power and influence into the third world in the
1950's and 60's. The frustrations and failures that culminated in the Vietnam
debacle caused the internationalist liberals to question former policies and led
to what Mr. Taft terms ''isolationist liberalism.'' This loss of resolve
resulted in a major loss of United States power in the world. Mr. Taft has done
a fine job, but tells only part of the story. He glosses over the role certain
business interests played in United States involvement in different parts of the
world. He also gives little credit to the McCarthyite red scare that led, in the
name of anti-Communism, to the support of corrupt regimes such as Ngo Dinh
Diem's in South Vietnam. To Mr. Taft, the author of ''Mayday at Yale,'' post-
Vietnam foreign policy is liberal isolationism. To others, it is a reasonable
reaction to a world that can no longer be ordered by American and European
elites.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

REFUGEES MOVING BACK TO CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Dec. 17


In the last few weeks, the Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas have moved at least
1,500 Cambodian refugees out of secret camps across the Thai border into areas
of Cambodia seized from the Phnom Penh Government, Western diplomats and
international relief workers say.

The refugees were transferred from Khmer Rouge-controlled camps along what is
known as ''the hidden border,'' a reference to the fact that international
relief agencies are not allowed access by the Khmer Rouge and the Thai
Government.

The diplomats and relief workers, interviewed here and by telephone in Bangkok,
say the population shift was made with the help of the Thai Army and its unit in
charge of coordination with the Khmer Rouge, Task Force 838.

Those interviewed said they feared there will be more refugee transfers to come,
especially from the Khmer Rouge's secret camps, in which some 50,000 to 75,000
Cambodians live with almost no contact with the outside world.

Captive Populations

Another 300,000 Cambodians live in camps open to the United Nations Border
Relief Operation and the International Committee of the Red Cross, divided among
the three factions opposed to the Phnom Penh Government. Well over half of them
live in camps controlled by the non-Communist factions of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and a former Cambodian Prime Minister, Son Sann.

The residents of these camps, too, live as captive populations, diplomats say, a
protected political constituency for the guerrilla factions. But they have
relatively easy access to food and medical care from the United Nations and
private relief organizations and are given some protection by the Red Cross.

Late last year, relief officials said the Khmer Rouge had moved thousands of
refugees from these more open camps and placed them in exposed bunkers closer to
the Cambodian border, hoping to move them inside Cambodia to populate territory
taken during a dry season offensive.

But the offensive was driven back by Vietnamese soldiers, then still fighting
alongside the forces of Prime Minister Hun Sen, whose Government had been
installed in Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese when they invaded Cambodia in late
1978. Hundreds of the refugees were said to have died from shelling and from the
virulent malaria prevalent along the border; most of the others straggled back
to the camps inside Thailand.

Strip of Territory

The whole operation provoked great criticism of the Khmer Rouge, which has been
trying to show the world that it has abandoned its previous brutal methods of
dealing with civilian populations and will abide by free elections in Cambodia.
Relief workers and diplomats say the Khmer Rouge has been behaving admirably in
its open camps for the last few months. The secret camps, however, which are
considered direct adjuncts to the war effort, do not appear to have altered very
much, defectors and relief workers say.

At the end of September, however, Vietnam said it withdrew the last of its
troops from Cambodia. In fighting since then, the opposition coalition has taken
a significant strip of territory near Thailand in northwest Cambodia.

The Khmer Rouge and Mr. Son Sann's faction, the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, have done the bulk of the fighting, but Sihanouk forces have
been moving administrators into the ''liberated zone'' and attracting recruits.
The Khmer Rouge, diplomats say, breaking the pattern of the 1970's, has also
been organizing the territory it has taken rather than abandoning it in
traditional guerrilla fashion. It is now, apparently, moving in ''loyal''
populations, which include party cadres and family members of Khmer Rouge
soldiers, the diplomats say.

The population movements come from a secret camp called Khao Din, just north of
the open Khmer Rouge camp called Site 8, near Aranyaprathet, and from one called
O'Plong Chae, just south of Site 8. More than 1,000 people have been moved from
Khao Din and about 500 people from O'Plong Chae, relief workers say. They say
these two camps normally hold a total of some 20,000 to 30,000 people.

The relief workers say that the Thais, by facilitating the transfer, are
contravening the accepted understanding that repatriation of Cambodians should
be done under international supervision after a comprehensive settlement in
Cambodia. But some parts of the Thai military have been working closely with the
Khmer Rouge for a decade against the Vietnamese, including the shipment of
Chinese arms through Thailand to the Khmer Rouge, and it is likely that local
commanders are taking the initiative, diplomats say.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pope Criticizes Hong Kong on Vietnamese

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: ROME, Dec. 17


Pope John Paul II today criticized Hong Kong's repatriation of Vietnamese
refugees and called for a policy that was ''more respectful of the dignity of
man.''

The Pope, adding his voice to the outcry over the Hong Kong situation, also
urged governments to recognize their responsibility to solve what he called a
''grave humanitarian problem.''

It was one of the few times that John Paul singled out a specific government for
criticism, and he did so as he offered his weekly blessing from a balcony
overlooking St. Peter's Square. Last Tuesday, Hong Kong sent back 51 Vietnamese
who had sought shelter there, and officials in London said the expulsions would
continue despite international protests. The Pope warned today that thousands of
other refugees were similarly threatened.

''Our heart cannot remain insensitive and indifferent in the face of such grave
decisions that affect so dramatically the lives of many persons, including women
and children,'' he said.

Hong Kong, which the British will hand back to China in 1997, has been a favored
haven for Vietnamese boat people for years. But in the last year and a half,
their numbers have grown rapidly, with 44,000 of them crowding into the colony
to join 13,000 who were there waiting resettlement. This influx prompted many
Hong Kong residents to demand that the Vietnamese be forced to return home, and
the process got under way last week.

The Pope, as is his custom, offered no specific solutions, but he prayed that
God would ''enlighten the minds of those who rule the fates of peoples.'' This
included foreign governments, which he said ''cannot avoid giving its generous
contribution.''

''International solidarity has already been expressed through valid initiatives
by countries and various agencies,'' John Paul said. ''We hope that other
concrete initiatives will be born at once, with everyone's prompt cooperation,
to better face and to offer a solution to such a grave humanitarian problem.''
By CLYDE HABERMAN ROME, Dec. 17 - Pope John Paul II today criticized Hong Kong's
repatriation of Vietnamese refugees and called for a policy that was ''more
respectful of the dignity of man.''

The Pope, adding his voice to the outcry over the Hong Kong situation, also
urged governments to recognize their responsibility to solve what he called a
''grave humanitarian problem.''

It was one of the few times that John Paul singled out a specific government for
criticism, and he did so as he offered his weekly blessing from a balcony
overlooking St. Peter's Square.

Last Tuesday, Hong Kong sent back 51 Vietnamese who had sought shelter there,
and officials in London said the expulsions would continue despite international
protests. The Pope warned today that thousands of other refugees were similarly
threatened.

''Our heart cannot remain insensitive and indifferent in the face of such grave
decisions that affect so dramatically the lives of many persons, including women
and children,'' he said.

No Specific Solutions

Hong Kong, which the British will hand back to China in 1997, has been a favored
haven for Vietnamese boat people for years. But in the last year and a half,
their numbers have grown rapidly, with 44,000 of them crowding into the colony
to join 13,000 who were there waiting resettlement. This influx prompted many
Hong Kong residents to demand that the Vietnamese be forced to return home, and
the process got under way last week.

The Pope, as is his custom, offered no specific solutions, but he prayed that
God would ''enlighten the minds of those who rule the fates of peoples.'' This
included foreign governments, which he said ''cannot avoid giving its generous
contribution.''

''International solidarity has already been expressed through valid initiatives
by countries and various agencies,'' John Paul said. ''We hope that other
concrete initiatives will be born at once, with everyone's prompt cooperation,
to better face and to offer a solution to such a grave humanitarian problem.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Judge Praised as a Man of Moderation and Wisdom

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: MOUNTAIN BROOK, Ala., Dec. 17


In 1966, when he was a lawyer in Birmingham, Robert S. Vance enlisted in the
effort by a small group of Democrats to wrest control of the state Democratic
Party from Gov. George C. Wallace and the segregationist forces that controlled
it.

The odds were against them. It was a tense time for politically ambitious whites
in the state to oppose the Wallace forces and risk being labeled
''integrationist,'' recalled Max Pope, a friend and ally of Judge Vance.

''He was running for the state committee against two other candidates,'' Mr.
Pope said, ''but then the Wallace candidate's check for his qualifying fee
bounced and suddenly it was a two-way race with improved odds.'' Judge Vance won
and was then narrowly elected state Democratic Party chairman.

Judge Vance, the United States Circuit Court of Appeals judge who was killed at
the age of 58 on Saturday when a letter bomb exploded in his home here, served
as state chairman for the next 11 years.

''Bob always said that if it hadn't been for a bounced check he never would have
made it,'' Mr. Pope said.

Shed Segregationist Clothing

And by most other accounts, that bounced check paved the way for a period in
which the Alabama Democratic Party slowly began to shed its segregationist
clothing, ally itself with blacks in the state and move toward what Mr. Pope
said Bob Vance saw as the ''mainstream of the national Democratic Party.'' One
proud moment came in 1968, when Judge Vance led the state's delegation to the
Democratic National Convention in Chicago, the first Alabama delegation to
include blacks.

Although a moderate on civil rights issues, Judge Vance was not very different
from his fellow Alabamians on other issues of the time. His friend United States
Bankruptcy Court Judge Clifford Fulford said Judge Vance was suspicious of
unchecked governmental powers over individuals and tended to be ''tough on
governmental administrative agencies'' with sweeping regulatory powers.

In 1968, he was a vocal and often vitriolic supporter of the Johnson
Administration's Vietnam policies, publicly calling antiwar leaders in the party
''yellow.''

'He Was a Practical Man'

''He was no different than any other Southerner when it came to the war,'' said
Joe Reed, head of the politically powerful Black Alabama Democratic Caucus and
one of the state's delegates to the 1968 national convention. ''He was a
practical man, and that was why he was successful. On the race issue, he
understood our aspirations and we understood his limitations and the result was
that, with help, Bob Vance saved the Democratic Party in this state.''

A native of Talladega, Judge Vance entered college at the University of Alabama
at the age of 15. When he was a senior, he was elected student-body president, a
position that had also started the political careers of men like John Sparkman
and Lister Hill.

A Nimble Intellect

After graduating from the university's law school in 1952, Judge Vance served
two years in the Army with the Judge Advocate Corps. In 1955 he received a
master's of law degree from George Washington University Law School in
Washington. He then returned to Birmingham, where he was a law clerk with the
Alabama State Supreme Court and a trial lawyer for the United States Department
of Labor before going into private practice in 1956. As a lawyer and later as a
judge, friends said, Judge Vance had a nimble intellect. James White, his
neighbor in the wealthy Shook Hill estate community on Shade Mountain, said
telephone conversations with the judge were invariably brief and direct.

''But he could also laugh and cut up one minute and change horses the next to
make momentous and serious decisions,'' Mr. Pope said.

Judge Vance was a supporter of the longshot Presidential campaign of the
Governor of neighboring Georgia, Jimmy Carter. And it was Mr. Carter who
nominated him for the Court of Appeals in 1977, fulfilling a lifelong dream of
Judge Vance.

''He was one of the highest-quality judges you will ever meet,'' said Judge
James C. Hill, a senior judge on the 11th Circuit with Judge Vance. ''I've lost
a highly admired and respected colleague, but I have also lost a great friend.''

Aside from politics and the law, Judge Vance led a quiet life in the two-story
brick colonial perched on the ridgeline of the mountain. He and his wife, Helen,
bred Great Danes and Arabian Salukis.

''He had been involved in judging dog shows,'' his neighbor Mr. White said,
''and it got so I would see him at the airport and not know whether he was off
to judge dogs or to judge cases.''

A Gift From George Wallace

Judge Fulford recalled that the interest in the rare Salukis was an outgrowth of
Judge Vance's earlier political involvement and an indication of how he was
respected even by his opponents. The Vances' first Saluki, he said, was a gift
from his onetime foe, Governor Wallace and his wife Cornelia.

''They got to be friends,'' Judge Fulford said. ''It is unusual to find a man
who could be as adept in politics and still be a good judge.''

Judge Vance is survived by his wife of 36 years and by two sons, Robert S. Jr.,
a Birmingham lawyer, and Charles, a medical school student and Ph.D. candidate
in psychology at Duke University in Durham, N.C.; a sister, Martha Cameron, of
Wilsonville, Ala., and a brother, William, of Washington. A funeral will be held
Wednesday in Mountain Brook.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Explains His High-Wire Role in Awkward Cambodian Coalition

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1549 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Dec. 18


Now 67 years old, Prince Norodom Sihanouk still sits in a gilded exile in the
old French legation here, pampered by the Chinese, monitored by the Khmer Rouge
and haunted by the past and by the fear of making one final, disastrous error to
the detriment of the independent Cambodia he has devoted his soul to achieving.

In conversation, over the fine French champagne he offers in his immense
reception room, he admits he is a moody man, liable to drive the diplomats and
journalists he meets to exasperation. They seek an impossible clarity, he says,
when little is clear in Cambodia, which has for so long had so little say over
its own affairs.

He has spent his life trying to keep his country and himself afloat, with few
resources other than his wit and unpredictability. Given the devotion to him
that still exists in the country he once ruled as a god-king, there is no end to
the great powers and minor factions that try to use him, and which he tries to
use in turn.

''The Romans had their Janus god, with two faces, for peace and war,'' he said.
''But there are two or three or four Sihanouks.''

Not a 'Changeling Prince'

Still, he said, ''I am not 'the changeling prince' as the Western press calls
me. I have to use my imagination and my intelligence to find any reasonable
solution possible for Cambodia - but one based on fact and the realities on the
ground.''

That is why, he says, he has ended up in such an awkward coalition with both the
rightists who overthrew him in 1970 and the Communist Khmer Rouge, who turned
Cambodia into a charnel house when they overthrew the rightists in 1975.

Between the crocodile of Vietnam, which ended the slaughter in late 1978 when it
expelled the Khmer Rouge and set up the current Phnom Penh Government as a
subservient instrument, and the tiger of the Khmer Rouge, he has had to choose
the tiger, he said, ''for while it, too, is man-eating, it is purely
Cambodian.''

He has also been forced to make this choice by China, which has always treated
him with ''friendship and dignity,'' he says, but which remains not only the
prime ally of the Khmer Rouge, but also the main source of weapons and funds to
the non-Communists.

''So we are obliged to be friendly to the Khmer Rouge,'' the Prince said,
''otherwise China will send no more support to us.''

Sees Lack of Western Support

It is also true, he says, that the non-Communist forces are more and more
coordinating their military activity in Cambodia with the Khmer Rouge. ''The
world may condemn us,'' he said, but this, too, is a result of the comparative
lack of military support provided by the West and the non-Communist countries of
Southeast Asia.

''It is a terrible choice,'' he said, but the non-Communist forces must keep
their legitimacy as actors in Cambodia, and that is only possible through
success on the battlefield.

The diplomatic trend, he said, is ''more and more favorable to Hun Sen,'' the
Prime Minister of the Phnom Penh Government, ''so the resistance is obliged to
strengthen its unity,'' particularly when the non-Communist factions are weak.

''You say if we continue to cooperate with the Khmer Rouge on the battlefield,
the outside world may condemn us, and it's true,'' he said. ''But while on the
surface, the outside world condemns us morally, in reality it only gives
importance to military strength. Despite their fine words about moral values,
the outside world is not so moral, because in fact they are observing the
developing military situation in Cambodia.''

''And the ones who win will be embraced and recognized - it is very simple,'' he
said. ''So the most important thing is to show that Hun Sen will not win the
war, so we can force the outside world not to go so quickly to Hun Sen.''

A Quote From 'Hamlet'

The Prince toyed with his white French poodle, Miki, and then gave a sort of
giggle that expanded to fill the room. ''It is something very tragic, very
Shakespearean,'' he said. ''You know Hamlet: 'To be or not to be.' I don't want
to give any justifications, but only to explain.''

As he spoke, his personal secretary, Chhorn Hay, listened from a couch to the
side of the Prince. Mr. Chhorn Hay was Prince Sihanouk's guardian during years
of house arrest in Phnom Penh under the Khmer Rouge. Friendly and at times even
servile, he exists as a constant reminder of Khmer Rouge power and control. When
he notices a reporter trying to maneuver him into the viewfinder of a camera, he
moves away.

The Prince says he is hurt by charges in the West that he is an accomplice of
the Khmer Rouge, which he detests. Pol Pot and Ieng Sary, he says, despite their
claims to have retired, ''are the real masters'' of the Khmer Rouge. ''I have no
doubt that Pol Pot is heading the army,'' he said. ''If I were an accomplice of
the Khmer Rouge I wouldn't say that.''

Pressed, the Prince said that as more and more Western Governments tell him he
must drop the Chinese formula of Khmer Rouge participation in an interim
government in Cambodia to oversee new elections, he has embraced the idea of a
United Nations trusteeship over Cambodia for a year.

Peacekeeping Force Urged

That way, he says, there will be no interim Cambodian government and no Khmer
Rouge participation in anything but free elections, which the United Nations
would also organize and oversee. It just might work, he said, so long as there
is also a United Nations-sponsored International Control Mechanism and armed
peacekeeping force in Cambodia for at least five years, and preferably for 10.

China and the Khmer Rouge opposed this second condition, he said, and he was
sure that Mr. Hun Sen would also reject it, because it would mean the
dismantling of his Government, though not his party. In return, the Prince would
disband his government in exile and allow the country's United Nations seat to
be vacant until a new government could be elected.

But if Mr. Hun Sen should somehow accept his proposal, including mutual
dismantling, the year-long United Nations trusteeship, the control mechanism and
peacekeeping force, the Prince said, ''then I will go home to Phnom Penh,''
regardless of any opposition from the Khmer Rouge or from China.

''The Khmer Rouge,'' he said, ''will continue their war, but never mind, the
whole world will condemn them.'' To defy China is a serious personal risk, he
said, ''but there must be some way out of this nightmare of stalemate and war.''

Last week, an editor close to the Phnom Penh Government said Mr. Hun Sen would
be willing to disband his Cabinet and accept a United Nations-controlled
election in Cambodia under what is called the Namibia formula. But under this
model, the Hun Sen Government would continue to administer the country at the
local level, a condition that Prince Sihanouk rejects.

No Illusions on Khmer Rouge

For Khieu Samphan, the official head of the Khmer Rouge and the man with whom he
often deals, the Prince has a sort of contempt. Khieu Samphan, he says, is
probably only the seventh-ranking official in the Khmer Rouge hierarchy, coming
after Ieng Thirith, the wife of Ieng Sary.

He has no illusions about the Khmer Rouge, he says, or about the Thais. ''Pol
Pot is like Hitler,'' he said. ''Unless you kill him, you cannot oblige him to
stop fighting and killing people.''

He shakes his head. ''Pol Pot would not be with us in this world, he would not
be alive without the Thais,'' he said. Pol Pot remains ''terribly weak'' with
malaria, ''yet each time he became very ill, the Thai army sent a helicopter to
his headquarters in Trat Province to take him to the best hospital in Bangkok,
and gave him the best room, normally kept for the best of the Thai generals, and
the best doctors took care of him.''

With the introduction of gossip, the Prince brightens. It is true, he said, that
Pol Pot's first wife, Khieu Ponnary, the sister of Ieng Thirith, is very ill and
dying in a hospital here, perhaps dead. Ieng Sary, he said, has not been seen in
three or four years, and the rumor is that he, too, is dead.

''Did you know,'' he asks, ''that Pol Pot gave Khieu Samphan a wife?'' A
princely giggle. ''She is a Khmer Rouge cadre, a peasant girl and trusted by Pol
Pot. She is not ugly, she is rather pretty, with a dark skin. But I know Khieu
Samphan, and it seems he is not so much interested in women.''

On 'Very Dangerous' Men

''Men who are not so interested in women are very dangerous,'' the Prince
continued, ''for they must concentrate on other things, which makes them very
dangerous in wartime.''

He giggled again. ''But we nationalists, we are very interested in beautiful
women. We are true Cambodians. We say the Cambodians are 'les chauds lapins et
les chaudes lapines,' yes, yes, hot rabbits,'' he said, overcome with laughter.

But rather quickly, another mood takes hold, and the Prince grows somber. ''I
cherish my friendship with China. I don't want to lose it. It's the reason I'm
hesitating,'' he said, acknowledging that it would be very easy now to make a
tragic mistake.

And then he gave a sort of groan. ''I have problems of conscience,'' he said.
''I take sleeping pills each evening. I don't sleep without them. I have so many
problems in my head. I suffer, I really suffer. It's not a comedy, I assure
you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk with his dog, Miki (NYT/Steven
Erlanger)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Sharing the Blame for Boat People

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 402 words


A chorus of angry, righteous protests have been stirred by Britain's hard-boiled
decision to forcibly bundle 51 Vietnamese boat people onto planes bound from
Hong Kong to Hanoi. Governments, relief agencies, the European Parliament and
now Pope John Paul II have joined in denouncing what is plainly an inhumane act.

Though Prime Minister Thatcher insists that the policy stands, the outcry has
elicited a seasonal concession - no more deportations until after the Christmas
holidays.

Yet those who criticize Mrs. Thatcher have not squarely addressed certain
awkward realities in a poignant human tragedy. Most of the Hong Kong refugees
have been driven from North Vietnam as much by poverty as by an oppressive
political system. And the British are not wholly wrong in asserting that the
exodus will continue as long as Vietnamese face hunger and joblessness at home.

The U.S. condemns forcible return as ''odious'' but won't provide homes for the
boat people or lift a finger to change the conditions that impel them to flee.
This moralism smacks of hypocrisy.

When Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978, the United States responded with a total
embargo that sharply curtailed Hanoi's exports of raw material. Successive
Administrations set several conditions for ending the embargo and establishing
ties with Hanoi. They included withdrawal from Cambodia and progress on finding
2,500 U.S. servicemen still listed as missing in action in Indochina.

In September, Vietnam completed its withdrawal. Progress has been made on the
M.I.A.'s. Washington now says this is not enough. It wants Hanoi to support a
Cambodia policy few can understand, much less defend. That policy would force
Hanoi's allies in Cambodia to share power with the mass-murdering Khmer Rouge.
Vietnam has refused, and as punishment its application for an International
Monetary Fund loan has been blocked by the United States.

Two courses are open to President Bush if he is to give moral and political
content to American preaching about the boat people. He can take the lead in
urging industrial countries to provide a home for all 50,000 refugees now in
Hong Kong camps. And he can lift the U.S. veto on lending to Vietnam, whose
wretched conditions are partly the result of economic sanctions.

Otherwise, Mrs. Thatcher can with some justice dismiss U.S. objections to
British policy as the irrelevant mutterings of Uncle Humbug.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The 'Peace Dividend': A Rubber Check

BYLINE: By Jim Sasser; Jim Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee, is chairman of the
Senate Budget Committee.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In what is being billed by the Administration as a victory for ''deficit
reduction,'' the Pentagon is settling for a fiscal 1991 budget of $292 billion.

This nod toward fiscal responsibility follows Administration announcements that
it is contemplating dramatic Pentagon reductions in response to the relaxation
of world tensions: $180 billion in cuts over four years; cuts of up to 290,000
from the nation's 2.1 million troops; a cut of some 23,000 jobs from the
580,000-strong procurement bureacracy.

On the basis of those promised economies, we are seriously debating the question
of what to do with the ''peace dividend.'' But how can we speak of a peace
dividend with a military budget of $292 billion? The peace dividend, as
currently constituted, is a rubber check.

The $292 billion defense budget for fiscal 1991 actually represents an increase
of some $5 billion from 1990. It would save only about $4.7 billion from current
inflation-adjusted spending levels - a mere fraction of the $40 billion to $60
billion we'll need to hit next year's deficit target under Gramm-Rudman.

Worse still, the purported $180 billion ''cut'' actually takes, as its starting
point, the Administration's ''wish list'' budget, which would have raised
Pentagon spending by some $200 billion above a true freeze level between now and
1994.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has apparently concluded that even a $20 billion
increase over the next five years is more austerity than the Pentagon can
absorb. But it is clear that the Secretary's worst case scenario - the deepest
''cuts'' he's currently considering - would produce a ''peace dividend'' that is
actually a $20 billion debit.

To put all of that as simply as possible, the Pentagon gets $287 billion in the
budget just passed for fiscal 1990. Under the exercise in ''austerity'' proposed
by the Secretary, the Pentagon would get more than $290 billion annually through
the mid-90's.

The Secretary's proposal appears to have been driven wholly by the desire to
offer some public acknowledgment that the world has indeed changed. But it is a
grudging acknowledgment at best.

It assumes continuation of virtually all of the Pentagon's priorities and
programs, and it eschews entirely a fundamental re-evaluation of our military
establishment in light of our changing security needs. Such a reappraisal has to
be the beginning point.

Fully half of our $287 billion military budget is devoted to defending Western
Europe against the now remote threat of a Warsaw Pact invasion.

Earlier this month, the Pentagon acknowledged that its estimate of a two-week
mobilization period for a full-scale Soviet invasion seriously overstated the
threat: 33 to 44 days is a far more likely projection. That profoundly
exaggerated threat assessment was inflating our defense budget long before the
Iron Curtain began to rise and the potential for hostilities in Europe began to
decline.

After we make adjustments for ''the common European home,' which now appears to
be under construction, the entire frame of reference for America's defense
expenditures changes radically.

If we add to all this the potential for completing treaties to slash strategic
nuclear arms and conventional forces in Europe, we should be aiming for a
military budget that returns to the post-Vietnam Nixon-Ford era average:
somewhere in the range of $215 billion in constant 1990 dollars.

That is a legitimate target, once we cast a critical eye on all our military
assumptions, from our entire force structure to the weapons systems now in the
pipeline: from the $35 billion advanced tactical aircraft to the $45 billion
advanced tactical fighter to the $70 billion B-2 bomber.

Our allies and our former adversaries have already begun to respond decisively.
West Germany is talking about reducing its ground forces by 20 percent. Hungary
has unofficially asked that Soviet troops be removed from within its borders,
and Czechoslovakia seems to be following suit.

Those countries, and many others in both the East and the West, are poised to
advance into a world in which the strength of nations will be measured in
economic output. We should prepare to do the same.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Upheaval in the East;
Rumania's Suppression of Protest Condemned by the U.S. as 'Brutal'

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 19


The White House today condemned Rumania's continuing crackdown on political
demonstrators as ''brutal'' and said the United States was considering teaming
up with its Western allies and Moscow to develop some kind of coordinated
response.

Eastern European press agencies carried reports today saying that more shootings
of demonstrators were taking place in the western Rumanian city of Timisoara. In
one of the most startling of these, the Tanyug press agency of Yugoslavia said
there were unconfirmed reports of up to 2,000 dead. Other reports in Hungary and
Yugoslavia talked of hundreds of deaths.

The State Department said it could not confirm any casualty numbers from the
reported clashes between police and demonstrators in Timisoara, but it said two
United States Embassy officers were sent to the city on Monday from Bucharest,
500 miles away, to try to make a firsthand assessment.

Military units throughout Rumania have been put on alert, the State Department
said, and its airport and borders with neighboring countries have been sealed to
foreign visitors. International telephone calls into the country are receiving a
busy signal, and reporters are being barred from entering the country.

''The repressive measures undertaken by the Rumanian Government are totally
unjustified and stand in stark contrast to the positive changes taking place
elsewhere in Eastern Europe,'' said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman.
''The United States condemns the brutal use of police force by the Rumanian
Government.''

President Nicolae Ceausescu of Rumania left Bucharest on Monday to make a state
visit to Iran. In Teheran today, he laid a wreath at the tomb of Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini and spoke about the need for peace in the Persian Gulf.

Conceding that the United States had little leverage to influence the Rumanian
Government, Mr. Fitzwater said that Washington was talking with its allies about
''pursuing some kind of coordinated response'' through the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe to find out what is happening in Rumania and
to restrain the Bucharest authorities. In addition to the United States and its
15 NATO allies, the 35-nation conference includes the Soviet Union and its
Warsaw Pact allies, including Rumania, as well as neutral European nations.

It was this organization that produced the 1975 Helsinki Final Act, which
confirmed Europe's post-World War II boundaries and established criteria for
human rights. Mr. Fitzwater said a provision of the conference allowed member
countries to verify events in other participating states independently.

Shevardnadze's Regret

In a revealing sign of the times, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A.
Shevardnadze, joined the White House today in condemning any violent crackdown
in Rumania. Speaking before 200 members of the European Parliament in Brussels,
Mr. Shevardnadze said that he had heard of ''some unpleasant things'' happening
in Rumania and that if reports of bloodshed were true, ''I can only express my
very profound regret. We are categorically opposed to the use of force.'' Mr.
Ceausescu has openly sought to put a distance between his Government and that of
President Mikhail S. Goirbachev in the Soviet Union.

There was no comment from Beijing, where the Chinese authorities crushed a
peaceful pro-democracy demonstration in Tiananmen Square in June.

For many years the Government of President Ceausescu had been Washington's
favorite Communist regime in Eastern Europe. Until 1988 Rumania received
most-favored-nation trade benefits, largely because its foreign policy was very
independent from Moscow and supportive of American diplomacy in Asia, where
Bucharest mediated between the United States and Vietnam, and in the Middle
East, where it mediated between Egypt and Israel. Rumania also refused to take
part in the Warsaw Pact's 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia.

In the last several years, however, sharp differences arose between Washington
and Bucharest over Rumania's treatment of religious figures and President
Ceausescu's authoritarian rule.

''Rumania was a favorite of ours for a long time,'' said Charles Gati, an expert
on Eastern Europe at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y. ''In retrospect, I think
we probably looked too much at Rumania's role as a maverick in foreign policy
and underestimated what was going on inside the country in terms of human rights
violations. Although we woke up in recent years, for too long we lent our moral
support to a man who is turning out to be one of the worst dictators in Eastern
Europe.''

Trade Status Withdrawn in '88

In February 1988 President Ronald Reagan signed an order withdrawing trade
concessions from Rumania under the most-favored-nation program. That was a
formality, however, since Rumania informed the State Department earlier in the
year that it would not seek a renewal of the concessions because to obtain them,
Bucharest would have to address American concerns about human rights.

In 1987 Rumania's exports to the United States were nearly $800 million and its
imports of American goods slightly exceeded $200 million. Today, total trade
between the two countries amounts to only $300 million - most of it Rumanian
refined petroleum products exported to the United States.

Jeri Laber, executive director of Helsinki Watch, which monitors human rights in
Eastern Europe, said: ''Ceausescu seems impervious to what the world thinks. He
is driven by an almost maniacal urge to rule unhindered. He has fostered a cult
of personality that has not been seen anywhere since Stalin. But Rumania cannot
remain an island. It may not be a peaceful revolution, but it is going to be a
revolution.''

The State Department and White House were asked whether the Bush Administration
planned to impose sanctions on Rumania or ban high-level visits and contacts
with Rumanian officials, as it supposedly did with China after the killings in
Beijing in June.

''That would be a presidential decision that I don't believe the White House has
made yet,'' said the State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler.

''Our attitude toward what happened in Tiananmen Square in China'' is the same
as what happened in Rumania, said Mr. Fitzwater. Then, alluding to the two
secret visits made to China by the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft,
and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger despite the sanctions he
added:

''We've had the same attitude toward violations of human rights wherever we
would find them. If you are saying, does this mean that six months from now we
are going to make a special mission to Rumania, no.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Rumania showing location of Timisoara (NYT) (pg. A17)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 981 words




International    A3-18

In a military operation in Panama, U.S. troops were ordered into the streets in
an effort to topple the Government of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noreiga, the White
house announced.    Page A1



Man in the news: The new President of Brazil, Fernando Collor de Mello, sold
Brazilians on his free-market vision of a new Brazil with less government and
more growth.    A1



Sanctions against China were waived by President Bush, who lifted a ban imposed
by Congress on loans to companies that do business with Beijing and approved the
export of three satellites to China.    A1



The leaders of the two Germanys met in Dresden for the first time since a tide
of change swept the East. They agreed to reopen the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin
and allow free movement for all Germans across their border.    A1



At a plant in East Berlin, men are of two minds

    A16



Rumania's crackdown on protesters was condemned as ''brutal'' by the White
House, which also said it was considering teaming with Moscow and the Western
allies to develop a coordinated response.    A1



Visitors horrified at Rumanian protest scene

    A17



In Czechoslovakia, democracy and a free-market economic system were approved by
the Communist-led Parliament. Vaclav Havel appears on the verge of becoming the
first non-Communist President since 1948.    A17



Military analysis: The Warsaw Pact has been transformed in a few short months
from a military alliance feared by the West to a hollow organization with no
clear purpose.    A16



Mikhail Gorbachev's economic plan was ratified by the Soviet national congress,
as his Government easily rebuffed a bold vote of no-confidence pushed by
opponents who warned of a retreat from perestroika.    A18



Fiber-optic links to the Soviet Union could be built with the help of an
American company, the Commerce Secretary said, showing new flexibility in
high-technology exports to the Eastern bloc.    D1



Jews gathered in Moscow from all over the Soviet Union. Their quandary is how to
help those who want to emigrate yet still protect the hopes of those who stay.
    A18



Shevardnadze, at NATO, calls for links in East-West pacts

    A18



Lithuanian Communist Party nears the brink

    A18



Arab and European chiefs will meet in Paris this week in the most ambitious
effort yet to revive political and economic discussion between the Arab League
and the European Community.    A14



Beirut, unsure of future, embraces the holidays

    A13



Israeli oil purchase from Iran is disclosed, linked to captives

    A3



Britain's decision to return refugees in Hong Kong to Vietnam is causing alarm
among Vietnamese boat people and refugee workers throughout Southeast Asia.
A12



U.S. delegate calls U.N.'s session ''constructive''    A3



National    A19-25, B6-7



Investigators have linked the bombs that killed a Federal court judge in Alabama
and a civil rights lawyer in Georgia. Another bomb was found at the local
headquarters of the N.A.A.C.P in Jacksonville, Fla.    A1



Victim of bombing is called quiet but effective

    B6



The testimony of Oliver L. North cannot be used in the trial of John M.
Poindexter for his role in the Iran-contra affair, a judge ruled. The decision
is a setback for the Government's case against Mr. Poindexter.    A19



The causes of the accidents last month that killed 10 Navy personnel include
inadequate supervision, lax safety procedures and complacency, said Adm.
Carlisle Trost.    A20

Washington Talk: A peace dividend that will become available as military
spending is reduced has Congressional committees rushing out of the gates a
month before Congress reconvenes.    A20



The risk of cancer from radiation at low levels appears to be four times as high
as previously estimated, the National Research Council said.    A22



Three die and dozens are hurt as train hits truck in fog    A20



A Christmas party helps the forgotten recall joy

    A22



Nominee for energy post is accused of lying

    A23



Residents in Vermont decline to bail out an idled incinerator    B7



Regional    B1-5



Vulgarity is protected as free speech, New York State's highest court ruled,
striking down a major provision of the state's harassment statute.    A1



On a cold night on the city's streets, thousands of homeless people faced
temperatures that fell to 16 degrees and makeshift beds on subway trains,
heating grates or wherever they could find a warm spot.    B1



Housing aides in Hartford ran a racket, developers' suit says

    B1



Eleven are indicted in Atlantic City influence peddling

    B2



New York's list of troubled schools includes one in Manhattan where the hallways
are clean and most test scores are up. Officials say the state's list of 43
schools unfairly singles out those with urban problems.    B1

Science contest accepts late entries from Stuyvesant High

    B3



Crews of four firefighters, not five, can be assigned to the pumper trucks of
New York City's engine companies, saving at least $25 million a year, the Board
of Collective Bargaining ruled.    B1



A new head of the drug abuse agency was named. Arthur Webb, head of the Office
of Mental Retardation, has a reputation as a trouble-shooter. He replaces Julio
Martinez, who resigned after a highly critical report on the agency.    B3



Child-welfare agency cited in Connecticut lawsuit

    B4



Koch bids farewell to the police    B3



Neediest Cases    B4


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

301 Chinese Expelled by Japan

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 336 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Dec. 19


In the first of what is expected to be a series of transfers, the Japanese
Government said today that it would return 301 Chinese who sailed here over the
summer falsely claiming to be Vietnamese refugees and seeking to resettle in
Japan.

The group of 270 males and 31 females, including 13 children younger than 15
years old, were a small part of a wave of about 3,000 Chinese and Vietnamese who
arrived on Japanese shores this summer and fall, taking unprepared Japanese
authorities by surprise.

They sought asylum, but Japan has said that many were Chinese who came to Japan
seeking better economic opportunities and were not fleeing political
persecution.

Japan has thus treated them as illegal entrants rather than refugees, which
means that they cannot obtain jobs in Japan or qualify for Government services.
Most have been living in overcrowded detention centers awaiting Government
checks on their status and backgrounds.

The Japanese Government also said today that the wife and son of the suspect in
the hijacking of a Chinese jetliner to Japan over the weekend returned
voluntarily to China today. The suspect, who has been identified by Japanese
news organizations as Zhang Zhenhai, a manager for an electrical power plant in
the northern Chinese province of Hepei, remains in a Fukuoka hospital with a
broken pelvis that he suffered when he was pushed from an open door of the jet
after it landed in southern Japan on Saturday.

Japan is to turn the first group of boat people over to Chinese officials at the
port of Nagasaki on Thursday. The Chinese Government agreed to take the people
after long negotiations with Japan and has hired a passenger ship for the
two-day return trip to southern China, the Foreign Ministry said.

Toshio Tsunozaki, director of the Foreign Ministry's refugees and human-rights
division, made clear that at least some of the Chinese were being returned
against their will. ''Many are willing to go back because they have no
opportunity to work in Japan,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong's Move Worries Refugees Elsewhere

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1049 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 18


Britain's decision to send boat people back to Vietnam from Hong Kong is causing
alarm among Vietnamese refugees and refugee workers throughout Southeast Asia.

Many of the emigres have been living in fear since June, when an international
conference attended by more than 40 countries raised the possibility of forcible
repatriation if all other alternatives failed to persuade the Vietnamese to
return voluntarily.

At a refugee camp in Manila, where the flags of the Philippines and the United
Nations fly side by side, Vietnamese boat people said last week that they had
learned of Hong Kong's action through radio broadcasts and newspaper accounts.

They fear a similar fate, even though the Philippines has been more generous
than Hong Kong in providing temporary asylum to boat people who come to its
shores.

''It's better to die here than to go back to Vietnam,'' said Nguyen Thi Cuc, a
58-year-old woman who arrived in the Philippines in May 1988 after a six-day
trip by boat from Vietnam. Her statement was echoed by many boat people living
with her in stalls of a shed that looks like a barn.

Fear of Reprisal

''When we left Vietnam,'' she said, ''we decided to leave forever and never want
to go back. Even rocks on the road would try to escape from Vietnam if they had
feet.''

The Philippines has one of the region's largest programs for Vietnamese
refugees. One of those living at the Philippine Refugee Transit Center,
21-year-old Che Ngoc Phuong, said she felt pity for those forced back to
Vietnam. ''Their situation is like mine,'' she said. ''When you go back, they
give you a bad report because you have been disloyal to your country, have
escaped.'' Such people, she said, have often been jailed or required to accept
menial jobs like sweeping streets.

On Dec. 12, Hong Kong, a British colony, sent 51 boat people - 8 men, 17 women
and 26 children - back to Vietnam on a plane loaded before dawn under heavy
security. Under a storm of criticism, Britain agreed to postpone further
deportations until after a debate in the House of Commons.

The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said, ''Vietnam has told us that
those repatriated will not be punished for leaving.'' Neither boat people nor
refugee workers who try to arrange resettlement trust such assurances, and they
doubt Britain can monitor the treatment of those who return.

'Don't Trust Communist Talk'

''The refugees don't trust Communist talk and promises,'' said Sister Pascale Le
Thi Triu, a Vietnamese Daughter of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul, who runs
the Center for Assistance to Displaced Persons in Manila. ''They think the West
is very naive to believe what the Communists say.''

The British colonial government of Hong Kong contends that it may legally send
boat people back to Vietnam if the migrants cannot demonstrate ''a well-founded
fear of persecution.''

About 57,000 Vietnamese are jammed into Hong Kong's camps and detention centers.
Thirteen thousand are recognized as refugees eligible for resettlement. The rest
arrived after tough screening procedures were introduced in June 1988. Most are
being held as illegal immigrants and face deportation because the authorities
concluded that they had fled for economic, rather than political, reasons.

In addition to the 57,000 Vietnamese emigres in Hong Kong, there are more than
11,000 in Thailand, 20,000 in Malaysia and somewhat smaller numbers in Indonesia
and the Philippines.

Roger P. Winter, director of the United States Committee for Refugees, a private
group that monitors the treatment of refugees, said: ''Hong Kong is a bellwether
for the region. If Hong Kong gets away with forced repatriation, it will unleash
Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia to pursue less humane approaches. Those three
countries have pushed back refugee boats, resulting in deaths in 1988 and 1989,
and like Hong Kong they would be free to work out their own bilateral
arrangements with Vietnam.''

Harsher Measures Seen

An official of an international relief agency here warned today that ''we will
see the collapse of regional and international agreements on the protection of
refugees if forcible repatriation becomes the order of the day.''

An American diplomat predicted that Thailand and other Southeast Asian countries
would try to negotiate ''a multilateral agreement for the eventual mandatory
repatriation'' of boat people who do not qualify for refugee status and are
unwilling to return voluntarily to Vietnam. In the absence of such an agreement,
he said, some countries in the region will again push off refugee boats before
they unload.

Thai officials said they would reluctantly consider involuntary repatriation if
Hong Kong's program works and if Western countries do not fulfill their
commitments to take refugees given temporary asylum here.

''We are studying Britain's repatriation of Vietnamese refugees from Hong
Kong,'' said Khachadpai Burusapatana, deputy secretary general of Thailand's
National Security Council. ''We are not saying that Britain did the right thing
or the wrong thing, because it's their internal affair. But we have to study
these things so we may in future adapt and apply the good results to our own
problems.''

Plans for Larger Returns

Vietnam accepted the first batch of boat people from Hong Kong last week, but
says it opposes the idea of ''forcible repatriation.'' Britain has not informed
the United States of the exact terms of its agreement with Vietnam. Western
diplomats say Hanoi has apparently agreed to take back boat people who do not
volunteer but acquiesce in their expulsion from Hong Kong.

''It looks as if Vietnam will take them back as long as security forces don't
have to physically push them down the runway,'' said one diplomat.

British officials said they were making plans for larger groups of boat people
to be sent back to Vietnam against their will, possibly by ship. They contend
that such expulsions are needed as a deterrent to those who would set sail from
Vietnam in February or March, when the current monsoon season ends.

Refugee workers here question whether the expulsions will have the intended
effect. They note that the strict screening procedures adopted last year were
also supposed to deter new arrivals, but failed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of boat people demonstrating against the forced repatriations, at
a refugee detention in Hong Kong (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
Asian Refugees Discover Gold In Two Hearts

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 771 words


Robert and Beatrice Donofrio personify this season's best dream, the dream that
anything is possible for those of good heart. He is a tattooed, plain-spoken
civilian employee of the Police Department who has always lived on Staten
Island. She grew up poor in the Philippines, found her way to America and earned
a doctorate from Columbia University.

They met in 1978, when Mr. Donofrio was towing her car from a no-parking zone.
He saw her searching for it, shivering in the cold. He scurried back with her
coat. She said, ''You pig!'' They were married three months later.

Material success followed: He progressed in the civil service, she in teaching.
Together, they pursued small business interests, from making silk flowers to
running a video store. They also restored a dilapidated frame house and mastered
the mysteries of multiple mortgages; today they own six houses.

More important, the two 49-year-olds have a son, Antonio - age 10, chubby and
razor-sharp. They have also had 39 Asian foster children whom they say they love
just as much.

The children came from refugee camps where they were alone, and thus eligible
for aid under a decade-old Federal program. City officials treat them as regular
foster children, contracting their placement to private agencies. The Donofrios
got theirs from Sheltering Arms Children's Service.

Last Thursday, they took two Vietnamese boys, their current charges, to Kennedy
Airport to meet parents they had last seen five years ago. At first, they didn't
recognize each other.

Later, in the Donofrios' dining room, Hon and Kwang Sam, 14 and 12 respectively,
tried to make up for lost time. Their five younger siblings, who had come on
Thursday with their parents, gobbled hot dogs given them when they turned up
their noses at American cereals, and scurried off to watch TV. For the first
time, their father, Vong Dong Sam, 43, and their mother, A Duong Sy, 36, heard
the boys' story.

They hadn't seen their sons since they gave them each two ounces of gold, put
them on a truck and said they'd follow later. Now they listened raptly. There
were long rides in the backs of other trucks, the stealing of the gold, bare
feet bloody from miles of jungle. The boys, then 9 and 7, caught in the war
between Cambodia and Vietnam, were interrogated at gunpoint.

''We're too afraid to cry,'' said Hon, his voice quivering as if he was
re-living the ordeal. ''We keep running.''

Then there were years in a refugee camp in Thailand. Finally, in September 1987,
they found a new home with the Donofrios in Port Richmond, Staten Island.

The parents then told their own horror story. Paying gold for counterfeit
documents they were then afraid to use. Catching fish for money. A different,
but equally crowded Thai refugee camp.

Everyone told his thread of the tangled tale of how the family was reunited.
Right now, everyone is staying with the Donofrios.

Since arriving, the younger children, ages 3 to 11, have played with toys
seemingly for the first time. They already delight in singing ''Jingle Bells.''

This is one great satisfaction for the Donofrios. Another is that all their
foster children graduated from high school. Another is that three became members
of the armed services. Still another is that Rith, whose parents died on
Cambodia's killing fields, has found a good job.

The Donofrios' generosity is apparent in the Buddhist shrine they built to give
foster children a place to worship. But they expect them to learn the value of
hard work. Mrs. Donofrio requires her charges to collect bottles, then to split
the proceeds equally.

When the newly arrived 5-year-old boy blurted out a curse word, he learned two
things: First, that Mr. Donofrio knows a bit of Vietnamese, and, second, what is
unacceptable. Mr. Donofrio raised his voice. The next day, the boy's first words
were in English and polite: ''Good morning, Father.''

The Donofrios have gone to K Mart and the Salvation Army to buy warm children's
clothes, and are on the prowl to find the parents jobs. They hope for something
in Atlantic City. That would enable the family to live in a house the Donofrios
own in New Jersey.

''Maybe in a year, I'll sell them the house with no money down,'' Mr. Donofrio
said.

They have requested more children. But even as refugees are being forced home
from Hong Kong, this nation's aid program is being phased out, said Leena
Kuivanen, supervisor of Sheltering Arms' refugee effort. ''Vietnamese refugees
are no longer fashionable,'' she speculated.

A real pity. ''You can give them a crumb and it's like giving them a piece of
gold,'' Mr. Donofrio said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

TOO MANY COOKS? THE MORE THE MERRIER

BYLINE: By MOLLY O'NEILL

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2424 words


FIVE cookbook authors were recently asked to consider themselves a family and to
imagine the following scene:

It's the night before Christmas and you just got home. Your arms are weary, the
handles of shopping bags have dug red welts into your palms, your Yuletide
spirit has been worn as thin as your credit cards. You're hungry, but nobody had
time to plan dinner. You'd like a festive meal, though not one person has the
pep to create it.

But it's Christmas Eve! What if you all pitched in for an hour or so and made a
holiday dinner of whatever is in the house or available at the corner store?

''That should be great fun,'' said Julia Child whose book ''The Way to Cook''
was recently published by Knopf.

On the appointed day her voice rose like a matriarch's over those of the other
authors, Sheila Lukins, Richard Grausman, Nicole Routhier and Dr. Jessica B.
Harris.

The five cooks weren't born family, but for one evening they were chosen kin.
They gathered in a Manhattan apartment kitchen, tied on aprons and faced the
challenge of Christmas Eve dinner.

Dr. Harris spotted sweet potatoes and saw hors d'oeuvres: ''If we dip them in
batter and fry them, they would be wonderful with drinks,'' she said. Dr.
Harris, 41 years old, teaches French and English at Queens College and is the
author of ''Iron Pots and Wooden Spoons: Africa's Gifts to New World Cooking''
(Athenum, 1989).

Ms. Routhier said, tentatively, ''Maybe I will stuff these bananas with almond
paste and flambe them like in Vietnam?'' Her book is ''The Foods of Vietnam''
(Stewart Tabori & Chang, 1989). She grew up in Laos and now, at 33, is a caterer
in Manhattan.

It was beginning to sound like home. After their younger colleagues had staked
claims at either end of the meal, the veterans negotiated the heart of dinner.

''Some little Cornish hens, perhaps?'' said the 77-year-old Mrs. Child. ''You
can get them anywhere and they are quick and good.''

''We could bake that butternut squash with carrots and onions and puree it into
a soup,'' said Mrs. Lukins, a former art teacher who co-founded the Silver
Palate in Manhattan and who, at 47, has written ''The New Basics Cookbook''
(Workman, 1989). ''Squash,'' she added, ''is so Christmas.''

Mr. Grausman, a 51-year old cooking teacher who is the author of ''At Home With
the French Classics'' (Workman, 1989), contemplated the potatoes. ''We could
slice them and bake them with chicken broth or cream,'' he said. The cooks
raised a collective brow. Cream! But it's Christmas! And it would be elegant to
have sauteed mushrooms, too.

Within 15 minutes, the oven had been turned to 400 degrees and Mrs. Lukins was
peeling and chopping butternut squash, carrots and onions on a corner of the
butcher-block work island in the center of the kitchen. She wore a black T-shirt
and ropes of vintage gold necklaces. Her hedge of dark hair was barely contained
by a barrette and her rumpled white apron was rolled at the waist. She worked
quickly. To her right Mr. Grausman in a tidy turtleneck and a crisp apron that
said ''Who's Afraid of French Cooking?'' used a paring knife to carve eight
potatoes into a uniform shape.

On the other side of the island, Mrs. Child had tucked a blue towel into the
waist of her white apron. She splattered herself as she removed the gizzards
from the game hens and used kitchen shears to cut each in half. She moved with
the calm of one who has cooked many Christmases. Stopping in the first few
minutes of preparation, she surveyed the industrious group, smiled with the
pride that some reserve for progeny and began to brown the birds' trimmings and
gizzards in a saucepan.

''That will bring out more flavor in the broth,'' she told no one in particular.
''Is there any bay leaf in this house?''

At another counter Dr. Harris, who was wearing a Senegalese batik apron over her
sweater and skirt, peeled sweet potatoes, moving at a meditative pace. Ms.
Routhier, in a sensible sweater and white apron, efficiently made a batter to
coat the bananas.

They looked like so many members of a family, back home from all directions.
Easing behind each other to stove or sink, exchanging ingredients, utensils or
gossip, each was careful to accommodate the different generations and
temperaments.

They agreed that each person should be in charge of a single dish - that's the
most efficient way to organize a cooperative meal. ''It cuts down the barking of
orders,'' said Mrs. Lukins, over the chop-chop, scrape-scrape, hack-hack that
filled the kitchen.

Fine organization does not preclude collaboration. ''Can somebody help take the
wishbones out of these birds?'' Mrs. Child asked. And it doesn't eliminate
potential friction: ''I'd help you if Richard would give me back the knife of
choice,'' replied Mrs. Lukins, whose helter-skelter of vegetables was already in
a baking pan, covered with chicken broth and foil. Mr. Grausman sculptured his
fourth potato.

Ms. Routhier, who had finished her batter, patted a layer of almond paste onto
banana halves. Dr. Harris vigorously peeled sweet potatoes, sending a shower of
confetti over the counter.

''Everybody here cooks better than I do,'' she said. Ms. Routhier finished her
bananas, put them in the refrigerator to cook later, and began cleaning the
sweet-potato spindrift. Families accommodate. ''The biggest difference between
cooking with professionals and cooking with your family is that pros clean their
areas,'' Mrs. Lukins remarked.

After 40 minutes the aroma of simmering broth and roasting squash permeated the
kitchen. Mr. Grausman, his potatoes sliced and arranged neatly in a casserole,
warmed a combination of milk and cream on the stove. Dr. Harris warmed a pot of
vegetable oil for deep frying. Mrs. Child used a mallet to flatten the game
birds, lined them up on a baking sheet and pushed them under a broiler. Ms.
Routhier began cleaning mushrooms as Mr. Grausman drizzled the warmed cream over
the potatoes that he had seasoned with minced garlic, salt and pepper.

Mrs. Lukins removed the squash from the oven and began to puree it in batches in
a food processor. Mrs. Child watched, transfixed.

''Isn't it amazing how easy it's gotten?'' she marveled. ''My first Christmas in
France it took a whole day just to make the ham mousse. We didn't have food
processors; we didn't even have refrigerators. Of course we had help.''

''Help?'' Mrs. Lukins asked. Leaning over the steaming food processor, she
pushed her hair off her forehead and repeated the word like a foreigner seeking
a definition. ''Help?''

''These days the only way to have Christmas is to make Christmas,'' said Dr.
Harris, dipping sweet potato slices in batter and dropping them hissing into the
hot oil. The birds began to sizzle under the broiler. The mushrooms were rinsed,
drained and patted dry. Mr. Grausman slid his potatoes into the oven. Mrs. Child
enlisted a younger arm to push the game bird livers through a fine-mesh
strainer. Dinner was under control. ''Is there a little wine in this house?''
she asked. Of course the conversation wasn't the standard homey holiday chat.
Instead of being about work and marriages and children, the talk was of book
advances and sales.

The soup was warming and Mr. Grausman took his dish of bubbling potatoes from
the oven and set it on a trivet. Quickly he sauteed the mushrooms. Mrs. Child
pulled the pan of birds from the broiler and turned up the heat under the
strained broth. Between other last-minute touches, the cooks leaned against the
counters, sipped wine, nibbled at sweet potato fritters and, like disparate
generations of a family, traded Christmas stories - a tropical Christmas, a
Jewish-American Christmas, a Baptist Christmas, a foie-gras-in-France Christmas.

''Just a normal American family,'' said Mrs. Child, spilling a glass of wine as
she whisked the strained livers and butter into her Cornish hen sauce.

''An ancestor must be thirsty,'' Dr. Harris said.

COOKING FROM MEMORY, A 'FAMILY' OF CHEFS OFFERS IDEAS FOR A FESTIVE MEAL

Sweet Potato Fritters
(Adapted from ''Iron Pots and Wooden Spoons'')

Preparation time: 15 minutes
Cooking time: 15 minutes

6 medium size sweet potatoes
1 1/2 teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 cup flour
2 eggs
2 tablespoons water
Oil for deep frying
6 scallions, minced.

1.Place the sweet potatoes in a large pot, add one teaspoon of salt, cover with
cold water and bring to a boil. Boil for 10 to 15 minutes until the potatoes are
tender. Drain and cool.

2.Combine remaining 1/2 teaspoon of salt with the pepper and flour in a small
bowl and set aside. Beat eggs lightly with the water. Cut the sweet potatoes
into 1/4-inch slices.

3.Place oil for deep frying in a heavy skillet and heat it to 350 degrees. Dip
the sweet potato slices in the egg and then in the flour mixture and fry in
small batches. Serve hot, topped with minced scallions.

Yield: 6 appetizer servings.

Baked Butternut Squash Soup

(Adapted from ''The New Basics Cookbook'')

Preparation time: 20 minutes
Cooking time: 50 minutes

2 Butternut squash, peeled, seeded and cut in 1/2-inch pieces
2 carrots, peeled and cut in 1/2-inch lengths
1 medium-size onion, peeled and thinly sliced
4 tablespoons unsalted butter
5 cups chicken broth
2 tablespoons dark brown sugar
 1/2 teaspoon mace
 1/2 teaspoon ground ginger
Pinch cayenne
Salt to taste
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
Sour cream, for garnish
Snipped fresh chives, for garnish.

1. Preheat oven to 400 degrees.

2. Place squash, carrots and onion in a shallow roasting pan. Dot the vegetables
with the butter.

3. Pour 1 1/2 cups of the broth over the vegetables and sprinkle evenly with
brown sugar. Cover the pan tightly with foil and bake for 35 minutes, until
vegetables are tender.

4. Remove the pan from the oven and place vegetables and any liquid in a soup
pot.

5. Add the remaining 3 1/2 cups of broth, mace, ginger, cayenne and salt. Stir
well and bring to a boil. Reduce heat and simmer, uncovered, for 10 minutes.
Stir in lemon juice.

6. Puree the soup until smooth in batches in a blender or food processor. Return
to pot, adjust seasonings and heat through. Garnish portions with sour cream and
chives.

Yield: 6 servings.

Butterflied Game Hens

Preparation time: 30 minutes
Cooking time: 40 minutes

3 Cornish hens, with livers, gizzards and necks
6 cups chicken broth or water
 1/2 cup vermouth
Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
2 tablespoons unsalted butter
1 bunch watercress, for garnish.

1. Preheat the broiler.

2. Cook the birds' necks and gizzards in a small saucepan with the chicken broth
and the vermouth over medium high heat for 40 minutes.

3. Use a knife to split the birds and flatten each with a mallet. Place them on
a broiler pan and season each with salt and pepper. Place under a broiler and
cook for 20 to 30 minutes, until the skin is crisp and juices run clear from the
joints when pricked with a fork. Use a pastry brush to baste each with its own
juice frequently. When the birds are cooked, arrange them on a warm platter

4. After the broth has simmered for 40 minutes, strain it into another saucepan
and discard necks and gizzards. Put raw livers in a fine mesh strainer and use a
spoon to push them through. Immediately before serving, whisk the livers into
the warm (but not hot) broth. Then whisk the butter into the sauce, season with
salt and pepper, drizzle over the birds, garnish with watercress and serve.

Yield: 6 servings.

Potatoes Baked in Cream

(Adapted from ''At Home With the French Classics'')

Preparation time: 15 minutes
Cooking time: 35 minutes

2 teaspoons butter
8 large potatoes, peeled and cut into 1/8-inch slices
1 large garlic clove, chopped
1 teaspoon salt
 1/8 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 cup milk
1 cup heavy cream.

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees. Grease a baking dish (9 by 14 inches) with
the butter.

2. Layer sliced potatoes in dish and spinkle with garlic, salt and pepper.

3. In a small saucepan over medium heat combine milk and cream and bring to a
boil; pour over the layered potatoes. Place the potatoes in the oven and bake
for 35 to 40 minutes until a knife penetrates them easily. If they begin to boil
rapidly or to brown before they are tender, reduce the heat by 25 to 50 degrees.

Yield: 6 servings.

Sauteed Mushrooms

(Adapted from ''At Home With the French Classics'')

Preparation time: 15 minutes
Cooking time: 15 minutes

3 tablespoons unsalted butter or olive oil
1 1/2 pounds mushrooms, washed, dried and quartered
4 garlic cloves, chopped
 1/4 teaspoon salt
 1/8 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
6 sprigs parsley, chopped.

1. In a large skillet heat the butter over high heat. Add only the amount of
mushrooms that will cover the bottom of the pan and saute until brown, about
four minutes.

2. When all the mushrooms are cooked, return them to the skillet, add the
garlic, salt, pepper and and parsley, toss and serve immediately.

Fried Stuffed Bananas
(Adapted from ''The Foods of Vietnam'')

Preparation time: 15 minutes
Cooking time: 15 minutes

1 cup all-purpose flour, sifted
1/3 cup cornstarch, sifted, plus cornstarch for dredging
3 teaspoons sugar
Pinch of salt
1 1/2 teaspoons baking powder
1 cup plus 1 tablespoon water
1 1/2 tablespoons vegetable oil
6 large ripe bananas
 1/2 cup almond paste
Oil for deep frying
1 cup rice wine or rum
Confectioners' sugar for sprinkling
Vanilla ice cream (optional).

1. In a large bowl, combine the flour, Y cup cornstarch, sugar, salt and baking
powder. Make a well in the center and gradually whisk in the water to make a
smooth batter. Add the vegetable oil, stir until smooth and refrigerate the
batter.

2. Peel the bananas and cut them in half crosswise, then split them lengthwise
and spread half a tablespoon of almond paste between the two halves. Heat 2
inches of oil in a deep skillet.

3. Dredge the stuffed bananas in cornstarch and dip them, a few at a time, in
the batter. Carefully fry them in the hot oil, turning once until golden, about
4 minutes altogether. Transfer them to a flameproof dish and sprinkle with
confectioners' sugar.

4. Put the rice wine or rum in a saucepan, heat gently over a moderate flame,
ignite and pour over the bananas. Serve immediately with ice cream, if desired.

Yield: 6 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Dr. Jessica B. Harris, with sweet potato fritters; Nicole Routhier,
with stuffed bananas flambe; Richard Grausman, with sauteed mushrooms and
potatoes baked in cream; Julia Child, with broiled Cornish hens, and Sheila
Lukins, with squash soup (pg. C1); baked butternut squash soup by Sheila Lukins.
Left: Julia Child's broiled Cornish hen (pg. 6) (The New York Times/Ruby
Washington)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
How an All-American Boy Went to War and Lost His Faith

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


As a teen-ager in Massapequa, L.I., in the 1960's, Ron Kovic believed in all of
the right things, including God, country and the domino theory. He was Jack
Armstrong, the all-American boy, good-looking, shy around girls and a
surreptitious reader of Playboy. He was the archetypal son in a large archetypal
lower-middle-class Roman Catholic family.

When he competed as a member of the high school wrestling team, he wanted to
win, and when he lost a match, he wept. Winning was the way he measured his
belief in himself. He didn't question the values that shaped his optimism.

On graduating from high school, he enlisted in the Marine Corps to fight in
Vietnam. ''Communists are moving in everywhere,'' he told his somewhat more
skeptical classmates. Home and hearth were endangered. Ron Kovic, who really was
born on the Fourth of July, was ready when his country called.

In 1968, during his second tour of duty in Vietnam, a bullet tore through his
spinal column. He returned home a paraplegic, paralyzed from the waist down,
emotionally as well as physically shattered. That was the beginning of a long,
painful spiritual rehabilitation that coincided with his political
radicalization.

By the time the war ended, Ron Kovic had become one of the most restless and
implacable spokesmen for Vietnam Veterans Against the War. Childhood was forever
gone.

Taking ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' Mr. Kovic's fine spare memoir about this
coming of age, published in 1976, Oliver Stone has made what is, in effect, a
bitter, seething postscript to his Oscar-winning ''Platoon.''

It is a film of enormous visceral power with, in the central role, a performance
by Tom Cruise that defines everything that is best about the movie. He is both
particular and emblematic. He is innocent and clean-cut at the start; at the
end, angry and exhausted, sporting a proud mustache and a headband around his
forehead and hippie-length hair.

Though ideally handsome, Mr. Cruise looks absolutely right, which is not to
underrate the performance itself. The two things cannot be easily separated.
Watching the evolution of his Ron Kovic, as he comes to terms with a reality for
which he was completely unprepared, is both harrowing and inspiring.

Written by Mr. Stone and Mr. Kovic, the screenplay is panoramic, sometimes too
panoramic for its own good. It covers Ron's childhood, his teen-age years, his
enlistment, the tour of duty in Vietnam and his long recuperation in a Bronx
veterans' hospital, an institution that makes Bedlam look like summer camp.

No other Vietnam movie has so mercilessly evoked the casual, careless horrors of
the paraplegic's therapy, or what it means to depend on catheters for urination,
or the knowledge that sexual identity is henceforth virtually theoretical.

One of the film's problems is that it becomes increasingly generalized as it
attempts to dramatize Mr. Kovic's transformation from a wide-eyed Yankee Doodle
boy to an antiwar activist.

The film is stunning when it is most specific. There is the nighttime mission
when Ron's outfit slaughters a group of Vietnamese peasants in the belief that a
Vietcong patrol has been ambushed.

In the confusion of a fire fight, Ron shoots one of his own corporals through
the neck. When he tries to confess to murder, he is given absolution by an
officer who tells him that he is probably mistaken and that, anyway, these
things happen.

Equally agonizing are the posthospital sequences when Ron returns to his
well-meaning but bewildered family in Massapequa, where he is presented as the
grand marshal of the annual Fourth of July parade. People are always trying to
help. ''I'm O.K.,'' he says, or ''I'm all right'' or ''O.K. O.K.'' But there is
no understanding.

There is a fine old family row when Ron comes home one night from the local bar,
drunk as has become his habit. In a fury, he pulls out the catheter. His mother
calls him a drunk. His father tries to get him into his room. Ron cries out
about his inoperative penis. His mother screams, ''I will not have you use the
word penis in this house.''

The film turns less persuasive as Ron acquires his new political consciousness,
possibly because, given everything that has gone before, the transformation is
so obligatory to the drama. Mr. Stone's penchant for busy, jittery camera
movements and cutting also do not help. Though they reflect Ron's earlier state
of mind, they start to obscure the character of the man they mean to reveal.

Every member of the large cast is exemplary. It includes Raymond J. Barry and
Caroline Kava as Ron's parents; Kyra Sedgwick as his high school girlfriend;
Frank Whaley, who is especially good as a fellow vet, one of the few people with
whom Ron can communicate when he comes home, and Cordelia Gonzalez as the
Mexican whore who tries to persuade Ron that he's still a man.

The two stars of ''Platoon'' appear in cameo roles: Tom Berenger, as the marine
who recruits Ron with his rousing pep talk at Ron's high school, and Willem
Dafoe, as a fellow paraplegic vet Ron meets during a brief interlude in Mexico.
An aging Abbie Hoffman, an icon of the Vietnam years, makes a sad, curious
appearance, more or less playing himself during an antiwar demonstration set in
the 1960's. (Hoffman committed suicide in April at the age of 52.) ''Born on the
Fourth of July'' is a far more complicated movie than ''Platoon.'' It's the most
ambitious nondocumentary film yet made about the entire Vietnam experience. More
effectively than Hal Ashby's ''Coming Home'' and even Michael Cimino's ''Deer
Hunter,'' it connects the war of arms abroad with the war of conscience at home.

As much as anything else, Ron Kovic's story is about the vanishing of one man's
American frontier.

AND THEN REBORN

BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, directed by Oliver Stone; screenplay by Mr. Stone
and Ron Kovic, based on Mr. Kovic's book; director of photography, Robert
Richardson; edited by David Brenner; music by John Williams; production
designer, Bruno Rubeo; produced by A. Kitman Ho and Mr. Stone; released by
Universal Pictures. At Ziegfeld, 141 West 54th Street. Running time: 145
minutes. This film is rated R.

Ron Kovic . . . Tom Cruise
Donna . . . Kyra Sedgwick
Mr. Kovic . . . Raymond J. Barry
Mrs. Kovic . . . Caroline Kava
Steve Boyer . . . Jerry Levine
Timmy . . . Frank Whaley
Charlie . . . Willem Dafoe
Tommy Kovic . . . Josh Evans
Jimmy Kovic . . . Jamie Talisman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tom Cruise in ''Born on the Fourth of July.''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
History and Memories of the Fight for Civil Rights

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 971 words



Freedom Bound
A History of America's Civil Rights Movement
By Robert Weisbrot
350 pages. Illustrated. W. W. Norton. $21.95.

Voices of Freedom
By Henry Hampton and Steve Fayer with Sarah Flynn
692 pages. Illustrated. Bantam Books. $25.95.

Several strong impressions emerge from a reading of ''Freedom Bound,'' an
authoritative and clearly written history of the modern civil rights movement by
Prof. Robert Weisbrot of Colby College. These impressions are confirmed by
hundreds of interviews that appear in another work on the same theme, ''Voices
of Freedom,'' an oral history assembled by Henry Hampton and Steve Fayer, the
producer and the writer of the public broadcasting series ''Eyes on the Prize.''
The evidence in both valuable books leaves one with these conclusions:

First, only a rainbow alliance of white liberals and black advocates enabled the
movement to flourish and caused civil rights legislation to pass; second, even
those Presidents who professed sympathy with the plight of minorities did not
take action unless it was politically prudent to do so; third, equality under
the law, standing alone, does not necessarily lead to equality of opportunity in
modern American society.

Professor Weisbrot makes this telling point: ''A basic assumption of liberalism
in the 1960's was that equal protection of constitutional rights would afford
all Americans, regardless of color, an equal chance to amass wealth, influence
and stature. Yet civil rights laws alone could not overcome the effects of past
discrimination and lingering prejudice, nor did these laws substantially alter
the economic system that had long permitted vast disparities of wealth and
privilege, to the disadvantage of most blacks.''

The continuing demand for economic equality did not persuade a sufficient number
of liberal reformers in public office to press ahead with the same zeal that
they had done for civil rights, according to the case histories in ''Freedom
Bound.'' These reformers maintained that the social order was already basically
sound and that merit, rather than race or class, determined a person's chances
in life. However, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and other black leaders
sought to stretch the liberal vision beyond endorsement of limited welfare
programs to an insistence on freedom from poverty as a basic civil right.

The outspoken interviews in ''Voices of Freedom'' cover events that already
begin to fade into history: the Montgomery bus boycott; student sit-ins in
Nashville; James Meredith's entry into the University of Mississippi; the March
on Washington; the Mississippi freedom summer; bombings of black churches; Dr.
King's controversial pairing of civil rights with his stand against the Vietnam
War; Attica and prisoners' rights; busing in Boston, and affirmative action in
Atlanta.

The tales of individual sacrifice in ''Freedom Bound'' and ''Voices of Freedom''
recall how the civil rights movement led to limited progress. It is doubtful if
many of the current officials, including the one black justice on the United
States Supreme Court, Thurgood Marshall, would have achieved their high elective
and appointive positions had not some brave souls once moved defiantly from the
back of the bus, sat down at segregated lunch counters, or been killed by
racists in Mississippi. Later, blacks and whites assembled by the hundreds of
thousands in peaceful demonstrations in Washington, awakening the Federal
Government to recognize civil rights.

In this respect, ''Freedom Bound'' notes, the civil rights achievements of the
1960's were in retreat during the 1980's. The Kennedy and Johnson wars against
poverty turned into mere skirmishes. Even hard-won civil rights laws were placed
in jeopardy during President Reagan's tenure, of which Professor Weisbrot
writes:

''The Justice Department filed suit against busing and affirmative action
programs as unsound paths to the goal of racial equality. More discreetly the
Administration scrutinized and rejected virtually all other paths as well. Jimmy
Carter had proposed regulations to implement the neglected open-housing law of
1968; Reagan withdrew the guidelines. His first Attorney General, William French
Smith, sought to dilute the Voting Rights Act by requiring proof of intent to
discriminate beyond clear circumstantial evidence of black exclusion.'' While
Congress protected civil rights laws, ''Reagan effectively pared the agencies
responsible for enforcement.''

Where does the civil rights movement now stand? On the political level, there
are great changes. A number of black officials sit in city halls, statehouses
and in Congress; a black, Jesse Jackson, became the first serious Presidential
candidate. Dr. King's birthday, Jan. 15, is a national holiday - a symbol of
recognition for the minister who led the civil rights struggle in the front
lines, where he was beaten and jailed, reached the mountaintop of inspiring
oratory, and was finally assassinated.

Where is the movement going? In ''Voices of Freedom,'' Marian Wright Edelman,
the respected civil rights lawyer who founded the Children's Defense Fund, sees
a ray of hope:

''One has to remember the seasons, that in the barest points of winter, one
really does have to remember that leaves and buds are beginning to blossom now
in a new recognition by the country that it is in deep trouble. That the
messages of Martin 20 years ago are the messages that we have still got to
answer today. But I think, paradoxically, the Reagan years, which have been very
hard years, with assaults on the national role on protecting the poor and
minority groups, have set the stage for the 1990's, because this country will
have to confront the issues of investing in its children and families if it is
going to preserve the future.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Robert Weisbrot

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: The Attack;
U.S. TROOPS GAIN WIDE CONTROL IN PANAMA; NEW LEADERS PUT IN, BUT NORIEGA GETS
AWAY

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2184 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


About 10,000 American troops backed by helicopter gunships and overwhelming
firepower took control of much of Panama today. But after installing a new
Government sympathetic to Washington they had not achieved a major objective:
capturing Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. American officials said that in the broad
assault, the largest American military operation since the Vietnam War, at least
15 American servicemen and an American civilian woman were killed and 59 other
Americans were wounded. There was no exact count of Panamanian casualties, but
news reports said scores were killed and hundreds wounded. Four of the
helicopters were downed.

Although United States officials tried to discount General Noriega's ability to
elude thousands of pursuing American soldiers, their anxiety was evident tonight
when the White House announced a $1 million reward for the capture of the
Panamanian leader.

Noriega on Radios

Later, The Associated Press reported that brief remarks by General Noriega had
been broadcast by the national radio. He appealed to Panamanians to ''win or
die'' in resisting United States forces. Where the general spoke was not
disclosed. Shortly afterward the radio went off the air as its building was
attacked by American forces.

After a night and a day of fighting in and around Panama City that began at 1
A.M. with a coordinated assault by paratroopers, infantry and marines across
three fronts, the White House was unable to declare President Bush's first major
military operation a complete success. There was scattered resistance from
Panamanian troops and armed bands of civilians.

There also were reports that Americans, including some journalists, had been
removed from a downtown hotel at gunpoint. The Smithsonian Institution in
Washington, which conducts research in Panama, reported that 11 people,
including five Americans, were removed by armed Panamanians from a research
center on the San Blas islands off Panama's Caribbean coast.

Reinforcements Sent

Latin American governments today condemned the operation. The Soviet Union
called for world condemnation of the move while stressing that it was not
necessarily a cause for confrontation between East and West. [Page A24.]
Pentagon officials said tonight that they were sending in a fresh brigade of
soldiers from the Army's 7th Infantry Division to relieve exhausted troops and
begin the dangerous task of moving into the downtown streets of the capital,
where widespread looting was reported. In all, the United States has about
24,000 troops in Panama, including the 12,000 stationed there before the
operation began.

The Pentagon has entitled the operation Just Cause. Offering justification for
the military action, President Bush said that Americans were placed in grave
danger after the Noriega regime declared itself in a state of war with the
United States on Friday. He also cited the threat to United States installations
in Panama and Washington's rights under the Panama Canal Treaties.

Mr. Bush acted after an unarmed American officer was shot and killed on Saturday
in downtown Panama City by Panamanian soldiers.

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said the United States had received an
intelligence report that General Noriega was considering a plan to attack United
States civilians in Panama. But he said the report could not be reliably
confirmed and in any case had been received after Mr. Bush decided on Sunday to
authorize the military action.

Major Gains Are Claimed

Mr. Bush and his top aides, who spent the day closeted in their offices and
command centers, proclaimed that they had achieved some important goals,
including driving General Noriega from power and securing American citizens and
installations at a time of increasing violence in Panama.

''General Noriega is in hiding,'' a somber Mr. Bush said in a nationally
televised speech early this morning that drew a quick and largely positive
response from lawmakers of both parties. ''Yesterday a dictator ruled Panama and
today, constitutionally elected leaders govern,'' the President said.

''I took this action only after reaching the conclusion that every other avenue
was closed and the lives of American citizens were in grave danger,'' Mr. Bush
said. In offering justification for the military operation, Administration
officials have repeatedly cited a resolution passed by the Panamanian National
Assembly on Friday. ''It is declared that the Republic of Panama is in a state
of war while there is aggression against the people of Panama from the United
States of America,'' the resolution said.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the United
States did not know where General Noriega was. But he vowed to continue hunting
the General and said, ''As a practical matter we have decapitated him from the
dictatorship of this country, and he is now a fugitive and will be treated as
such.''

Total of 24,000 Troops

Lieut. Gen. Thomas W. Kelly, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, said General Noriega, whom he called ''a crafty devil as you know,'' had
eluded American forces on Tuesday night. He said General Noriega had been
''spotted several times'' on Tuesday before the assault.

''We have every spigot turned on that we can turn on to capture the fugitive Mr.
Noriega,'' General Kelly said at a Pentagon news conference.

General Kelly said the United States forces had met their first-day objective of
breaking the Panamanian Defense Forces as a fighting body. He said that there
were still pockets of fighting and credible but unconfirmed reports of Americans
being taken hostage, but that ''organized resistance'' had been quashed in most
areas around Panama City.

There were reports of widespread looting. The ''dignity battalions,'' armed
civilian bands organized by General Noriega, were roaming Panama City and ''have
to be our next priority,'' General Kelly said.

New Officials in Hiding

Despite Washington's declarations that a new Government was in power in Panama,
the officials sworn in at an American military base just before the attack began
and instantly recognized by Washington did not appear to be in control. And as
the White House struggled to explain its reasons for sending the American
military into the streets of a foreign capital, Administration officials sought
to deflect attention from the fate of General Noriega and toward the other goals
of the military operation.

The newly sworn-in President, Guillermo Endara, and his two vice presidents,
Ricardo Arias Calderon and Guillermo Ford, who won a May election that was later
nullified by General Noriega, were in hiding out of fear for their lives. A
senior American diplomat in Panama said he expected ''a great deal of concern
and fear'' as long as General Noriega remained free.

Night of Phone Calls

Members of Congress supported Mr. Bush, who has been under intense pressure to
take military action against the defiant general since a coup failed in October.
''Under the circumstances, the decision is justified,'' said the Speaker of the
House, Thomas S. Foley.

But others questioned Mr. Bush's decision to use military force. Representative
Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of New York, said, ''I don't see the legal authority
of the use of the military.''

Mr. Bush and his top aides spent the night telephoning Latin American leaders
and American allies around the world and sent a cable to the Soviet leadership
informing them of the Panama operation. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of
Britain, who was telephoned by Mr. Bush personally, gave a ringing endorsement
of the American action.

Administration officials said Mr. Bush made his initial decision to send
American troops into Panama to seize General Noriega on Sunday. ''The die was
pretty much cast'' at a Christmas brunch attended by Mr. Bush, Vice President
Dan Quayle, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and their wives.

Disguised Tuesday Meeting

Mr. Endara, Mr. Ford and Mr. Calderon were called in by United States officials
on Monday evening and informed of the military plan, American officials said.

On Tuesday, Mr. Bush met with his top advisers to complete the plan, a meeting
that was disguised by the White House as a session intended to discuss ''a wider
role for the military in the war against drugs.''

Mr. Bush and his top aides worked through the night, with the President dividing
his time between the Oval Office and an adjacent study.

After a nap, Mr. Bush appeared on national television and then spent the day in
his office monitoring the progress of the operation. Apparently seeking to avoid
appearing to be nervously watching the events, Mr. Bush left his office in the
early evening to attend a Christmas party, just as he had done on Tuesday before
the attack began.

In Panama, the three new Government officials were sworn in by a Panamanian
judge at a United States military base. The oath was witnessed by two officials
of Panama's human rights association, because no Panamanian Government official
could be enlisted to participate.

Fears of General

United States officials, eager to demonstrate the legitimacy of the new
Government, released a videotape of the swearing-in ceremony.

John Bushnell, the highest-ranking United States official in Panama, told
reporters there today that he was worried that ''there is still going to be a
great deal of concern and fear among the Panamanians'' until General Noriega is
taken into custody.

As the first day of fighting passed without the capture of General Noriega,
Administration officials seemed concerned about the urgency that had been placed
on capturing the elusive general and bringing him to trial in the United States
on drug charges.

''It may be that there was too much emphasis put on snatching Noriega'' in early
Administration statements on the Panama operation, one senior official said.
''We should have just stuck with protecting Americans and restoring democracy,
which we are capable of doing even if Noriega is hiding in a basement for two
months.''

Columns of Smoke and Fire

The military operation began at 1 A.M. as American forces, reinforced quietly
over two days by airborne Army Rangers, infantry soldiers and marines from the
United States, quickly seized a series of critical objectives, including power
stations, the international airfield and the headquarters of General Noriega's
Panamanian Defense Forces, General Powell said at a Pentagon news conference.

Huge columns of smoke and flame poured out of the military headquarters, which
was the site of intense fighting on Oct. 3 when a group of mid-level officers
tried without success to overthrow General Noriega. That failure prompted
intense criticism of Mr. Bush, who decided to take only minimal military action
in support of the coup and later had to watch from the sidelines as General
Noriega called in reinforcements and quashed the uprising.

Today, the Americans bottled up some Panamanian military units loyal to General
Noriega and by nightfall had cleared out the headquarters and secured the other
major Panamanian base within Panama City, Fort Amador. General Kelly said that
by evening the United States had captured 250 Panamanian soldiers and had given
shelter to 1,000 refugees at a hastily erected camp.

Television footage from the scene showed heaps of bodies in makeshift
infirmaries, as well as dozens of people, most of them in civilian clothes,
being carried into ambulances and treated in hospitals.

An opposition spokesman, Luis Martinz, said by telephone today that he knew the
attack had started because his house began vibrating at about 1 A.M. from
bombing. ''My reaction was 'Thank God, at last.' '' he said. ''I don't know how
patriotic that sounds, but the situation had gotten very nasty recently.''

Mr. Martinz said the military situation appeared to have stabilized, but he said
widespread looting was taking place in several downtown areas, and that
civilians were being beaten and robbed by roving bands of thugs from the
''dignity battalions.''

Madeleine Jacobs, a spokeswoman for the Smithsonian Institution, said the 11
people abducted from the institution's research facility included 5 Americans, 5
Panamanians and 1 Venezuelan.

The Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, with headquarters in Panama City,
employs 140 people and operates five marine laboratories in Panama, including
one on the San Blas island chain off the Carribean coast, from which the
researchers were taken.

Dr. Ira Rubinoff, the institute director, was talking with the remotfafacility
by radio-phone when told that a boat containing armed men was approaching, the
spokeswoman said. Several hours after the line went dead, Dr. Rubinoff got a
call from one of the technicians, who said he had been brought back to the base
to get food. The technician, she said, reported that the party had been taken to
Carti, a small town on the mainland, and was told that those taken would be
trucked to El Llano, an intersection for the Pan American Highway.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of residents running for cover as United States troops took up
positions yesterday in the San Miguelito section of Panama City. (Reuters); map
of Panama City (NYT) (pg. A1); American soldiers preparing to move a howitzer to
a new position in Panama City (Dept. of Defense photo via AP) (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: The Implications;
War: Bush's Presidential Rite of Passage

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


For George Bush, the United States invasion of Panama early this morning
constituted a Presidential initiation rite as well as an attempt to achieve
specific goals.

For better or for worse, most American leaders since World War II have felt a
need to demonstrate their willingness to shed blood to protect or advance what
they construe as the national interest. John F. Kennedy in the Cuban missile
crisis, Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon in South Vietnam, Gerald R. Ford
in the Mayaguez affair, Ronald Reagan in Grenada and Lebanon, and now Mr. Bush
in Panama - all of them acted in the belief that the American political culture
required them to show the world promptly that they carried big sticks.

Jimmy Carter did not do it until he sought unsuccessfully to rescue American
hostages in Iran late in his term, and politicians of both parties still believe
that it cost him dear.

For President Bush - a man widely criticized as recently as a month ago for his
purported timidity, a man assailed on Capitol Hill and elsewhere for failing to
fully support an attempted coup against General Noriega only in October, a man
still portrayed in the Doonesbury comic strip as the invisible President -
showing his steel had a particular significance.

Achievement and Annoyance

Whatever the other results of this roll of the dice in Panama, it has shown him
as a man capable of bold action, especially coming, as it did, on the heels of
his Malta summit talks with Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his surprise initiative
toward China.

In a narrower sense, Mr. Bush sought to remove a burr from under his saddle in
the person of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, and he appears to have done that, at
least in part.

Even though the Panamanian leader was not immediately captured, kept control of
his radio station, could remain at large for months and may have left behind
mini-Noriegas with disruptive capacities of their own, he appears to have little
capacity now to exercise real power.

''We have cut off the head of that government,'' said Gen. Colin L. Powell,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. ''Yesterday's 'maximum leader' is today's
hunted fugitive,'' said Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d. Most experts
agreed with their assessments.

Mr. Bush also sought, in Lyndon Johnson's words, to ''protect my people'' - the
35,000 Americans living in Panama, toward whose safety and well-being General
Noriega seemed to have grown indifferent. That he also achieved, although some
American hostages were apparently taken. But these things have their costs. Last
spring, Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., General Powell's predecessor, told a
Congressional committee that using military force in a place like Panama could
be ''a messy, messy business.'' In the fall, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney
said that direct military intervention would seriously damage United States
relations with the other countries of Latin America. Both proved right.

And only last night, Mr. Nixon told a group of senators on Capitol Hill that
General Noriega was the sort of man who should be left to fall of his own
weight.

The Risks Bush Took

Mr. Bush thought otherwise, and he risked many things in acting as he did: the
prospect of an American military involvement that may well last for days and
weeks, rather than hours, and might end up looking more like Vietnam than like
Grenada; the possibility of a long and decidedly unheroic slog through the
jungles and mountains of the isthmus in search of General Noriega, if he has
indeed taken to the bush -an elephant tracking a gnat; the certainty of a
hostile reaction in many Latin American capitals, and the chance that the Soviet
Union would take serious umbrage at the American strike, despite the operation's
confident code name, ''Operation Just Cause.''

The President issued his orders in the knowledge that he might be confronted,
just before Christmas, with the awful spectacle of American soldiers in grim
gray body bags being brought home for burial.

Most important of all, perhaps, he knowingly ran the risk that democracy, so
often a failure in Panama, would again refuse to take root there, leaving the
United States where it has been in the past, looking like an imperialist
adjudicator between rivals for power.

''The big question,'' said Ambler Moss, a former United States Ambassador to
Panama, now at the University of Miami, ''is whether the people we are backing
can start looking and acting like a government, which is the only way this
operation will gain any legitimacy and credibility. It's ominous that after 18
hours, they still hadn't raised their heads or even made a broadcast.''

The Anti-American Strain

Perhaps because of popular fears that General Noriega might somehow come back,
perhaps because of deep-seated distrust of the Colossus of the North as the
United States is called in Latin America, there was little early show of support
for American intervention in the streets of Panama City or elsewhere.

Guillermo Endara, whom the United States considers the winner of May's
Panamanian presidential elections, which General Noriega nullified, was sworn in
at midnight Tuesday night as president - but in secret, on an American base,
months after the voting.

Secretary Baker argued that the United States incursion had been made to
''assist a democratically elected government,'' and Mr. Bush said that he had
acted to restore democracy. But as Robert J. Kurz of the Brookings Institution
pointed out, there has not been a democratic government in Panama and Mr. Endara
had not functioned for a single hour as the country's head of state.

Indeed, his mandate stems largely from the conclusion of international observers
that Mr. Endara would have won, had the ballot results not been tampered with.
That verdict was not accepted by the Organization of American States, which
permitted a Noriega delegate to continue as Panama's representative pending
fresh elections, and the moral claim of the Endara ''government'' has weakened
as the months passed.

Mexico's Polite Outrage

The Latin American reaction, even from those nations that have led the way in
branding General Noriega an outlaw, was furious. Mexico, for example, said that
''fighting international crimes is no excuse for intervention in a sovereign
nation.'' Memories of gunboat diplomacy - a phrase used often today in world
capitals - run deep.

But United States relations with Latin America have been unusually good in
recent years, which may count for something, and recent history suggests that
there are ways to heal wounds relatively quickly. One might be a major economic
assistance program for Panama in concert with leading Latin nations.

Mr. Moss recalled that American intervention in the Dominican Republic in 1965,
during the Johnson Administration, had been ''clumsy at first, like this one.''
But the appointment of Ellsworth Bunker, a highly skilled diplomatic operative,
as ambassador, and the injection of large amounts of American money rapodly
improved relations between the two governments.

Soviet spokesmen, official and unofficial, were almost as condemnatory as some
Latin Americans, and spokesmen in Washington were obviously uncomfortable in
trying to explain why the United States praised Moscow for its new policy of
nonintervention and then intervened itself.

Georgi A. Arbatov, one of the top Kremlin experts on the United States, struck a
nerve when he said that the American action would strengthen ''the Soviet
military-industrial complex'' in its contention that Soviet disarmament and
reform were serious mistakes in the face of American bellicosity.

When All Else Fails

Even if that is correct, the failure of past American policies, in which Mr.
Bush had a major hand, had left him with very few alternatives. Negotiations,
sanctions, elections, international mediation, veiled military threats,
spontaneous coups and an unending flow of superheated proclamations from
Washington had all failed to remove or isolate General Noriega.

''The difficulty of dislodging him was grossly underestimated by the officials
in charge of formulating the anti-Noriega policy,'' writes Linda Robinson, a
senior editor of Foreign Affairs, in the quarterly's winter issue. ''The basic
problem is that there is a substantial gap between the ends the United States
has defined in Panama and the means it has so far been willing to employ
there.''

Unprepared to scale down the objective - getting rid of General Noriega - Mr.
Bush finally decided to scale up the means he would authorize.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Christmas Reaches Refugee Camps

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Vietnamese refugee children playing near holiday decorations yesterday
at a center in Hong Kong. On Dec. 12, Hong Kong, a British colony, forcibly
returned 51 boat people to Vietnam, but Britain has agreed to postpone further
repatriations until after the holidays. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: Critic's Notebook;
From the Late Show to the Early Show, It Was All Panama

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


Television insomniacs were probably the only ones who caught the earliest news
of the United States invasion of Panama. CBS and ABC broadcast their first
bulletins at 12:37 A.M. - a few minutes after Pat Sajak and Arsenio Hall had
retired.

No pictures of anything resembling fighting were available for several hours.
Viewers had to make do with a still picture of Juan Vasquez, the CBS
correspondent in Panama, as he told, by telephone, of armed men entering the
Marriott Hotel in search of North Americans. Later he reported hearing the
sounds of ''extensive but limited'' fighting from downtown Panama City. He said
he could see a fire that might or might not have been Gen. Noriega's
headquarters.

The Fitzwater Briefing

The first official briefing came a little after 1:30 A.M., from the White House
spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater. He laid out the legal argument for the invasion, a
theme that would be sounded every time an Administration official appeared.

In their regular Tuesday evening news broadcasts, the networks had given a hint
of something in the works by reporting on the departure of American troops from
Fort Bragg; NBC carried pictures of American planes landing in Panama on Tuesday
afternoon. Now, on Wednesday morning, the anchors kept the telephone lines busy
talking to correspondents, Congressmen, consultants, anybody who might know
something or, anyhow, have an opinion.

CNN, the only American television news service available in Panama, received
hundreds of calls from Panamanians and Americans there on what they could see or
surmise; some of their accounts were relayed to the CNN audience, which meant
that the people calling in were able to hear what they had just said.

Hazy Information

In those early hours, reports came from the White House, the State Department
and correspondents in other countries as well as in Panama, but as far as the
battle itself, it was like listening to radio accounts of fighting in
pre-television days. One problem of getting close to the events was made clear
by Phil Jones on CBS, speaking at about 6 A.M. across the street from Fort
Bragg, the base of the 82d Airborne Corps, which had flown into Panama; he
reported that he had been invited off the base. This was not Vietnam.

There were hazy figures on casualties and reports of hostages being taken (and a
couple of hours later released). With the cameras unable to get close to the
action, the war took on a remote quality for viewers accustomed to watching
hurricanes and earthquakes as they occur.

All the networks carried President Bush's statement, in effect claiming victory,
shortly after 7 A.M., and the Pentagon briefing that followed, including a
detailed account, with maps and in militarese, of what Gen. Colin Powell called
''the operation.''

Dan Rather gave a favorable review to the briefing. Nobody could miss the
ordered official line: a carefully planned, perfectly executed, entirely
successful action provoked by General Noriega. At 4:45 P.M., the networks
carried another military briefing. The tube was being used to comfort the nation
and set up defenses for criticism that was already hinted at in the reporters'
questions to Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney.

From Morning to Afternoon

The morning talk programs devoted themselves to Panama in their various
fashions. NBC's ''Today'' show ran longest, from 7 A.M. to 12:30 P.M., while ABC
sent out an extra 30 minutes of ''Good Morning America,'' which was not picked
up by the network's New York station; WABC offered, as scheduled, ''Live: Regis
& Kathie Lee.'' CNN, as usual, never stopped, except for commercials.

It was not until about 9:30 A.M. that the first pictures began to come in:
American helicopters, aerial shots of Panama City and pictures of American
troops on city roads, apparently being applauded by a few Panamanians. There
were sounds of gunfire amid the smoke. General Noriega was said to be on the
run.

Not Quite Compelling

At 2 P.M., soap-opera fans found themselves watching Secretary of State James
Baker's news conference, another justification of the invasion. That's not
usually the way the world turns on weekday afternoons. Now we saw pictures of
planes and buses with red crosses on them arriving back in the United States.

It is no discredit to the reporters who had their night's rest disrupted to
observe that the Panama invasion did not make much of a live television show.
The reporters worked hard at giving the details as they came in, asked the right
questions and raised the right issues, notably about the legality of the action.
The appearances of the President and Cabinet members were reassuring; they
seemed to be in control of events. What was missing was what television has
accustomed us to expecting - those instant, up-close pictures that are the
inimitable stuff of television news.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Morning-Show War

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When you declare that a ''state of war exists'' between the country you control
and the United States, and when you then pass the word that it's O.K. to rough
up or kill local U.S. soldiers and their dependents, you would be well advised
to expect a massive military response.

That's the lesson to tinpot dictators of the military action waged largely
between the end of ''Nightline'' and the opening of the network morning shows.

We are entitled to a brief jingoistic jig, which will be cut short by pictures
of casualties; then we should examine the other lessons to other groups.

To the Bush Administration crisis managers: There is no substitute for
organization. In the October fiasco, the key players were never properly
assembled or seized with a sense of mission. ''We'll do better next time,''
promised Brent Scowcroft, our national security adviser, and they did.

To the commanders of our armed forces: It is possible to conduct a complicated
nighttime operation complete with paratroop drop by the book. No more post-
Vietnam failures of nerve, as at Desert One, or uptight blackout of news, as at
Grenada, or sleepy underestimation of the enemy, as in Lebanon. We did not
appear to stumble, run into bad luck, hesitate or blaze away at our feet; that's
an improvement.

To fellow jingoes: Hubris is uncalled for; this exercise did not carry the risks
of Dieppe because the dictator's forces were no match for our own. This was less
a test of strength than a test of will; the victory was won by the quick
application of overwhelming strength, a sensible way to cut casualties.

To the legalists: Sofaer, so good. The U.S. knocked itself out to operate within
the rule of law. We did not bottom our justification on Mr. Noriega's war words
because declarations of war no longer make force legitimate; the only time the
use of force is considered ''legal'' by international lawyers is in defense,
with the user required to prove it necessary and appropriate to the threat.

The killing of an unarmed serviceman and the other violence done U.S. citizens,
rather than the Noriega drug-running or annulment of elections, was the primary
basis for our intervention: we have the legal right by treaty to use armed
forces to defend U.S. personnnel in the canal area. That was why the President
used the words ''to safeguard the lives of American citizens.'' Our
justi-Anthony Lewis is on leave. fying purposes - to protect lives and the
treaty - is not our primary purpose, which is to reinstate democracy (and
incidentally, to capture and prosecute a drug suspect).

To our Latin American neighbors: Our concern for legal-diplomatic niceties went
to an extreme when our State Department produced Guillermo Endara, the elected
head of government deposed by the dictator, to ask for our intervention 45
minutes before the operation began.

This was soon followed by the unblocking of assets and the lifting of sanctions
to bolster the elected officials we put in place. This sudden largesse to a
nation yesterday described as at war with us recalls ''The Mouse That Roared''
but shows that a carrot as well as a stick is on our checklist.

To our diplomatists: The reaction shows who our friends are. Britain's Maggie
Thatcher, whose thank-you for our support of her Falkland war was to snipe at
our defense of democracy in Grenada, got religion and reasserted the special
relationship; otherwise, our allies waited to see if we succeeded before
commenting. The Soviet Union all but called us an evil empire.

To parapsychiatric pundits: This was not the result of an accused wimp's need to
prove himself macho; we've had too much of that personal-motive pap since Lyndon
Johnson. It would be more profitable to speculate about what pride or fear drove
Mr. Noriega to press his luck and invite his ouster.

This President, having acted like an amateur in bungling a previous opportunity
to remove a danger to our sea lanes, acted like a pro in taking advantage of the
chance offered him by the escalation of violence against our citizens. His men
delivered on their promise to do better next time.

To moralists: Legalities and results aside, did we do right in resorting to
force? Did we give the Soviets, Rumanians and Chinese an excuse to justify
future crackdowns?

Values have moral meaning: freedom is good and tyranny bad. The use of force to
deny the people's expressed will is wrong; its use to carry out a democratic
decision, lawfully justified by violent provocation, is right.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: Panama City;
PANAMA'S CAPITAL STILL NOT SECURED

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, Dec. 21


Few areas in Panama City appeared totally secured by United States forces today
as scattered fighting with paramilitary groups continued.

Occasional mortar explosions and sniper fire could be heard late this afternoon
even at military installations like Howard Air Base, which has the only United
States military runway in Latin America.

''We found a lot of guys holed up or squirreled away,'' said Col. Ron Sconyers,
the spokesman for the Southern Command, the American regional military
headquarters. ''There's a lot of looting.''

'An Eye for an Eye'

The situation in the city was extremely volatile as members of the heavily armed
Panamanian paramilitary groups that call themselves Dignity Battalions
crisscrossed residential neighborhoods, commandeered taxis and civilian vehicles
and threatened to seize hostages from among the 35,000 Americans who live here.

''It's an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth,'' a member of a Dignity
Batallion was heard to say on Wednesday after seizing Jonathan W. Meyersohn, a
CBS News producer. Mr. Meyersohn remains among a handful of known hostages who
have not been heard from since their seizure.

Sgt. Daniel Masa of the 82d Airborne Division, which parachuted into the country
in the unit's first combat jump in more than 20 years, said American troops were
having difficulty winding up the invasion because the battle had become a
guerrilla war.

''They knew we were coming and wore civilian clothes to get us confused,'' he
said.

Headquarters Destroyed

The invasion, which began Tuesday night, is the largest United States combat
operation since the Vietnam War. It followed two years of steadily worsening
relations between the once-close allies.

The invasion began with an attack on the Panamanian military high command. Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega apparently escaped the raid, which set fire to hundreds
of wood shanties in the poor neighborhoods that surround the headquarters.

The fire belched black, acrid smoke for 12 hours and virtually leveled the
headquarters.

United States officials said 5,500 Panamanians who had lived in the area had
sought shelter in Balboa Stadium. The officials said they were unprepared for
the influx of refugees and did not have the proper installations to feed or care
for them.

United States military officials in Panama said it would probably take several
more days before they could concentrate on providing social services, repairing
damage and establishing a police force to prevent looting.

But they said that the American-installed Government was beginning to function
and that President Guillermo Endara had sworn in his Cabinet. One of his first
acts was to announce a curfew, which went into effect at 6 P.M. tonight and is
to last until 6 A.M. Friday.

General Noriega remained at large today, foiling one of the main purposes of the
invasion. There were rumors he had sought refuge in either the Cuban or
Nicaraguan embassy. And that led American personnel carriers to move to those
embassies.

In Nicaragua, Sandinista troops retaliated and surrounded the American Embassy
in Managua. [In Washington, officials said they did not believe General Noriega
was inside either embassy in Panama, but said they were being watched in case
the general tried to enter either of them.] At the American Embassy, Noriega
supporters opened fire on the building, firing six rounds in 20 minutes, Reuters
reported.

Several American soldiers said that they often secured areas only to be attacked
from the rear. Communications for United States troops also seemed to be posing
problems and at times held up operations, several soldiers said.

''They've got jamming devices,'' a sergeant said.

Speaking in little more than a hoarse whisper, a senior United States field
officer said he had lost his voice shouting into the radio in an effort to
overcome the communciations problem of getting in touch with other units on his
flank.

Soldiers in the field said that the operation had been a success and that they
no longer detected any organized opposition. They said they doubted that the
Panamanian Army or the Dignity Battalions, which were formed by General Noriega
a year ago, could sustain the current pace of their actions for much longer.

''They haven't got the organization,'' a sergeant said.

LAST GRAF CAN BITE.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a man in Panama City carrying merchandise from a damaged store
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: Implications;
Noriega Must Be Captured, a New Leader Established in Power and Hostages Freed

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


More than 36 hours after the start of the United States thrust into Panama, at
least three major problems remained unresolved today, none of them easy to deal
with. Each problem has the potential to diminish the success, if not turn it
into failure.

There was a good deal of satisfaction in the upper reaches of the American
Government, because a technically difficult military mission had apparently been
well conducted and had driven one of this country's nemeses, Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega, Panama's dictator, out of power and into hiding.

But there was also a good deal of apprehension - less loudly voiced, of course -
because of what a senior official called ''these severe challenges.'' An
atmosphere of uncertainty prevailed, and members of the White House inner circle
said they lacked information on important aspects of the situation.

''Take them in order,'' the official said. ''Finding Noriega, getting the new
Government up and running and rescuing the hostages. Fail conspicuously in any
one of them, and this won't look like such a triumph in a week or so.''

Representative Les Aspin , the Wisconsin Demnocrat who heads the House Armed
Services Committee, agreed that one measure of success would be the ultimate
effectiveness of President Guillermo Endara, who was, in essence, installed by
the United States.

Mr. Aspin added an item not on the Administration official's list - insuring
that General Noriega's drug cartel had been broken up, with all of its key
figures neutralized.

What President Bush is trying to do now is turn his intital military gains into
a political and diplomatic achievment, less flashy but more significant than the
assault mounted on Panama in the pre-dawn hours Wednesday. He is trying to do it
quickly, so that the support his country has given him does not dwindle in the
face of continuing American casualties.

Like every President since the Vietnam War, Mr. Bush is ever-mindful of the
perils of third world quagmires.

As Mr. Bush spoke to reporters at the White House this afternoon, talking of his
efforts to minimize casualties, television networks joined images of the
President to pictures of four flag-covered coffins being carried from a
transport plane at Dover Air Force Base, Del. Muffled drums rolled.

Still, Mr. Bush pledged to pursue General Noriega ''as long as it takes,'' and
one of his closest aides said that was necessary, even though the former
Panamanian leader had been stripped of his power, for two reasons: because
''Noriega at large makes it harder'' for the fledgling Endara Government to
emerge from hiding and begin governing, and because it seriously delays the
moment when bureaucrats and others needed to assure future stability will be
willing to transfer their allegiance to Mr. Endara.

While General Noriega is free, ''a whole lot of Panamanians are afraid to raise
their heads,'' another official said. ''Some of his supporters cling to the hope
that he will somehow turn this thing around, wage a guerrilla war or make
himself into a martyr, and some of his enemies fear his retribution.''

Few Signs of Authority

That official said that if, as widely reported this afternoon, General Noriega
had taken refuge in the Cuban or Nicaraguan Embassy, where he would be beyond
the reach of American arms, ''we have a huge problem on our hands, because he'll
serve as a symbol of rebellion to every malcontent in Panama.''

Even if General Noriega is not in an embassy, the hunt for him could be
difficult. From the days when he worked with the Central Intelligence Agency, he
knows American espionage methods, including the way in which agents use
electronic surveillance techniques. As a result, the Administration was said to
have ''not too much information but too little - he's here, he's there, he's
nowhere, and a lot of it has to be disinformation that he's spreading.''

A third major figure at the White House conceded, ''It could take months to find
him, if he choses to go to ground'' but argued that the more thoroughly General
Noriega hid himself, the more surreptitious his movements, the less trouble he
could cause.

While the hunt goes on, Mr. Endara, who is believed to have won last May's
election, which General Noriega voided, has done little to establish his
authority. And that, said an official who spent much of the morning on the
telephone with Latin American leaders, has made it difficult for the
Administration to mute the hemispheric chorus of condemnation of Mr. Bush's
decision to intervene in Panama.

Few P.D.F. Defections

Although he managed to travel to the legislative building late today, Mr.
Endara's curfew order seemed to have little if any effect, and he was unable to
win recognition beyond Washington.

One of the most disturbing aspects of the day's events, in the view of Mr.
Bush's advisers, has been the failure of significant numbers of soldiers in the
Panamanian Defence Force to switch sides. Most of them appeared to have melted
into the hills and jungles of Panama, taken cover in Panama City or adopted a
warily passive attitude, as dozens of shops and stores were looted.

''Endara needs the P.D.F. to show he's really in charge and to help establish
security,'' a State Department official said. ''And he doesn't have them.''

The most difficult of the problems to gauge is that of the hostages. A sizable
group of Americans, held for a considerable period, can prove highly corrosive
to Presidential popularity, as Jimmy Carter discovered when the Iranians
captured the American diplomats in Teheran. But by nightfall today, it was not
clear how many Americans were captive or when and under what conditions they
might be freed.

''Probably not more than 20,'' one official estimated. ''But that could still be
a time bomb. Fortunately, we think time is on our side here, because the longer
this goes on, the less likely a Noriega comeback becomes, and the more likely
the captors are to throw up their hands and release hostages.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the coffin of an American sailor killed in Panama being
carried by a Navy honor guard at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware (NYT/Steven M.
Falk)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: Casualties;
First American Dead Arrive From Panama

BYLINE: By GEORGE JAMES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: DOVER, Del., Friday, Dec. 22


The first four coffins holding bodies of Americans killed in Panama arrived at
the United States Air Force base here on a bleak Thursday afternoon. Another 14
arrived in brutal sub-zero temperatures shortly after midnight today.

As the C-141 Starlifter transport plane touched down at about 3 P.M., President
Bush was beginning a news conference in which he praised the success of American
troops in assuring ''the integrity of the Panama Canal'' and creating ''an
environment safe for American citizens.''

The back ramp of the plane opened, and four coffins covered with American flags
were carried down the ramp past the United States Navy honor guard to a drum
roll that sounded brittle in the frigid air.

The first four dead servicemen were Navy commandos, known as Seals. There were
reports that they had been killed trying to capture an airfield near Panama City
where Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega's private plane was kept.

Secretary of the Navy H. Lawrence Garrett 3d mentioned them by name in his brief
comments.

''The four brave men we mourn here today now rest in the quiet arms of a
grateful nation and a loving God,'' Mr. Garrett said. ''These magnificent young
men have made the greatest sacrifices for us all.''

The coffins were then taken by hearse to the Dover Air Force Base mortuary.
Built in 1968 during the Vietnam War, it is the largest port mortuary in the
Department of Defense. It has handled the bodies of 21,693 servicemen from
Vietnam, those of 233 Marines killed in the bombing of Marine headquarters in
Lebanon in October 1983, and those of 14 people killed in the invasion of
Grenada in November 1983.

None of the dead servicemen's families attended the half-hour ceremony Thursday.
Second Lieut. Teresa Shallock, deputy chief of public affairs for Dover Air
Force Base, said the bodies would be shipped to funeral homes in the men's
hometowns.

At his news conference President Bush was asked, ''Was it really worth it to
send people to their deaths to get Noriega?''

His answer sounded pained, and he paused often. He said: ''Every human life is
precious. And yet I have to answer, yes, it has been worth it.''

At midnight, as winds created a wind chill factor of 25 degrees below zero, the
bodies of 14 servicemen arrived on a C-5B Galaxy Transport. They included 13
soldiers and one Marine. Most had been 19, 20, 21 years old, representing small
cities and towns from across America.

They were met by an Army honor guard, a Marine honor guard and officials,
including Secretary of the Army Michael P.W. Stone and Marine Lieut. Gen. Norman
Smith, deputy chief for manpower and reserve.

One of the dead, Pvt. First Class John Mark Price, of Conover, Wisc., who was
based in Fort Lewis, Va., as an infantryman, would have celebrated his 23d
birthday on Christmas Eve.

The third flag-draped coffin to come down a ramp of the open nose of the huge,
cavernous transport, held Staff Sergeant Larry R. Barnard, 29 years old, who
entered the Army in June 1980, and was a Ranger based in Fort Benning, Ga. As
his coffin was carried off the plane, his mother, father and two brothers were
there, the only family to attend either of the ceremonies.

Wounded Arriving in Texas

SAN ANTONIO, Dec. 21 (Special to The New York Times) - Medical evacuation
flights today brought to 190 the number of American troops wounded in Panama who
are being treated at military hospitals here, Air Force officials said.

Four of those evacuated have died either in flight or shortly after they
arrived, said Lieut. Col. Johnny Whitaker, spokesman for the Wilford Hall Air
Force Medical Center.

''We have everything from broken bones to shrapnel wounds, and many of them have
gunshot wounds,'' said Colonel Whitaker.

The San Antonio area was made the evacuation point for all the wounded from
Panama because of the concentration of military medical installations here, said
Ray Dery, spokesman at the Brooke center.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A wounded American serviceman being rushed to Brooke Army Medical
Center in San Antonio after helicopter flight from air base. (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
To Senator McCain, the Savings and Loan Affair Is Now a Personal Demon

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1742 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


John McCain's Senate colleagues have just begun to notice how troubled he seems.
But his friends back home have been noticing the telltale signs for months.

Normally given to expansive gestures and almost hypertensive movement, he seems,
they say, to have visibly shriveled, hunching his shoulders and clasping his
arms tightly about his chest as if to ward off blows. And there are the jokes,
sarcastic, self-deprecating - funny, but not quite.

So when the Senator rose from the dinner table at Tom and Lupe Espinoza's home
in Phoenix last week for the goodbyes, the guests exchanged worried glances as
he started to speak. He thanked the hosts for a lovely meal, for their
friendship during ''this difficult time,'' and then he tried to lighten the
awkward moment.

''You know what Chairman Mao said - It's always darkest just before it's totally
black.''

The Link With Keating

In the space of six months, what had seemed a boundless political future for the
ambitious Arizona Republican has been darkened by his association with Charles
H. Keating Jr., a high-rolling Phoenix land developer and chairman of the failed
Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, Calif.

Mr. McCain and four Democratic Senators are under investigation to determine
whether contributions to their campaigns from Mr. Keating influenced their
intervenion with Federal regulators in 1987 to try and save his ailing
institution.

Mr. McCain has impressed political scorekeepers on Capitol Hill with his
mea-culpa defense, admitting that it was a serious error to meet with the
regulators. Bolstered by a transcript from one of those two meetings and by
statements by the regulators themselves, he has succeeded, at least here in
Washington, in putting some distance between himself and senators who went to
greater lengths on Mr. Keating's behalf.

'Duty, Honor and Country'

Back home, the meetings are less an issue than the Senator's personal friendship
with the land developer and the Senator's friends and supporters now say they
are worried that he is loosing the advantage he gained by being humble in
continuing to harp on his involvement in the matter.

The Espinozas and others close to John McCain are watching as he struggles
against the once unthinkable prospect of a serious Democratic challenger in 1992
and a personal demon - a deep and seemingly unquenchable need to defend his
honor.

''I believe in duty, honor and country, and I never thought I'd be embroiled in
something like this,'' said Mr. McCain, a Navy war hero who was held prisoner in
Vietnam. Fumbling for the words, and apologizing ''because it sounds corny,''
his explanation is tangled up with family tradition and patriotism, with growing
up in the shadow of a father and a grandfather who were four-star admirals.

The Senator began explaining it all in late October after a series of Arizona
newspaper articles about his ties to Mr. Keating. The point he is desperate to
convey is that he washed his hands of the whole thing once regulators outlined
their case against Mr. Keating and his financial institution. Unspoken, but
clearly intended as part of the message is that some of his colleagues,
including Arizona's Democratic Senator, Dennis DeConcini, cannot make the same
claim.

Fallout From a Friendship

But the finer points of that distinction and the transcripts and regulators'
statements Mr. McCain uses to make the points are easily lost in the larger
story. A joke making the rounds in Phoenix is that Arizona has the two best
Senators money can buy.

Mr. McCain's problem remains the fallout from the friendship he and Mr. Keating
struck up the year before he won a seat in the House. The Senator's face
tightens and he stares straight ahead as he recites its particulars like a
catechism:

''I met him in 1981 at a Navy League dinner in Phoenix. He was the state's
largest homebuilder, a contributor to every charity in Arizona. He was very
pleasant. He told me I was one of his heros. My wife and I saw him a couple of
times that year, and when I announced I was going to run run for Congress, I
went to him for financial support, and he helped me, in 1982, in 1984 and in my
Senate campaign in 1986.''

''In those days, he didn't want anything from me,'' the Senator continued. ''He
never asked me for anything of significance until the thing with the
regulators.''

Encounter With the Regulators

When Mr. Keating asked Senator McCain to help him make a deal with savings and
loan regulators to ease up on Lincoln, the request led to a thunderous argument
between the two men outside the Senator's office on March 24, 1987, a week
before the first of two meetingswith the regulators.

The friendship never recovered, but Mr. McCain, for reasons he finds difficult
to explain, ignored the advice of his staff and attended the meetings anyway.

He went, he says, not for Charlie Keating but because of the jobs Mr. Keating's
American Continental Corporation provided in Arizona, because, he says, it
appeared that regulators were unfairly giving Lincoln Savings a hard time. He
relied, he says, on an accounting report, signed by no less an economic
emminence than Alan Greenspan, then a consultant, now the chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board. Nobody twisted his arm, he said.

The Bahamas and Wife's Trip

''I was very, very concerned about the appearance of the meetings before I
went,'' he said. ''I'm a big boy. I made the decision.'' His first real effort
to explain came at a Phoenix news conference a week after The Arizona Republic
reported that he and his family had vacationed at Mr. Keating's home in the
Bahamas in 1984, 1985 and 1986, and had only belatedly reimbursed the
developer's company for flights there on the corporate jet.

The paper also reported that the Senator's wife, Cindy, and her father, a
wealthy beer distributor and prominent Phoenix businessman, invested $359,100
from their own comapny in a Keating shopping center partnership in 1986.

Senator McCain said he was unaware that some of the personal flights had not
been paid for until Mr. Keating's accountants brought them to his attention in
March 1989. He made the reimbursements in May and June.

His wife has a right to her own career, he said, noting that under a prenuptual
agreement their finances are separate and the investment had been reported on
his Senate financial disclosure forms for three years.

Editor Was a Convert

The make-a-clean-breast move won Mr. McCain an important convert, William
Cheshire, the editorial page editor of The Republic. A strong McCain booster
earlier in his career, he had been taking the Senator to task over the Keating
affair.

Mr. McCain's Washington staff, like his friends in Arizona, had advised against
the news conference and were relieved that the Senator's notorious short fuse
did not blow under the harsh questioning. Some, like Grant Woods, a friend and
former aide to the Senator had argued that Mr. McCain's tendency to shoot from
the hip when angry, would be outweighed by the personal and political benefits
of telling his story.

''He had already had some pretty rough sessions with reporters,'' Mr. Woods
said, describing press interviews in which Mr. McCain had sarcastic and angry
exchanges. But after the Phoenix news conference, Mr. Woods said, ''I think his
spirits were actually lifted because he felt like he was doing something.''

Now his closest friends and advisers are worrying about something else. The
Senator can't stop talking.

''It's a very dangerous decision to open yourself up like that,'' said Mr.
Espinoza, a former community worker who now develops low-income housing. He is
also the godfather of Mr. McCain's youngest son, Jimmy.

Obsessed, a Friend Says

''He was pretty stressed out once they sucked Cindy into this thing,'' Mr.
Espinoza said.

''He's better now, but I think he's obsessed by a situation that he has no
control over. We're beyond the issue of right, wrong or indifferent -
intellectually he's accepted that. I don't think emotionally he has yet.''

Mr. McCain himself has a somewhat different fear. Remembering John Tower and Jim
Wright and their ethics battles, what haunts him is that he is now part of a
story that won't die. ''If this had been just a John McCain story, it would be
over by now,'' the Senator said. ''But it's about Keating and it's about the
savings and loan bailout and it's about campaign finance. When The Arizona
Republic wrote about my wife's investment, I knew then that I had to seek every
opportunity to get my version of events out. I started with Phoenix and then
moved on to all other available forums.''

Over the past month, he has crisscrossed his state, presenting his case to
editorial boards and at town meetings. If the number and tenor of questions
about the Keating affair are any guide, the response outside the Phoenix area
has been generally positive. Mr. McCain was touched last week when officials in
Sierra Vista, 75 miles outside Tucson, offered a testimonial to his good
character.

But Phoenix and its suburbs are the key to winning in Arizona politics, and a
Democratic Party that once considered Mr. McCain invulnerable is clearly
re-evaluating.

''There are two groups in this state who would love to see John McCain get hung,
and combined they could do him a lot of damage,'' Rick DeGraw, a Democratic
political consultant, said. He was speaking of the the possibilities in a
marriage of convenience between Democrats, who make up 43 percent of the
electorate, and the right-wing backers of former Republican Gov. Evan Mecham,
who are about 14 percent of the Republican voters and have not forgiven Mr.
McCain for his vocal support of Mr. Mecham's impeachment last year.

Robert Robb, a Republican political consultant, said: ''I think John was right
to go public, but I think he should disappear for a while and take some
political hibernation; right now, whenever anybody hears the name John McCain,
all they think of is Keating,''

It is that commonly held wisdom that cuts Mr. McCain most deeply, even as he
accepts the truth of it. ''I should stop talking about it'' , he said after a
grueling 16-hour hour day on the road. ''I am going to stop talking about it.''

Then he checked his speaking schedule for the next day, an equally grueling
round of appearances in the northern part of the state.

''It's like a campaign, '' he smiled, ''A campaign for credibility.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Senator John McCain, whose involvement in the Lincoln Savings and Loan
affair has resulted in a seemingly unquenchable need to defend his honor,
speaking recently at a town meeting in Douglas, Ariz. (NYT/Kim Newton)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Anne T. Board Becomes Bride

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


The marriage of Anne Taylor Board, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles L. Board
of Wilmington, Del., to William Burpee Richards, the son of Mrs. LeRoy Richards
Jr. of Ardmore, Pa., and the late Mr. Richards, took place yesterday. The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St. Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.

Mrs. Richards is the director of corporate communications for Russell Reynolds
Associates, an executive search concern in New York. Her father retired as a
patent attorney in Wilmington. Mr. Richards, a vice president of institutional
equities for County NatWest Securities in New York, graduated from Denison
University and served as a lieutenant with the Army in Vietnam. His first
marriage ended in divorce. His father was a vice president in the Philadelphia
office of Alling & Cory, a wholesale distributor of paper and paper products.
The bridegroom is a great-grandson of W. Atlee Burpee, the founder of the
Philadelphia-based seed company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

FIGHTING IN PANAMA;
Cities Are Looters' Jungles As Chaos Consumes Panama

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, Dec. 22


Two days after United States forces invaded the country, Panama appeared close
to anarchy as bands of looters and roving gunmen took over and ravaged one
neighborhood after another.

Ricardo Arias Calderon, the newly installed junior Vice President in the
American-backed government, narrowly escaped assassination this afternoon when
shots were fired as he left the National Assembly building, senior aides said.

Mr. Calderon, a Christian Democrat whose election earlier this year was annulled
by the regime of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, was not injured. The officials
said that the shots were fired from a truck by several men who appeared to be
members of a paramilitary group.

Two bodyguards were slightly injured in the attack, they said.

Looters have swarmed through Panama City's downtown business district, leaving
an ankle-deep carpet of glass shards that made many sidewalks all but
impassable.

In some areas, hardly a window pane was to be seen as looters ran through the
streets searching for remnants overlooked in previous attacks.

''Merry Christmas,'' many of them shouted at passers-by. Some looters chanted
''Viva Panama'' as a convoy of U.S. troops rumbled down the road.

Some store owners took up rifles and stood guard in front of their shops.

Other areas of the capital seemed close to civil war, with supporters and
opponents of General Noriega, the deposed strongman, shooting at anyone they
suspected of sympathizing with the other side.

An atmosphere of chaos has spread across the isthmus, turning cities into war
grounds and provoking sharp criticism of the American invasion, even by
opponents of the Noriega regime.

Many of these civilians had previously called for United States military
intervention. ''The country is being destroyed to save it,'' said a civil
engineer who has long criticized General Noriega and initially supported United
States military intervention. ''Washington never thought about the social
consequences. This country is deeply scarred.'' American officials said they had
dispatched 1,500 military police in an attempt to establish some order in the
capital and halt the looting.

But they said that the invasion force was still concentrating on flushing out
supporters of General Noriega and seizing their weapons.

''To completely clean out the entire city is going to take months of work,''
said Col. James Snell, a senior American military commander.

The United States sent 2,000 soldiers to Panama today to reinforce its invasion
force of 24,000.

Sporadic fighting continued with reports that forces loyal to General Noriega
continued to hold some sections of northwestern Panama. Many officers in the
Panama Defense Forces were surrendering to United States officials and taking
oaths of loyalty to the new Government.

''We want to fight for Endara,'' one officer said, referring to the new
President, Guillermo Endara.

Fear of Guerrilla War

American troops appear to have seized all of their major military and Government
targets. But their failure to prevent hit-and-run raids is threatening to turn
the sniping into a full-scale guerrilla war against the American military
presence.

Soldiers said that planes approaching the runway at Howard Air Force Base were
being fired upon by snipers hiding in the hills. A chartered plane that flew in
from Miami this morning with about 200 journalists was hit at least twice.

Late this afternoon, American planes started dropping leaflets in the city
encouraging forces loyal to the General to surrender. The papers guaranteed
''safe conduct'' to any United States medical facility, as well as food and
shelter, to anyone presenting the leaflet.

''Remember, you need not suffer any longer,'' the pamphlet said.

But the invasion has stirred nationalist feeling among many Panamanians.
Although American troops were greeted with cheers in some neighborhoods,
criticism of military intervention appears to be growing, even among Panamanians
who reject General Noriega's effort to portray himself as a defender of the
flag.

'I Have My Bags Packed'

''I have my bags packed,'' said a lecturer at the national university who is
planning to go to New York or Miami. ''If I was a military man, I'd go to the
mountains, not because I support Noriega, but because of the nation. It's like
being raped.''

A few Americans who were seized in the initial hours of the invasion were still
missing today. American officials declined to discuss their cases for fear of
jeopardizing prospects for their release.

The United States troops were still frustrated in pursuing their primary goal,
the capture of General Noriega. He was variously rumored to have taken shelter
in a sympathetic embassy, to be leading loyal forces from a headquarters in the
countryside, or to have fled with a band of loyalists into neighboring Costa
Rica. None of those reports could be confirmed.

From Allies to Enemies

The invasion, which United States officials acknowledge has run into
difficulties, began early Wednesday with a three-pronged attack on major
military targets across the country.

The invasion, the largest American combat operation since the end of the Vietnam
war, followed two years of worsening relations between the two countries, who
were once allies.

The breach widened after the indictment of General Noriega last year on Federal
drug trafficking charges. The general has denied the charges, but prosecutors
have said their case is strong.

In what was originally planned as a quick and painless campaign to oust General
Noriega, Washington imposed diplomatic, economic and military sanctions against
Panama. But the effort backfired.

The United States succeeded in isolating the military regime. But its effort
wrecked a once-flourishing economy and allowed the general, an acknowledged
master of military intelligence, to tighten his grip on power and prepare for
American military intervention.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

KHMER ROUGE SAY THEY HOLD A CITY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 356 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 22


Khmer Rouge guerrillas said today that they had captured the third district
capital since Vietnamese troops withdrew from Cambodia three months ago, the
guerrilla radio reported.

The radio, the Voice of the National Army of Democratic Cambodia, said the
guerrillas had been besieging the area around the town of Anlong Veng since
mid-November.

''On the 19th and 20th of December, our Cambodian national resistance forces
launched an offensive to destroy and completely liberate the strategic Anlong
Veng position,'' said a transcript of the radio report seen in Bangkok.

If true, the seizure of Anlong Veng would be one of the most important Khmer
Rouge victories since their seizure of the western town and district capital of
Pailin on Oct. 22.

District Seat Taken

The Khmer Rouge also say they have taken the district seat of Samlot.

The radio said Anlong Veng had protected the entire Government defense network
along the Dangrek mountain range, which marks the border between Cambodia and
Thailand.

''The attack and liberation of this position,'' it said, ''has basically
dismantled the networks defending the positions of the Vietnamese enemies and
their puppets along the Dangrek mountain range.''

The guerrillas also asserted that they had ''attacked and swept'' other
positions along Route 69 and to the south and east of Anlong Veng.

Strongest of Factions

The Communist Khmer Rouge is the strongest of the guerrilla factions fighting
the Government that Vietnam installed in Phnom Penh after its invasion in late
1978.

The invasion ended three and a half years of brutal reign by the Khmer Rouge,
during which at least a million Cambodians died.

Since Hanoi's avowed late-September troop withdrawal, the guerrillas have begun
big attacks and seized several towns in the northwestern part of the country.
The Khmer Rouge maintain that Hanoi's withdrawal was a trick and that tens of
thousands of disguised Vietnamese soliders remain in the country.

The radio report said the area around Anlong Vong was defended by the Vietnamese
302d division and Government soldiers from the 4th military region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

FIGHTING IN PANAMA: The Survivors;
For Military Families, Worry, Grief and Pride

BYLINE: By CRAIG WOLFF

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words


The apprehension for many families began with phone calls, soldiers saying they
would be out of reach for a time. They were about to embark on a dangerous
secret mission, they said, to a destination they did not know. Some cried.
Everyone hung up uneasily.

Yesterday, the families of the Americans killed in the fighting in Panama still
did not understand all the intricacies of the invasion or the details of how
their loved ones had died, and they longed for one more word with their sons.
But many found solace, they said, in the thought that the cause was worthy.

''I think he would have felt going out to oust Noriega was the right thing to
do,'' said Julie Otto of Buena Park, Calif., the mother of one of the soldiers
who was killed, Pfc. Roy Dennis Brown Jr., an Army Ranger who was 19 years old.
''Roy was really against drugs. We do not feel his life was sacrificed in vain.
It was for a major cause.''

Twenty-one Americans had died in the fighting, the Pentagon said last evening,
and 221 had been injured. Two others were missing.  Millions of Americans
watched the haunting and familiar television pictures of flag-draped coffins
borne by solemn comrades. But their sorrow did not compare to the anguish of
relatives and friends of the dead, who felt first-hand the grief of war. These
people found comfort in small, precious tributes, like raising money, or raising
memories of young men who had fulfilled ambitions by fighting for their country,
but who left many other ambitions unattained.

Money for a Memorial

In Conover, Wis., many of the merchants placed empty coffee cans out for their
customers. They were collecting for a memorial to John Mark Price, a paratrooper
who was killed. They said they were trying to humanize ''an abstract happening
in Panama.''

By last night, a cigar box placed on the bar at the Cocktail Corner Tavern in
town, was overflowing.

In the Boston suburb of East Arlington, Mass. yesterday, a stream of visitors
moved quietly in and out of the home of the parents of Lieut. John Patrick
Connors, a member of the Seals, an elite Navy unit who died Wednesday. A
Christmas wreath of dried pine cones now symbolized their sadness, friends said.
The only sparkle came from a cinnamon-colored dog who greeted the mourners and
well-wishers.

A family friend, John Sheehan, said the family felt some comfort believing that
''he knew exactly what he was doing; he made a choice to go to Panama.''

In San Antonio, the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Carl Vuono, yesterday handed out
Purple Hearts and other medals to soldiers who were wounded, telling them he and
President Bush were proud of their ''selfless commitment to the service of this
nation.''

The city, with its five military hospitals, is accustomed to treating wounded
American soldiers and comforting their families, but as one doctor said, ''I
would rather we did not have to go through this again.''

General Vuono passed out medals at Wilford Hall Medical Center, one of two large
military hospitals that have received the the largest influx of casualties since
the Vietnam War.

Words From the President

Officials said 112 men remained hospitalized at Wilford yesterday and an
additional 89 were at nearby Brooke Army Medical Center.

''Right before I got on the helicopter down here I got a phone call from the
President of the United States,'' General Vuono told the first soldiers he
visited. ''He wanted me to tell you and every other troop down here how proud he
is of each and every one of you for your sacrifice.''

General Vuono first handed out Purple Hearts to Pvt. Christian Robinson, Pfc.
Bobby Miller of Franklin, Pa., and Specialist 4 Albert Harris, of Jackson, Miss.
All suffered bullet or shrapnel wounds.

For Richard and Linda Turner, visiting their wounded son, Pvt. Rick Turner, 19,
at the hospital yesterday brought relief. Private Turner was recovering from a
mild head injury.

''At least it is over for us,'' said Mrs. Turner. ''My heart goes out to the
parents who still have to worry about what might happen to their boys in
Panama.''

The Turners, who drove here Thursday from their home in De Soto, Tex., near
Dallas, had no doubts about the American action in Panama. Indeed, their
daughter, Aimee, 16, said of the fugitive Panamanian leader, Manuel Antonio
Noriega, ''I think the soldiers ought to get him out some place and torture
him.''

Mr. Turner, himself a 22-year Navy veteran who now works for the Postal Service,
said, ''the drugs Noriega was dealing were killing American kids, and now maybe
that'll stop.''

Many Fractures and Sprains

Nine of the injured were flown back to their bases today and at least 53 more
were awaiting flights, said Lieut. Col. Johnny Whitaker, spokeman at Wilford
Hall.

More than half of the troops being treated there had broken bones or sprained
arms and legs, said Col. William Burner, Wilford Hall's chief of surgery. Many
of them, and others who suffered only minor wounds, will return to their bases
for further treatment.

The parents of Lieutenant Connors had not known their youngest child was even
involved in the fighting, said Mr. Sheehan, the family friend. Lieutenant
Connors, 25, had been in Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., since
Dec. 8 with a skin ailment he contracted while on duty in Brazil.

He was a member of the elite Sea, Air and Land Teams, known as the Seals and
from friends, the family learned that Lieutenant Connors volunteered from his
hospital bed to lead a unit in the Panama mission.

The family also learned through friends that Lieutenant Connors was fatally shot
on Wednesday. And Pentagon officials indentified him as one of the men who died
trying to capture an airfield.

Shy But a Bright Student

Several friends remembered Lieutenant Connors as shy but very bright, even by
the highly competitive standards of Boston College High School, a Jesuit
preparatory school from which he graduated in 1982. He was a member of the
National Honor Society and of the Homeric Society, a club where students met to
discuss the works of Homer.

Ms. Otto, the mother of Private Brown, showed pictures yesterday of her son,
blond with blue eyes, as she sat in the living room by a lavishly adorned
Christmas tree. Her son, she said, had apparently received indications that he
was about to go on a perilous assignment.

''He called to say goodbye,'' said Ms. Otto, an ambulance worker. ''He was
crying. It was a rough call. He said, 'I love you,' and that 'I might not be
home again.' ''

The solider called once more to say his unit was practicing parachuting in the
rain, something it had never done before. He talked about a visit home. That was
the last contact.

Roy D. Brown, the dead soldier's father, said he was proud his son had died
fighting against drugs. But both parents said they were outraged by something
Army officials told them. The officials, the family said, said that press
reports had alerted Panamanian forces that American military planes were on
their way to Panama, suggesting that they were better prepared to fight because
they were tipped off in advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: United States soldiers guarding Panamanian prisoners yesterday at a
camp near Panama City (Department of Defense)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Black Military History in the U.S.: No Longer the Untold Story

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 975 words



Forged in Battle
The Civil War Alliance of Black Soldiers and White Officers
By Joseph T. Glatthaar
Illustrated. 370 pages. The Free Press. $24.95.

Thomas Morris Chester, Black Civil War Correspondent
His Dispatches From the Virginia Front
Edited by R. J. M. Blackett
Illustrated. 375 pages. Louisiana State University Press. $35.

America's First Black General
Benjamin O. Davis Sr., 1880-1970
By Marvin E. Fletcher
Illustrated. 226 pages. University Press of Kansas. $22.50.

Two weeks after the Battle of Gettysburg, the 54th Massachusetts (Colored)
Infantry led an assault on Fort Wagner, a Confederate bastion in South Carolina.
Their young white commander, Col. Robert Gould Shaw, died with his men, who took
heavy casualties in hand-to-hand fighting. (The battle and its meaning for the
black soldiers and the nation is the subject of the new film ''Glory.'') The
courage displayed by the 54th Infantry was a signal to Washington and the
Northern states that freedmen and liberated slaves could bear arms and help
defeat the enemy. By the end of the war, 178,000 blacks had served in Union
blue.

Their long-neglected story is told in ''Forged in Battle,'' one of the most
revealing contributions to the literature of the Civil War. The book adds a
missing chapter to the annals of the armed forces - the role played by uniformed
black soldiers fighting for freedom - that is barely mentioned in school
textbooks. By documenting his story with contemporary memoirs, pension and award
records and newspaper accounts from the North and South, Prof. Joseph T.
Glatthaar of the University of Houston has rendered a scholarly service. General
readers should find the book fascinating.

''Forged in Battle'' covers all the wartime problems and glories: breaking down
the resistance to ex-slaves serving alongside whites; coping with racism in the
service; recruiting experienced white officers; how blacks left their mark on
the battlefields and proved their valor. The Union Army offered freedom to
blacks who enlisted; this incentive enticed thousands to risk the hazards of
running away to Federal lines for sanctuary. Of course, the Southern leaders did
not want to enlist blacks to bear arms and don gray; to do so would recognize
them as soldiers instead of as property and undermine the Confederate
philosophy.

The War Department called these units United States Colored Troops. Although
most of the infantry was led by white officers, 110 blacks were lieutenants,
captains and surgeons. In an interesting footnote (is there the germ of another
good film here?), Professor Glatthaar adds that the National Archives records do
not include ''blacks who posed as whites and commanded in white volunteer
units.''

After the war, black soldiers in occupation units in the South and black
veterans in the North both encountered prejudice. Yet some of their greatest
defenders were their former white officers. ''Forged in Battle'' tells why.

Thomas Morris Chester, 30 years old, was the only black reporter to cover the
Civil War for a daily newspaper - a breakthrough in what was then considered a
white activity. His mother had been a slave who escaped to Pennsylvania; he was
born in Harrisburg. Well educated, a teacher and believer in black immigration
to Liberia, he was changed by the war. When blacks entered the Union Army, he
was engaged by The Philadelphia Press as a war correspondent. In the last year
of the war, he filed the most exhaustive accounts of black troop actions on the
road to Richmond.

Now his dispatches have been edited by Prof. R. J. M. Blackett of Indiana
University, in ''Thomas Morris Chester: Black Civil War Correspondent,'' which
includes a biographical essay. Chester often came under fire at the front. He
was fond of humorous metaphors, frequently referring to the bombardment of
opposing armies as the fireworks displays of ''the enterprising managers of the
firm of Grant & Lee.'' Such touches make the book easy to follow.

In his first-person reports (the subjective writing style of the time), he often
criticized white commanders of black troops who treated them poorly and praised
those who were kind. Otherwise, his well-written dispatches seem colorblind.
Later, Chester continued his legal studies and became the first black American
to be called to the English bar.

Not until 1940, with World War II on the American horizon, would a black officer
wear a general's stars. In ''America's First Black General,'' Prof. Marvin E.
Fletcher of Ohio University writes about Benjamin O. Davis Sr., who became a
brigadier in the Office of the Inspector General. That he did not receive a
field command was a mark of the times; there was discrimination against blacks
commanding junior white officers in the Regular Army. All-black regiments were
separate and mostly commanded by white officers during World War II. By
contrast, fully integrated Army units fought in the Vietnam War.

The biography traces the career of General Davis up through the ranks. He rose
to lieutenant colonel, became an instructor in military tactics and, above all,
served as an example to other blacks to work within the military system to
change it. One of those who did force changes by personal example was the
general's son, Benjamin O. Davis Jr., a fighter pilot who commanded the black
99th Pursuit Squadron in Italy, was highly decorated and after the war helped
integrate the Air Force.

Professor Fletcher writes sympathetically about General Davis's personal and
military life, providing more facts than excitement for the reader. He
concludes, ''The first black general was nominally a member of both the black
middle class and the professional officer corps, but because of his occupation
and race, he was never fully a member of either.'' Maxwell Communicationd(The
Free Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Benjamin O. Davis Sr. in France in 1944. (NYT)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: Overview;
G.I.'s in Panama Report Gains in Restoring Order

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1721 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, Dec. 23


The American military commander here said today that his forces had begun to
make significant progress in restoring order in Panama City and the countryside.
But there was no indication that the American forces had made any progress
toward one of their main goals, the capture of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, the
dictator who went into hiding when the Americans invaded this country four days
ago.

In the city, neighborhood groups set up checkpoints and other barriers to try to
stop the rampaging and shooting of recent days, much of it by members of the
paramilitary forces known as the Dignity Battalions.

Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman, head of the United States Southern Command, said that
the army had taken 2,250 pro-Noriega troops and armed civilians into custody and
that the Government installed three days ago by the United States ''now is
ensconced.''

Dissolving Defense Forces

The new Government announced today that it was dissolving the Panamanian Army
and setting up a more modest police force in its place.

General Thurman also said that civilians had begun to give the American troops
''significant cooperation'' in identifying pro-Noriega fighters to be arrested
and in cleaning up areas of the city littered by looting and fighting.

The 2,000 fresh troops President Bush ordered airlifted here arrived to
reinforce the 24,000 already here. 25 U.S. Deaths Reported The army said that 25
American soldiers had been killed and 238 wounded and that one was missing.
Panamanian casualties were said to be 139 dead and 95 wounded. . Many hundreds
of civilians were belived to have been killed or wounded in the fighting, but
exact figures were hard to come by.

Pro-Noriega forces today released Jon Meyersohn, a CBS News producer seized on
Wednesday at the Marriott Hotel. An executive with GTE, Doug Mullen, who was
taken along with Mr. Meyersohn, was also released. The army said 10 other
hostages, all businessmen, had also been released and that an undisclosed
number, including some Americans, were still being held.

Vigilante Groups Set Up

Vigilante groups were set up almost overnight to reclaim the streets of this
city from rampaging mobs that had turned it into an urban jungle.

In an effort to stop the waves of looting, residents built barricades on
virtually every street, transforming glass and steel canyons into a labyrinth of
dead-ends. This occurred in both the poor and rich neighborhoods.

''I've said from the beginning that when the looters finished with the business
district, they'd come into our homes,'' said a writer, who organized one of the
community self-defense groups.

''We have to fight,'' added the writer, who had armed himself with a shotgun.
''We are going to fight. This is our town and our country. That's the only way
we're going to stop this barbarism.''

The birth of the self-defense groups has infused the struggling Government of
President Guillermo Endara with new confidence. It said that it was making
progress re-establishing law and order and that the anarchy that characterized
the last two days was a thing of the past.

''It's fantastic seeing Panamanians fighting for their turf,'' said Louis
Martin, the senior aide to the United States-backed Government of President
Endara, who was installed on Thursday. ''It's great seeing the barricades
everywhere. It gives me new hope.''

The Government, which has been sharply criticized for failing to move more
rapidly and more strongly to control the chaos, also was heartened by the
establishment of the first American-Panamanian police patrols and the surrender
of hundreds of former members of the Panamanian Defense Forces, which is known
as the P.D.F.

In an arrangement brokered through the influential Roman Catholic Church,
barracks commanders from major cities around the country agreed to surrender and
give up their arms to representatives of the Government coalition. In return,
the Government guaranteed their and their families' safety.

''Hundreds of members of the P.D.F. have seen the light,'' said a spokesman for
the Southern Command, which is situated on the outskirts of the city and is the
headquarters for all United States troops in Latin America. ''The P.D.F. has
finally joined forces with the people. It's the beginning of a kinder and
gentler P.D.F.''

But forces loyal to General Noriega were reported today to be still holding
areas in the northeast, near the Costa Rican border. General Noriega was
stationed in the area as a junior officer and assigned some of his most loyal
followers there.

Other former members of the American-trained, 7,000-man Panamanian forces as
well as members of hard-line paramilitary groups established by the general
continued to ambush American troops in what threatens to become a guerrilla war.


Resistance Is Vowed

A member of one of the paramilitary groups active in the city today said the
units, the Dignity Battalions, would continue mounting raids on the 24,000
American troops who took part in the invasion, the largest American combat
operation since the end of the Vietnam War.

''We are not going to surrender,'' the man said. ''They're going to have to kill
everybody. We have to fight. Women have lost their husbands. Children have lost
their mothers. So we have to fight.''

The man, who works as a laborer, said morale in his unit remained high. He said
the 2,000 additional American troops due here would be insufficient to squash
the resistance, and he predicted that the battle would go on for years.

''The troops coming today won't be enough,'' he said. ''During the day I'm a
friend of the American soldiers. At night, we're the enemy. The general will not
surrender. He will fight and fight until he dies. And then we will fight on.''

There were heavy but brief fire fights in many areas of the city during the
night. Shooting and several explosions, apparently from 90-millimeter cannon,
reverberated through the narrow streets of the old city. Plumes of smoke
followed. But there appeared to be less combat than in previous days.

City sidewalks remain covered with an ankle-deep carpet of glass slivers. Trash,
dropped by the rampaging looters, rotted in the heat. Some neighborhoods
remained without water or power. But for the first time since Tuesday's
invasion, residents began venturing out of their houses in large numbers.

Medicines Are Needed

Block-long lines formed outside any shop that had escaped the frenzied mobs.
Medicines were in specially short supply, and any pharmacy that opened was
immediately inundated by thousands of relatives of sick people.

United States officials said they were preparing to airlift thousands of tons of
emergency relief supplies to Panama.

Hospitals reported that they were desperate for medicine to care for the
hundreds of civilians wounded during the fighting.

There were no accurate figures on civilian casualties. But city morgues reported
they were full, and a doctor in an outlying hospital said today that he had
treated at least 60 wounded in the first two days.

Several hundred civilians are thought to have been killed and many more wounded.
But it will take days, if not weeks, before accurate figures are compiled.

Endara's First Major Decision

In the first major policy decision of the American-backed administration,
President Endara announced today that he was abolishing the Defense Forces,
which have been the de facto government of the country for more than 20 years.

The Defense Forces will be replaced by a new institution to be called the Public
Forces of Panama, officials said. But they avoided any discussion of the new
force's role in the country and it appeared that was still under discussion.

While the Government works to establish the new force and its authority,
residents of the city took control of the streets. Armed with everything from
hunting rifles to thick chains, shotguns to barbells, they set up road blocks,
preventing anyone who looked suspicious from passing.

One group of residents said they had captured 30 looters, some of whom belonged
to the Dignity Battalions, and recovered 10 stolen cars at the El Dorado, an
upscale mall that was among the most heavily vandalized. In the trunk of one
car, the residents said they had found a bazooka.

Four Seized as Looters

Civilian security squads this morning seized what they thought were four looters
in the exclusive district of Paitilla, the spit of high-rise apartments that jut
out into the waters of Panama Bay. The men were captured and tried within 30
minutes.

''Kill them! kill them!'' hundreds of residents shouted when the four men were
marched at gunpoint past the crowd gathered outside an open supermarket.

But when a civilian security official began kicking one of the suspected
thieves, a paunchy man dressed in Bermuda shorts and rust-colored T-shirt, the
crowd surged forward to protect him. The guard kept them at bay by firing a shot
from his silver chrome pistol into the air.

The four suspected thieves were then tied up with belts and shoe laces and
forced to lie face down in the seeringly hot streets. That provoked sharp
arguments when the crowd gathered around the men.

''We're the poor people, and we're the most persecuted,'' one of the suspect's
neighbors. ''They're talking about a government of reconciliation, and they want
to kill them. What type of reconciliation is this.''

''They're thieves,'' members of the crowd shouted.

'Giant Mistake,' Suspect Says

''You say they're thieves, but what about the thieves with white collars?''
another man said, pointing to a steel-grey BMW 745i that was parked nearby. The
security chief told the crowd that his men had found a .32-caliber pistol on the
elderly man, Felix W. Suarez.

''This is all a mistake, a giant mistake,'' said Mr. Suarez, a private bus owner
and driver.

One member of the crowd went to the security chief and told him to release the
four suspects. ''If there's no proof, let them go,'' several people in the crowd
said.

''You see you want to kill us, but we won't kill you,'' said another member of
the crowd to the four suspects. The security chief resisted releasing the men.
He noted that Mr. Suarez had a gun and might be a member of the Dignity
Battalions.

''He could come back and kill me,'' the security chief said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China's Lonely Press Tries to Look the Other Way

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1422 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Dec. 22


Fearful of reviving its own domestic opposition, the Chinese leadership has kept
much of the extraordinary change in Eastern Europe out of the press.

Diplomatically, China has distanced itself from much of Eastern Europe while
drawing closer to Rumania. The popular upheaval that has continued in Rumania,
despite the sort of crackdown the Chinese carried out in June, remains
unreported in the domestic Chinese press. It was, however, mentioned briefly in
the English-language China Daily, intended for foreigners.

Chinese students and intellectuals with access to short-wave radios have been
getting news about Eastern Europe from the Voice of America and the British
Broadcasting Corporation. The Beijing authorities have jammed both services'
Mandarin-language broadcasts with uneven efficiency, but not their
English-language transmissions.

''It seems the dialectic of history is with us,'' said a professor at an elite
university here, barely suppressing a smile. ''Of course we are encouraged by
the changes in Eastern Europe, especially the students. But anyone old enough to
have been through the Cultural Revolution knows that China presents a different
set of problems.''

Deep Roots

Prime among them, he said, is the deeply rooted nature of the Communist Party
here, which made the revolution and constructed the patterns of power. Unlike
Communist leaderships in Eastern Europe, the leadership here did not arrive in
the baggage train of the Soviet Army. And unlike Communist regimes in the Soviet
bloc, the Communist system here was not laid upon a functioning Westernized
society like a thin layer of asphalt.

The Communist Parties in China, Vietnam and Cuba - all of which have resisted
the political tide that seems to flow, however uncontrolled, from Moscow - are
associated with larger historical accomplishments like decolonization, national
liberation, literacy and better food distribution.

In China, which remains a peasant-dominated state, the general level of
education is far lower than in Eastern Europe. And here, too, there are no
independent organizations like the Roman Catholic Church in Poland and the
Lutheran Church in East Germany around which an opposition can form.

Differences With Moscow

While the policies of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union have
been an inspiration to many dissidents in Eastern Europe, China and the Soviet
Union haven't seen eye to eye on very much for the last 30 years or so. Even
many Chinese opposed to the leadership here still speak with contempt about
Soviet society, politics, culture and technology. This is, after all, a country
that has dropped the Volga for the Toyota as fast as it could afford to.

Still, the Chinese leadership has taken great pains to try to limit the
infectious nature of change in Eastern Europe. In recent weeks, daily coverage
of events there has been limited to a few terse reports in the party newspaper,
People's Daily. Beijing radio and television have followed suit with limited
items at the end of broadcasts.

Even these reports carefully skip over the popular nature of the protests in
Eastern Europe. Changes that are mentioned are described as a result of
leadership decisions, not public pressure. Chinese news organizations have also
tried to emphasize those shifts as designed to ''perfect socialism'' or insure
''stability and unity,'' a common theme in internal Chinese reporting.

No Mention of Corruption

In the sparse coverage of East Germany, for instance, there has been no mention
of the corruption charges against the former leadership. In the popular protests
here in May and June that were finally crushed by the Chinese Army, a central
complaint of the demonstrators was the issue of nepotism and corruption among
party leaders and their families.

Press organizations here have also quoted some statements by Eastern European
leaders criticizing Western ''manipulation'' and ''interference into internal
affairs,'' another popular theme here, as the campaign against American
''meddling'' and what the Chinese call the ''capitalist strategy of peaceful
evolution against socialist countries'' continues in full swing.

For example, late last month, People's Daily and the official New China News
Agency gave prominence to a report in the official Rumanian party paper,
Scinteia, of an ''imperialist offensive'' against socialism. They also
highlighted a declaration from the Czechoslovak Defense Ministry that said the
Czechoslovak Army supported the party and opposed any ''anarchy fanned by the
internal and external antisocialist forces.''

Focus on 'Turmoil'

There has also been a series of small reports emphasizing ''turmoil'' in Eastern
Europe or the potential for it as the result of domestic change. On Wednesday,
for example, the press agency issued a four-paragraph item about a warning
strike for higher wages by Hungarian train drivers. It quoted Prime Minister
Miklos Nemeth as saying that Hungary would collapse if ''all social strata go on
strike in this time of widespread domestic difficulties in the economy.''

At the same time, Western diplomats say, the Chinese leadership has been
distancing itself from much of Eastern Europe, keeping correct but cool
relations, following standard protocol, with the new regimes in Eastern Europe.
The exception has been Rumania, which under President Nicolae Ceausescu kept
warm relations with Beijing throughout the Chinese-Soviet split. Ties have
become even closer, as they have with North Korea and Cuba.

Visit to Rumania

In late November, Qiao Shi, a member of the standing committee of the Chinese
Politburo, visited Rumania. In a meeting with Mr. Ceausescu on Nov. 21, reported
by the press agency, Mr. Qiao said he was ''deeply impressed by the powerful
leadership of the party'' and the ''political ideological work prevalent in the
whole party and people.''

On Nov. 18, People's Daily published a lengthy interview with Mr. Ceausescu, who
said he ''treasures'' his ties with China and that in a ''rather complicated''
world situation, ''it is all the more necessary to increase cooperation between
Communist parties and socialist countries.''

A message from the Chinese to mark the end of the recent Rumanian party congress
called for ''militant unity'' between the two parties on the basis of
''revolutionary friendship.''

In the weekly Foreign Ministry briefing on Thursday, the ministry spokesman, Jin
Guihua, was asked if China would support Rumania's move to crush
''counterrevolutionary'' demonstrations as the Rumanians had supported China in
June. But the spokesman was clearly not going to be drawn into such parallels.
He simply said that China did not approve of any country interfering in the
internal affairs of another - the same phrase China used today to condemn
American military action in Panama - and said, ''We believe that Rumania can
properly deal with its own affairs.''

A Party Meeting

A Chinese party member said a high-level party meeting was held last week to
discuss Eastern Europe, in an effort to enable party organizers to brief their
units. The party member said the changes in Eastern Europe were attributed to
three factors: the influence of Mr. Gorbachev, who was said to have been
described in unflattering terms; the presence in Eastern Europe of
''uneradicated bourgeois and social democratic elements,'' and ''the
interference in internal affairs'' by capitalist countries, in particular the
United States.

China, the party member said, was described as being a bastion of Communism in
the world and one of its firmest defenders. With developments in Rumania,
China's position seems that much lonelier today.

On Wednesday, the Chinese party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, spoke at a
conference for party officials. In his speech, reported by the official press
agency, he said that stability and economic progress were China's main tasks and
required adherence to its policy of openness to the outside world.

Hopes for Continued Friendship

BEIJING, Dec. 23 (Reuters) -China's Foreign Ministry said today that it hopes to
remain friends with Rumania and, in a report from Bucharest, the official New
China News Agency adopted a tone that was mildly supportive of Nicolae Ceausescu
without endorsing him personally.

The ministry comment was the first official reaction to developments in Rumania
since Mr. Ceausescu fled Bucharest on Friday and army units sided with
pro-democracy demonstrators to fight die-hard loyalists.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE YEAR'S BEST: FILM VIEW;
New and Original Were the Hallmarks

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2188 words


THIS WAS THE YEAR OF MONEY.

It wouldn't stop talking. Japanese interests bought Columbia Pictures and then
paid an emperor's ransom to Warner Brothers to obtain the release of Jon Peters
and Peter Guber, the producers of ''Batman,'' to run their new toy.

''Batman,'' which reportedly cost $50 million to produce, went on to make the
sort of profits only Steven Spielberg dreams of, after receiving reviews so
reverent that they read like the fashion-show coverage of the emperor's new
wardrobe.

Some stars were asking (and receiving) $10 million or more per picture, which
was the total budget of the average movie in the not too distant past.

A couple of years ago, Cineplex Odeon, the high-flying Canadian exhibition
company now facing financial problems, outraged the public (and Mayor Edward I.
Koch) when it raised first-run ticket prices in Manhattan to $7. This year the
price went up to $7.50. Nobody uttered a word.

It used to be said that you can't take it with you. This new rapacity suggests
that a way has been found. It is no coincidence that this year, as last, all but
one of the movies on the top-10 list are based on original screenplays, that is,
on material initially conceived of as film material. In each case the result is
a work that could not exist in another form without serious alteration of
identity.

These are films that enlarge the possibilities of cinema by celebrating what
would appear (to playwrights, novelists and short story writers) to be the
limitations of the screen. Each in its own way defines the medium. It may also
be heartening that four of the top 10 also mark the feature-film debuts of their
directors. It's not too much to expect that additional good work will follow. In
alphabetical order, the 10-best films of 1989 are: ''Chocolat,'' directed by
Claire Denis (her first feature) and written (in French) by Miss Denis and
Jean-Pol Fargeau. A limited but no less perceptive and evocative recollection of
life in Cameroon when it was a French colony in the 1950's, as recalled today by
the the daughter of a white French district officer.

The semi-autobiographical film is about the intense but mostly unspoken
friendship of a lonely little French girl named France (Cecile Ducasse) and the
elegant black house''boy,'' Protee (Isaach de Bankole), the would-be warrior who
acts as her de facto nanny. As the elder France (Mireille Perrier) remembers the
events of one hot summer, she comes to understand something of the forces that
led inexorably to the violent end of trust. Everything that happens is vivid and
clear and subject to the kind of speculation that rewards as it tantalizes.

''Chocolat'' is beautifully acted and shot with the kind of clarity that is the
cinema equivalent to spare, carefully measured prose.

''Crimes and Misdemeanors,'' written and directed by Woody Allen. Mr. Allen's
most successful ''serious'' film is also his most seriously funny comedy, a big,
multicharacter piece about how some members of today's upper middle class (in
this case Jewish) society might not only get away with murder, but also get away
guilt-free.

''Crimes and Misdemeanors'' dramatizes the rootlessness that haunts its
characters, played to perfection by Martin Landau, Anjelica Huston, Mia Farrow,
Jerry Orbach, Claire Bloom, Joanna Gleason, Sam Waterston and Martin Bergmann.
It's a toss-up as to whom steals the show: Alan Alda, as a successful,
incredibly self-assured television producer, or Mr. Allen, as a dedicated
producer of documentaries that tend to be honored only at obscure film festivals
abroad.

''Do the Right Thing,'' written and directed by Spike Lee. With his third
feature film, Mr. Lee comes into his own as director of distinctive style,
capacity and passion. Set in Brooklyn, in one block of Bedford-Stuyvesant on the
hottest day of the summer, the film chronicles the events leading up to a
vicious race riot.

The movie is big, colorful, tumultuous and sorrowful. Its resolution continues
to shock and disturb long after one leaves the theater. There is, however, no
doubt about the mastery of the man who wrote, directed and stars in it. The
excellent cast also includes Danny Aiello, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Richard Edson,
John Turturro, Giancarlo Esposito, Bill Nunn and the exuberant Rosie Perez.

''Enemies, a Love Story,'' directed by Paul Mazursky and written by Roger L.
Simon and Mr. Mazursky, based on the novel by Isaac Bashevis Singer. Nothing Mr.
Mazursky has done before has the wit, wisdom and complexity that are evident in
''Enemies, a Love Story,'' the director's finest film to date. Perhaps Mr.
Singer is the collaborator for whom he has always been searching.

Set in New York City (mostly Coney Island and the Bronx) in 1949, the film
embraces not only the Holocaust, which is tricky material for the maker of
fiction, but also the entire Jewish experience. It's about the earnest, feckless
Herman (Ron Silver), a Polish Jewish emigre who survived the war hidden in a
hayloft, tended by his former housemaid Yadwiga (Margaret Sophie Stein), a
Gentile whom he has since married out of gratitude. Unknown to Yadwiga, Herman
maintains another household in the Bronx where he lives with the exotic Masha
(Lena Olin), a survivor of the death camps who knows all about the Brooklyn wife
but makes allowances.

The menage is further complicated by the arrival of Tamara (Anjelica Huston),
the Polish wife Herman thought had died in the camps with their children. ''I'm
dead,'' Tamara says cheerfully when she arrives at Herman's Brooklyn apartment.

Though Herman is a very peculiar and particular character, he is also - without
meaning to be - Everyman. He is a wonderfully hopeful, forlorn fellow whose
existence is a bedroom farce played in three-quarter time. ''Enemies'' is funny
and sad and, by being utterly specific, mysterious. The performances are among
the year's best.

''High Hopes,'' written and directed by Mike Leigh. The subject of this
brilliant satire is life in Margaret Thatcher's England as seen from the vantage
point of the underemployed and ever-skeptical. The characters include Cyril, a
bearded young man who refuses to cooperate with the System and thus works as a
messenger; and Shirley, the loving, wise young woman with whom he lives. There
are also Cyril's despairing old mum, his wildly ambitious, nouveau riche sister,
her gross husband and random Thatcher types, whose scenes are as comic as
anything in a political revue.

Mr. Leigh's films are the result of long weeks of rehearsals, during which
actors are encouraged to improvise. This may be one of the reasons for the
extraordinary spontaneity that lights up ''High Hopes,'' which veers from sober
drama to comedy to outright farce without missing a beat.

''Little Vera,'' directed by Vasily Pichul and written (in Russian) by Maryia
Khmelik. The unexpected frankness of ''Little Vera'' was so newsworthy that it
almost overshadowed the quality of the film itself. This is an exuberant
kitchen-sink comedy about a pretty, bored, heavily made-up teen-ager, Vera
(Natalya Negoda), who drifts into marriage with a young student who is probably
going to make her life miserable.

''Little Vera,'' set in and around an unnamed port city, makes no attempt to see
the bright side of the dreary lives of Vera, her exhausted mother, her alcoholic
father and her brother, a doctor who lives in Moscow and seems to be well on his
way to becoming a pompous bore. Mr. Pichul regards his characters with sympathy,
but imposes no hopes on them. The tone is cool. The warmth, of which there is
plenty, comes from the humanity of the characters and the actors who play them,
especially Miss Negoda. ''Mystery Train,'' written and directed by Jim Jarmusch.
Mr. Jarmusch's third released feature is his chef d'oeuvre. The comedy is a
three-part fable set in a Memphis, Tenn., where Elvis Presley is still big
business. Elvis's ghost also haunts every room of the Arcade Hotel, the seedy
establishment that is the film's principal setting.

Mr. Jarmusch's sense of humor illuminates even the most somber settings and most
dimwitted characters. It locates the order in a universe that is otherwise
beyond comprehension. ''Mystery Train'' is light as a feather. It is also
eccentric, original and has the kick of a controlled substance. The great color
photography is by Robby Muller.

''Roger & Me,'' written and directed by Michael Moore. This feature-length
documentary (Mr. Moore's first film), is one man's blisteringly funny attack on
the giant General Motors Corporation, which Mr. Moore holds to account for its
treatment of long-time employes in Flint, Mich. The film documents the sad
economic state of Flint after the closing of various G. M. operations. Since the
film's showing at the New York Film Festival, Mr. Moore has been criticized for
the loose way in which he has played around with historical sequence to make his
case against the company. This isn't a nice thing to do, and , perhaps Roger
Smith, the chairman of G. M., has a right to be offended. However, Mr. Moore
might argue, throwing thousands of workers out of their jobs wasn't exactly
admirable either.

''Roger & Me'' is clearly one man's biased commentary, the sort of flagrant,
opinionated, freewheeling journalism that means to be offensive on behalf of
people who have no voice in things. It is personal journalism of a highly
original, satiric and colorful order, quite unlike the work of any other
documentary film maker at work today.

''Sex, Lies and Videotape,'' written and directed by Steven Soderbergh. Mr.
Soderbergh's first feature is a small, stunningly controlled comedy about love,
marriage, sex and idle philandering.

At the center is Graham, a romantic if impotent young man who can only relate to
women whom he tapes on his camcorder as they talk about their sexual fantasies.
There is also John, who is having a torrid affair with Cynthia, the sister of
his wife, Ann. Do you follow? Mr. Soderbergh's film makes these relationships
completely clear, as well as very funny and rueful. Relationships aren't easy,
especially when, as in our society, they are virtually all one talks about.

''Sex, Lies, etc.'' is a remarkable achievement for young Mr. Soderbergh and his
principal actors, James Spader, Andie MacDowell, Peter Gallagher and Laura San
Giacomo.

''True Love,'' directed by Nancy Savoca and written by Miss Savoca and Richard
Guay. An astonishingly fine first film, ''True Love'' is set in the same Bronx
that gave us Paddy Chayefsky's ''Marty'' 30-odd years ago. Miss Savoca follows
the preparations leading up to the marriage of two good-looking,
lower-middle-class Italian-Americans who may well be ruing the day two years
later.

The uproariously comic surface of the movie never obscures the probably bleak
future awaiting the betrothed pair. Yet the film also seems to understand that
this future will somehow be weathered in the same way the pair survive the chaos
of their wedding. The film has been written, directed and acted with
breathtaking skill. The cast members to remember include Annabella Sciorra (the
bride) and Ron Eldard (the groom). The runners-up, in no particular order of
importance: Jim Sheridan's ''My Left Foot,'' with Daniel Day-Lewis's
extraordinary performance as Christy Brown, the physically disabled, Dublin-born
painter and writer; Brian De Palma's ''Casualties of War,'' with Sean Penn and
Michael J. Fox, about a Vietnam soldier who blows the whistle on his comrades
after they rape and murder a Vietnamese peasant woman; Oliver Stone's ''Born on
the Fourth of July,'' based on Ron Kovic's memoir about a radicalized Vietnam
vet, played by Tom Cruise in one of the year's most moving performances.

Also, Edward Zwick's ''Glory,'' written by Kevin Jarre, a big, brightly colored,
pageantlike account of the heroism of an all-black Union regiment in the Civil
War, with Matthew Broderick, Denzel Washington and Morgan Freeman, among others;
''Driving Miss Daisy,'' Bruce Beresford's appreciative screen adaptation of
Alfred Uhry's Pulitzer Prize-winning play, with Jessica Tandy and Morgan
Freeman.

Also Juzo Itami's ''Taxing Woman's Return,'' in which the most humane and
satiric of Japanese directors studies a Japan that is turning to bogus religious
cults and Swiss bank accounts; Claude Chabrol's chilly, aggrieved ''Story of
Women,'' based on the true story of a rather commonplace, opportunistic young
woman (Isabelle Huppert) who finds her calling as an abortionist during World
War II and is guillotined more for political than moral reasons.

Also ''Henry V,'' a tough, vivid, pocket-sized screen version of the Shakespeare
play, adapted and directed by Kenneth Branagh, who also plays the title role
with great efficiency; Gus Van Sant Jr.'s ''Drugstore Cowboy,'' in which Matt
Dillon gives a mini-bravura performance as a small-time Portland (Ore.) thief
and junkie; and Danny DeVito's ''War of the Roses,'' with super performances by
Kathleen Turner and Michael Douglas, a hilariously nasty comedy that is the flip
side to all movies in which lovers live happily ever after.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Andie MacDowell in Steven Soderbergh's stunningly controlled comedy
''Sex, Lies and Videotape,'' Martin Landau in Woody Allen's ''Crimes and
Misdemeanors,'' Mr. Allen's most seriously funny comedy, and Annabella Sciorra
and Ron Eldard in Nancy Savoca's astonishingly fine ''True Love''; Cecile
Ducasse in Claire Denis's perceptive and evocative ''Chocolat, '' Youki Kudoh
and Masatoshi Nagase in Jim Jarmusch's ''Mystery Train, '' a film with the kick
of a controlled substance, and Natalya Negoda in Vasily Pichul's ''Little
Vera,'' an exuberant kitchen-sink comedy (Biran Hammill); Philip Davis and Ruth
Sheen in Mike Leigh's brilliant satire ''High Hopes,'' Spike Lee and Danny
Aiello in Mr. Lee's tumultuous and sorrowful ''Do the Right Thing'' and Michael
Moore in his blisteringly funny ''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PORTRAIT OF THE 1980's;
Trivial Pursuits And Huge Thoughts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


Like any other decade, this one got a reputation as trivial in the
arts-and-literature department. In films, Americans wanted things kept light. At
the same time, they bought books about chaos, the decline of their nation and
the closing of their mind.

Best Sellers

The best-seller lists of the decade were dominated by the usual celebrity
biographies, horror and espionage tales, exercise manuals, guides to making love
and money, inspirational stories about animals and political memoirs. But
bookstore windows were occasionally graced by best-sellers that helped shape
what people talked and thought about, books that everybody had to know about and
maybe even read.

At the beginning of the decade, Norman Cousins's Anatomy of an Illness
celebrated the healing powers of the spirit and holistic medicine. Hopes that
all the world would enter a New Age of enlightenment were reflected in
futuristic tracts like Alvin Toffler's Third Wave and John Naisbitt's
Megatrends. According to other books, the salvation would be laissez-faire
economics: Free to Choose, by Milton and Rose Friedman, and Wealth and Poverty
by George Gilder.

This was the decade when business magnates and corporate raiders became stars.
Along with Iacocca and Trump were attacks on business and finance: Greed and
Glory on Wall Street (Ken Auletta), The Reckoning (David Halberstam).

Journalists became historians and covered events as ancient as The Trial of
Socrates (I. F. Stone) and as recent as The Path to Power, the first volume of
Robert A. Caro's biography of Lyndon Johnson. In A Bright Shining Lie, Neil
Sheehan showed how one corrupt military leader personified the contradictions of
Vietnam.

The historian Paul Kennedy's Rise and Fall of the Great Powers warned that for
centuries superpowers have run through predictable cycles of domination and
decline. In The March of Folly, Barbara Tuchman showed how shortsighted leaders
keep marching their countries to ruin's brink.

Books seeking to explain the mysteries of science were especially popular: Tracy
Kidder's Soul of a New Machine, Stephen W. Hawking's Brief History of Time,
James Gleick's Chaos. The physicist Richard P. Feynman wrote two surprising
best-sellers, with the help of his friend Ralph Leighton: ''Surely You're
Joking, Mr. Feynman'' and ''What Do You Care What Other People Think?'' In The
Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat, the neurologist Oliver Sacks told readers
true stories of brains gone haywire. In Under the Eye of the Clock, a young
quadriplegic poet named Christopher Nolan, who learned to type with a unicorn
stick attached to his forehead, told what it is like to navigate through life
with a damaged nervous system.

A few novelists managed to tap the intellectual currents of the decade and
produce fiction popular enough to be sold in grocery stores. Umberto Eco drew on
semiotics and medieval theology for The Name of the Rose. John Updike filled the
pages of Roger's Version with modern religious controversies, physics and
computer science.

Toward the end of the decade, books titillated readers with warnings that
civilization was breaking down: Tom Wolfe in his novel The Bonfire of the
Vanities, Allan Bloom in his treatise The Closing of the American Mind. In
Cultural Literacy, E. D. Hirsch Jr. provided a list of facts he thought
Americans should know - and probably didn't. To John Allen Paulos the problem
was not only illiteracy but Innumeracy.

One best-seller owed its success not to its content but to what it symbolized.
People all over the world bought Salman Rushdie's Satanic Verses to show
dictators and bookstore chains that readers won't stay silent when a writer is
condemned to death for his prose.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PORTRAIT OF THE 1980's;
Selections From 10 Years of History

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 5628 words


What happened? Morning in America, hole in the ozone, Oliver North, AIDS,
terrorists, contras like Founding Fathers, $640 toilet seats, triumph of
democracy, just say no.

1980

It's America vs. the Soviet Union, Khomeini, Castro, inflation and Jimmy Carter.

January:  The U.S. embargoes grain and high-technology exports to the Soviet
Union in retaliation for its occupation of Afghanistan at the end of 1979.
President Carter warns that the U.S. might boycott the summer Olympics in
Moscow.

After criticizing Moscow's move into Afghanistan, Andrei D. Sakharov, the most
prominent Soviet dissident, is arrested in Moscow and ordered into internal
exile in the city of Gorky.

February:  In a sweeping inquiry into suspected bribe-taking and other
corruption, 31 public officials, including a U.S. Senator and seven
representatives, are reported to be subjects of an F.B.I. undercover operation
called Abscam.

March:  A sniper kills the outspoken Archbishop of San Salvador, Oscar Arnulfo
Romero. The country's polarization intensifies and soon turns into civil war.

April:  President Carter breaks relations with Iran after Islamic militants
continue to hold American Embassy employees taken hostage in November 1979. A
rescue mission fails.

After 90 years of white rule, Rhodesia becomes the independent nation of
Zimbabwe, led by an elected leader, Robert Mugabe.

May:  Fidel Castro allows a flood of Cubans to leave the port of Mariel for the
United States. Mr. Carter welcomes them with ''open arms,'' but the mood changes
after it becomes known that criminals and mentally ill people are included.

Mount St. Helens in Oregon blows its top, spewing steam and ash 60,000 feet in
the air.

August:  Caving in after two weeks of crippling strikes, the Polish Government
agrees to give workers the right to strike and form independent unions - the
first time such a right has been granted in the Soviet bloc. The strikes were
led by Lech Walesa, an electrician.

September:  Iraq, taking advantage of the turmoil in Iran to strike a blow
against its hated neighbor, attacks Iranian oil and air fields, and war begins.
In November oil prices reach $43 a barrel on the spot market, the 1980's peak,
as Persian Gulf tanker traffic is threatened.

October:  Ronald Reagan, who capitalized on frustration over double-digit
inflation, a gasoline crisis and the failure to rescue the hostages in his
campaign for President, has the most memorable line in the debate with Mr.
Carter: ''Are you better off than you were four years ago?''

November:  Mr. Reagan wins in a landslide, carrying 43 states, and is the first
candidate since Franklin D. Roosevelt to defeat an incumbent. The Democrats lose
the Senate for the first time since 1954.

The world learns that Saturn has scores of rings, not six, from the spectacular
pictures sent back by Voyager 1.

In China, Deng Xiaoping enjoys the trial of his hard-line nemeses: Mao's widow,
Jiang Qing, and other members of the Gang of Four.

December:  Three Roman Catholic nuns and a lay worker from the U.S. are murdered
in El Salvador. Right-wing death squads are blamed. The U.S. halts new aid and
calls for a reshuffling of the military-civilian Government. Jose Napoleon
Duarte becomes its leader.

Violent deaths:  Dr. Herman Tarnower (shot by Jean Harris); Anastasio Somoza
Debayle, deposed Nicaraguan leader (shot in exile in Paraguay); John Lennon
(shot by a disturbed fan).

1981

Enter Reagan, 'Dynasty' and brief notice of an unusual malady among homosexual
men.

January:  ABC introduces ''Dynasty,'' a celebration of glamour and greed. It
becomes a huge hit.

On his last day in office, President Carter says an accord has been reached for
releasing the hostages. Criticizing the deal, a Reagan adviser says, ''This
Administration will not negotiate with barbarians or terrorists.''

Mr. Reagan, sworn in as 40th President, promises an ''era of renewal,'' and
warns of tremendous ''upheavals'' if the deficit continues to grow.

Minutes after his inauguration, the hostages are released, after 444 days in
captivity.

March:  John W. Hinckley Jr. shoots President Reagan and his press secretary,
James S. Brady, in Washington.

May:  Pope John Paul II is shot in St. Peter's Square by a Turkish terrorist.

June:  In what will later be recognized as the first official notice of AIDS,
the Centers for Disease Control prints a short report on the ''unusual''
occurrence in five homosexual men in Los Angeles of a deadly form of pneumonia.

Baseball's first midseason strike begins. It lasts until July 31.

''We love your adherence to democratic principle,'' Vice President George Bush
tells Ferdinand E. Marcos after the Philippine President's re-inauguration.

July:  Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer are married and for a brief time
even the London tabloid press believes in fairy tales.

In a masterly triumph for President Reagan, Congress approves the deepest tax
and budget cuts in American history.

Brig. Gen. Omar Torrijos Herrera of Panama is killed in a plane crash. In the
struggle that follows, it is clear that Col. Manuel Antonio Noriega, the
country's most feared figure, is the ultimate arbiter of power.

August:  MTV, cable television's first 24-hour music channel, goes on the air.

President Reagan dismisses striking air traffic controllers, breaking their
union and dealing a devastating blow to labor.

September:  Responding to cuts in the school lunch program, the Agriculture
Department says ketchup can be counted as a vegetable. After an uproar, the
President withdraws the plan.

The Senate raises the Federal debt limit to $1.08 trillion, the first time the
ceiling is raised over the $1 trillion mark.

The Senate confirms Sandra Day O'Connor for the Supreme Court. She becomes the
first woman to become a justice.

October:  Anwar el-Sadat is killed by Muslim militants. The Egyptian presidency
passes to Hosni Mubarak.

November:  David A. Stockman, the White House budget director, pays ''a visit to
the woodshed'' for statements undermining Administration policy that appeared in
a magazine.

December:  After a year of unrest, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski declares martial law
in Poland. Solidarity is outlawed, and Lech Walesa and other oppositionists will
spend months or years in prison, or go underground.

1982

In a recession year, Dr. Koop and Jane Fonda are ascending, and stocks are up,
too.

January:  The White House says it approves of giving tax-exempt status to Bob
Jones University of South Carolina and other schools that are accused of racial
discrimination.

February:  In his budget address, President Reagan calls for less social
spending and a lot more military spending.

The Surgeon General, C. Everett Koop, calls smoking the most important health
issue of the day and warns of the dangers of ''passive smoking'' - breathing
someone else's tobacco fumes.

April:  Argentina's governing junta announces it has seized the Falkland Islands
from Britain, which sends a flotilla of warships the next day.

May:  Jane Fonda's aerobic exercise book is a hit and the fitness craze goes
into its ''no pain, no gain'' phase.

June:  Israel invades Lebanon in a campaign that will drive Yasir Arafat and the
P.L.O. from their base in Lebanon, while failing to secure a friendly Christian
government. Syria, not Israel, will eventually be the power broker in Lebanon.

The Government announces stiff penalties on steel imports in an attempt to help
struggling American steelmakers.

An estimated 750,000 people demonstrate against nuclear arms in Central Park in
New York. The freeze movement becomes a cause celebre.

Argentina is humiliated by Britain and surrenders in the Falklands. The defeat
hastens the demise of the military dictatorship.

The deadline passes for the Equal Rights Amendment, which falls three states
short of the number needed for ratification.

September:  Bashir Gemayel, Lebanon's Israeli-backed President, is assassinated.
After Israeli troops move into West Beirut, Christian militiamen massacre
hundreds of Palestinians in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps there.

Princess Grace of Monaco dies after an auto accident.

October:  President Reagan announces a war on drugs.

John Z. Delorean is charged with cocaine trafficking and racketeering.
Prosecutors say he was trying to raise money to save his automobile company. He
is later acquitted.

November:  Recession and high unemployment help the Democrats pick up 26 seats
in the House and seven governorships during the midterm elections.

The so-called Volcker recession reaches a painful climax when unemployment hits
10.8 percent in November, the highest since 1940. But interest rates have
fallen, inflation is down and the stock market is bullish.

Leonid I. Brezhnev dies at 75. The Soviet leader's rule was marked by increasing
stagnation and corruption and a huge military buildup. He is succeeded by Yuri
V. Andropov, the former head of the K.G.B.

A black granite memorial etched with the names of the 57,939 soldiers killed or
missing in Vietnam is dedicated in Washington.

December:  Dr. Barney B. Clark becomes the first recipient of a permanent
artificial heart, but dies less than four months later.

Congress approves the Boland Amendment, prohibiting the C.I.A. and Defense
Department from financing the overthrow of the Nicaraguan Government.

1983

The 'evil empire' and 'Star Wars' appear and Grenada winds up the year, with
hostilities between.

January:  Michael Jackson's ''Thriller'' joins the Billboard Top Ten, where it
will stay for a year and a half, becoming the best-selling album in history.

February:  Under Congressional investigation for conflicts of interest and
mismanagement, Rita M. Lavelle, the head of the Environmental Protection
Agency's Superfund program to clean up toxic waste, is fired by President
Reagan. A month later Anne McGill Burford, the E.P.A. Administrator, is forced
to resign. Miss Lavelle later serves four months in prison for lying to
Congress.

The final show of ''M*A*S*H'' displaces the ''Who Shot J.R.'' episode on
''Dallas'' as the most watched segment of a television series.

March:  Mr. Reagan tells an evangelical group that the Soviet Union is ''the
focus of evil in the modern world'' and ''an evil empire.''

Two weeks later, he proposes a space-based missile defense system and ''Star
Wars'' is born.

The digital compact disk player makes its debut in American retail stores.

April:  Chicago elects its first black mayor, Harold Washington.

May:  In an 8-to-1 ruling, the Supreme Court decides that the Administration
policy of granting tax exemptions to private schools that practice racial
discrimination is illegal.

June:  In a smooth flight of the shuttle Challenger, Sally Ride becomes the
first American woman in space.

July:  Economic recovery is gathering steam, with jumps in the gross national
product and unemployment falling to under 10 percent.

August:  Benigno S. Aquino Jr., an archrival of Ferdinand E. Marcos, returns to
the Philippines and is shot to death as he leaves the plane.

September:  Korean Air Lines Flight 007 is shot down by a Soviet fighter after
it strays into Soviet air space; all 269 people on board are lost.

October:  Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt, who fought to open Federal
lands to private drilling and other exploitation, quits in an uproar after he is
heard describing members of a coal-leasing commission this way: ''I have a
black, I have a woman, two Jews and a cripple.''

Nancy Reagan, who is fighting an image as a maven of fashion and wealth, unveils
a slogan for her anti-drug campaign: ''Just say no.''

A suicide terrorist in a truck full of explosives blows up the U.S. barracks in
Beirut, killing 241 Americans, most of them marines on a peace-keeping mission.

The U.S. invades the Caribbean island of Grenada after a power struggle in the
Marxist leadership turns bloody and, the U.S. says, threatens the lives of
American medical students.

November:  ABC airs ''The Day After,'' a dramatization of a nuclear holocaust;
afterward, Secretary of State George P. Shultz tells viewers that the movie does
not represent the future ''at all.''

Stores are running out of Cabbage Patch dolls, the latest rage in toys.

December:  A year and a half after its military rulers were disgraced in the
Falkland war, Argentina returns to democracy with the swearing in of an elected
civilian, Raul Alfonsin, as President. The move from military dictatorship to
democracy sweeps South America.

In a new twist on Japan's penetration of the U.S. auto market, Washington
decides that General Motors and Toyota can jointly build Japanese-designed cars
at a California plant without violating antitrust laws.

1984

Yuppies and Bernhard Goetz become news; bad foreign news includes Ethiopia and
Bhopal.

January:  In response to a court order, A. T. & T. is broken up into seven
regional companies.

February:  Yuri Andropov dies after only 15 months in power; Konstantin U.
Chernenko, a doddering Brezhnev loyalist, takes over.

March:  The word ''yuppie'' becomes part of public discourse, often used to
describe the young, upwardly mobile supporters of Gary Hart, a Democratic
Presidential candidate.

April:  Dr. Robert Gallo of the National Cancer Institute announces that his
team has shown a new virus to be the cause of AIDS. Outraged French researchers
say they had previously discovered the virus and linked it to AIDS. Later the
two groups agree to share credit.

May:  The Government rescues the nation's eighth largest bank, Continental
Illinois, a victim of bad loans.

In Salvadoran presidential elections, Mr. Duarte beats Roberto D'Aubuisson, an
ultra-rightist linked to death squads.

June:  Bruce Springsteen's ''Born in the U.S.A.'' hits the Top Ten, and
politicians steal its best lines.

September:  NBC trounces the competition with the premieres of two shows.
''Miami Vice'' makes network television seem avant-garde, and ''The Cosby Show''
becomes a fixture.

October:  Doctors transplant the heart of a baboon into a 12-day-old infant
known as Baby Fae. She dies 20 days later.  Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of
India is murdered by two bodyguards, both Sikhs. More than a thousand people,
mostly Sikhs, are killed in the ensuing sectarian violence. Her son, Rajiv, is
elected two months later.

November:  President Reagan and Vice President Bush win in a landslide over
Walter Mondale and Geraldine Ferraro, the first woman nominated for vice
president on a major-party ticket.

A heart-rending BBC news clip on the Ethiopian famine airs on NBC, finally
focusing American attention on the vast tragedy.

December:  Bell Laboratories says it has perfected a one-megabit chip, which can
store an unprecedented amount of information on a tiny piece of silicon.

December:  Toxic fumes from a Union Carbide insecticide plant kill more than
3,000 people in Bhopal, India.

Britain and China sign an agreement transferring the colony of Hong Kong to
Chinese sovereignty in 1997.

Madonna begins her ascent to pop culture's pinnacle when ''Like a Virgin'' zooms
to No. 1 on the charts.

U.S. leaves Unesco, calling the United Nations agency wasteful and
anti-democratic.

In a case that stirs debate on crime and civil liberties, Bernhard H. Goetz, who
is white, shoots and wounds four teen-age boys - all black - who he says were
trying to rob him on a New York subway. Mr. Goetz later serves eight months on a
gun charge.

1985

The year the Soviet Union gets a new leader, an agriculture expert named Mikhail
Gorbachev.

January:  In his second Inaugural Address, Mr. Reagan says the nation is
''poised for greatness.''

February:  Two Senators reveal that the Navy paid $640 each for toilet seats. An
investigation of defense contracting uncovers widespread fraud.

March:  Mr. Reagan, in a bid to win military aid for the Nicaragua contras,
calls them the ''moral equals of our Founding Fathers.'' A few months later,
Congress bars use of American aid for arms and ammunition, setting the stage for
White House efforts to supply the contras in secret.

British scientists report a giant ''hole'' opening in the ozone layer over
Antarctica each spring. The thinning of protective ozone is later linked to
chlorofluorocarbons and other products.

Capital Cities Communications buys ABC -the first takeover of a television
network. In December General Electric acquires RCA Corporation, owner of NBC,
and in 1986 Laurence A. Tisch takes over CBS, which fought off a bid by Ted
Turner.

After the death of Mr. Chernenko, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, a 54-year-old
agricultural specialist with no experience in foreign affairs, becomes the
Soviet leader. He promises to follow in the path of his predecessors.

April:  Coca-Cola says it is replacing its 99-year-old formula for Coke, the
world's best-selling soft drink, with a new one. But the public protest is so
great that the company brings back the ''old'' Coke as ''Coke Classic.''

May:  In West Germany, Mr. Reagan visits the Berlin wall, a concentration camp
and, to a chorus of dismay at home, a cemetery at Bitburg where 49 Waffen SS
officers are buried.

June:  Mr. Gorbachev indirectly criticizes his predecessors and calls for
sweeping economic changes.

Shiite Muslim extremists hijack a T.W.A. airliner. A U.S. Navy diver is killed
in the 17-day standoff.

Karen Ann Quinlan, who has been at the center of the ''right to die'' debate,
dies in New Jersey. Courts had allowed removal of the comatose woman's
respirator in 1976, but she lived nine more years.

July:  Mr. Reagan undergoes surgery for colon cancer. His doctors say his
recovery is ''spectacular.''

A marathon rock concert, Live Aid, raises $70 million for starving Africans.

Summer:  Depressed farm prices and high debt focus attention on the plight of
the American small farmer. Many farmers are forced to give up their farms in the
mid-1980's.

September:  Pete Rose passes Ty Cobb's 4,191 career hits.

A quake measuring 7.8 on the Richter scale causes devastation in and around
Mexico City. More than 5,000 people die.

October:  Palestinian terrorists seize an Italian cruise ship, the Achille
Lauro, in the eastern Mediterranean, and kill an American, Leon Klinghoffer.

Rock Hudson, 59, dies of AIDS, forcing the new disease into public
consciousness.

November:  A volcano eruption in Colombia kills 25,000 people.

In the largest civil judgment ever, Texaco is told to pay $10.53 billion in
damages to the Pennzoil Company. Pennzoil had charged that Texaco induced the
Getty Oil Company to back out of a deal to merge with Pennzoil and accept
Texaco's offer of a higher price.

1986

Americans witness disaster (the space shuttle) and the birth of two interesting
scandals.

January:  Scientists at I.B.M. laboratories in Zurich discover a material that
is superconducting, able to carry electricity without resistance, at
temperatures much higher than ever before. Their discovery, quietly published in
a European journal, sets off furious international competition to improve on the
new materials and grandiose dreams of levitating trains and cheap energy, but
commercial applications remain elusive.

Martin Luther King Day is observed for the first time.

The shuttle Challenger explodes, killing all seven aboard, including Christa
McAuliffe, a teacher. The space program comes to a halt.

February:  Jean-Claude Duvalier of Haiti flees into exile, ending his family's
28-year dictatorship. Violence blocks steps toward democracy.

In the Philippines, President Marcos is forced into exile after he tries to
steal the election from Corazon C. Aquino. Riding the crest of ''people power,''
she becomes President.

April:  The U.S. bombs Libya after President Reagan blames Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi for an attack on American soldiers in West Berlin.

Tears flow when Vladimir Horowitz performs in the Soviet Union, which he left in
1925. Under Mr. Gorbachev's glasnost, Soviet intellectual life has begun to
flower.

A reactor at the Chernobyl nuclear plant in the Soviet Ukraine explodes,
spreading a cloud of radioactive debris. The Soviets do not acknowledge the
disaster until after high radiation is reported in Scandinavia.

June:  Len Bias, a top college basketball player, dies of a cocaine overdose.

July:  Oil prices bottom out at $7.20 a barrel.

August:  Lethal gas erupts from a volcanic lake in Cameroon, killing some 1,500
people.

A surrogate mother, Mary Beth Whitehead, goes to court in an unsuccessful
attempt to keep the baby girl - known as Baby M - whom she agreed to carry to
term for $10,000. The father, William Stern, and his wife later retain custody.

September:  The Senate confirms William H. Rehnquist as Chief Justice and
Antonin Scalia as an associate justice of the Supreme Court.

Congress overrides Mr. Reagan's veto of sanctions against South Africa. The
United States and Europe act after Pretoria declares a state of emergency
because of unrest.

Mergers and economic troubles disrupt the airline industry, which is still
adjusting to the new age of deregulation. Frank Lorenzo of Texas Air announces a
deal to acquire People Express.

Congress overhauls the tax system, changing brackets and eliminating many
deductions.

October:  The rapid spread of crack prompts Congress to pass new anti-drug
legislation.

At a summit meeting in Iceland, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev come startlingly
close to agreeing on deep limits in nuclear arsenals.

November:  A Beirut magazine reports that the U.S. sent spare parts and
ammunition to Iran. A subsequent investigation reveals that other arms sales
were made to Iran and the profits were diverted to the Nicaraguan contras, and
the Iran-contra scandal is born.

Portending the end of a free-wheeling era in finance, the insider trading
scandal climaxes with news that Ivan Boesky agreed to pay $100 million and plead
guilty to a criminal count, and aided prosecutors by taping his conversations.
Other indictments follow, including that of Michael R. Milken, the junk bond
king at Drexel Burnham Lambert, who is awaiting trial.

December:  Mr. Gorbachev calls Andrei Sakharov to tell him he is free to leave
Gorky, where he has been in internal exile.

1987

The stock market crash, and Robert H. Bork's Supreme Court nomination; the
intifada begins.

January:  The nation's first trillion-dollar budget is proposed by President
Reagan.

February:  Signaling a worsening debt problem, Brazil, the third world's largest
debtor nation, suspends interest payments on loans from foreign banks.

April:  In a field near Monterey, Calif., scientists spray a strawberry patch
with bacteria to prevent frost, the first experimental release of genetically
altered bacteria in the United States.

June:  Margaret Thatcher is re-elected, becoming the first British Prime
Minister in the 20th century to win three consecutive terms.

July:  Three Congressmen bash a Toshiba radio with sledgehammers on Capitol Hill
after revelations that Toshiba sold sensitive technology to the Soviets.

Millions watch the testimony of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North during the
Congressional inquiry into the Iran-contra affair. He is later convicted of
destroying Government documents among other charges, He is sentenced to
community service and fined.

August:  Five Central American countries sign an accord intended to resolve the
region's conflicts. Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica will win the Nobel Peace
Prize for his efforts.

September:  In a victory for the global environment, many nations agree in
Montreal to protect the ozone layer by phasing out chlorofluorcarbons and other
chemicals.

October:  The stock market crashes. The 22.6 percent plunge in the Dow Jones
Industrial Average is the largest one-day decline since 1914.

The Senate rejects Mr. Reagan's nomination of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme
Court; critics say he is insensitive to individual rights and liberties and
supporters see an unfair campaign against him. A second nominee, Douglas
Ginsburg, will withdraw after acknowledging that he smoked marijuana. A third
nominee, Anthony M. Kennedy, will be confirmed.

December:  At the White House, President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev sign a treaty
to eliminate the superpowers' medium-range intermediate nuclear forces.

Rioting breaks out in the Israeli occupied territory of Gaza after a truck
driven by an Israeli kills four people near a Palestinian refugee camp. Unrest
spreads to the West Bank. The intifada - or uprising - begins.

1988

Politics takes up the year, and there is a time when it doesn't look good for
George Bush.

February:  Federal grand juries in Miami and Tampa indict Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega, charging that he protected and assisted the Medellin drug cartel. The
United States tries to oust him with economic and military pressures.

March:  Jesse Jackson's upset victory in the Michigan Democratic caucuses is the
first triumph by a black Presidential candidate in a big state, establishing him
as a serious contender for the nomination.

April:  Pakistan and Afghanistan sign agreements in Geneva calling for the
withdrawal of Soviet troops.

As safety in the sky and aging aircraft fleets become concerns, a gaping hole
opens in the fuselage of a 19-year-old Aloha Airlines Boeing 737 over Hawaii,
sweeping a stewardess to her death.

May:  On the last day illegal aliens can apply for amnesty under a new
immigration law, more than 100,000 people rush to submit applications, which
could lead to legal status and eventual citizenship. In all, nearly 1.4 million
illegal aliens seek amnesty.

June:  Congress approves legislation aimed at protecting the disabled and the
elderly against catastrophic health costs. A year later the program is repealed
after an outcry from elderly people who objected to paying the surcharge.

George Steinbrenner fires Billy Martin, ending Mr. Martin's fifth term as Yankee
manager.

July:  A missile fired by a U.S. Navy cruiser in the Persian Gulf destroys an
Iranian airliner, killing 290 people. Navy crewmen say they thought the plane
was an Iranian jet fighter.

Iran and Iraq agree to a cease-fire in the eight-year war.

After his nomination as the Democratic Presidential candidate, polls show Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts with a double-digit lead over Vice President
Bush, who awaits the Republican nomination in August.

August:  In Pakistan, President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq and the United States
Ambassador are killed in a plane crash, apparently an act of sabotage. Three
months later Benazir Bhutto, Zia's sworn enemy, becomes president.

October:  RJR Nabisco is bought by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts & Company. At a
price of $24.9 billion, it is the largest leveraged buyout ever.

November:  After the campaign in which he pledges not to raise taxes - ''Read my
lips'' -George Bush is elected the 41st President, with 56 percent of the
popular vote.

December:  An earthquake measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale devastates Soviet
Armenia, killing an estimated 25,000 people.

Pan Am Flight 103 explodes over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 270 people.
Investigators say a bomb was in the luggage compartment.

1989

The wall falls and freedom spreads at a dizzying pace, despite a setback in
China.

January:  George Bush is sworn in as the 41st President. In his Inaugural
Address, he calls for ''a new engagement in the lives of others.''

February:  Gen. Alfredo Stroessner, Paraguay's leader since 1954, is ousted and
sent into exile.

A 20-year-old man is the last person to be shot trying to escape across the
Berlin wall. The last Soviet troops leave Afghanistan.  Ayatollah Khomeini
denounces the novel ''Satanic Verses'' as blasphemy and calls for the execution
of the author, Salman Rushdie.

March:  Time Inc. and Warner Communications announce a merger that creates the
world's largest media conglomerate, with interests in books, magazines,
television, cable and movies.

For the first time in 70 years, the Soviet people are given a choice of
competing candidates. The winners make up part of the new Congress.

The tanker Exxon Valdez strikes a reef in Prince William Sound in Alaska,
resulting in one of the worst oil spills in history.

April:  Thousands of Chinese students mourn the death of Hu Yaobang, a deposed
reformist leader. The protests grow, and students camp out in Tiananmen Square
in Beijing.

After a year of unrest, the Polish Government legalizes Solidarity and sets
elections. Lech Walesa and General Jaruzelski shake hands.

May:  General Noriega engineers a fraudulent election, and his forces beat up
oppositionists.

In a reflection of Washington's new concern over Congressional ethics, House
Speaker Jim Wright announces he is resigning after a long-running dispute over a
lucrative book deal.

June:  The Chinese military, on orders from Deng, launches a savage assault on
the demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, killing an unknown number and crushing
dissent.

Ayatollah Khomeini dies; his funeral turns into pandemonium as frenzied mourners
try to kiss his corpse.

Poland's first free election since the Communists took over brings overwhelming
victory for Solidarity. In August, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a Walesa associate, will
become Prime Minister in a Government with the Communists. In Hungary, Imre
Nagy, the leader of the 1956 uprising, is given a hero's reburial.

Testimony in Congress paints a lurid picture of influence-peddling and political
favoritism in the Department Housing and Urban Development.

The Supreme Court decides flag burning is protected by the First Amendment,
causing a political uproar.

July:  By 5 to 4, the Supreme Court rules that states can put new restraints on
a woman's right to have an abortion, though it does not overturn Roe v. Wade.

August:  After gunmen kill a popular politician, Colombia declares war on drug
traffickers. The next month, Mr. Bush declares war on drugs in a strategy that
emphasizes law enforcement.

Congress passes a 10-year $166 billion package to rescue foundering savings and
loans.

President P. W. Botha of South Africa is pushed aside, and F. W. de Klerk
succeeds him. Mr. de Klerk promises change but opponents of apartheid press him
to move faster.

Pete Rose, the Cincinnati Reds coach, is banned from baseball after a 225-page
report chronicles his gambling activities.

September:  Vietnam says its forces have left Cambodia, 10 years after occupying
the country. The withdrawal creates fears that civil war will explode and that
the dreaded Khmer Rouge may fight their way to power.

Hungary opens its border with Austria to allow the exit of East Germans gathered
at the West German Embassy in Budapest.

Hurricane Hugo devastates part of the Caribbean and the Carolinas.

The Sony Corporation, which had acquired CBS Records in 1988, buys Columbia
Pictures.

October:  As a World Series game is about to begin, San Francisco suffers an
earthquake measuring 7.1 on the Richter scale. Sixty-seven people die, many of
them in the collapse of a freeway.

As East Germany celebrates its 40th anniversary, huge protests break out and
thousands of refugees flood routes to the West. By the end of the month, Erich
Honecker is out as party chief.

The Hungarian Communist Party changes its name and Parliament decides to allow a
multiparty system, with elections in 1990.

The Rockefeller Group, owner of Rockefeller Center, Radio City Music Hall and
other mid-Manhattan office buildings, sells control of the company to the
Mitsubishi Estate Company of Tokyo for $846 million in cash.

November:  After defeating Mayor Edward I. Koch in the primary, David N. Dinkins
becomes the first black to be elected mayor of New York.

East Germany opens the Berlin wall, on which ecstatic Berliners dance and drink
champagne. In Czechoslovakia, demonstrations force the Communist Party to cede
its absolute power. A vote in Hungary forces revision of the party's schedule
for elections, and in Bulgaria a Stalinist leader, Todor Zhivkov, is forced out.

December:  President Aquino of the Philippines survives a coup attempt, thanks
in large part to American military assistance.

Upheaval continues in East Germany, where revelations of corruption at the
highest level disgrace Mr. Honecker and force his successor, Egon Krenz, to step
down.

For the first time since 1970, Chileans freely elect a new leader, Patricio
Aylwin, and the Pinochet era ends. In the first direct elections for President
in Brazil since 1964, Fernando Collor de Mello, a free-market crusader, wins.

Andrei Sakharov, at 68, dies of a heart attack after a grueling day in the
Soviet Congress; Mr. Gorbachev laments the loss of ''a man of conviction and
sincerity.''

After a U.S. serviceman is shot by Panamanian forces, the United States invades
Panama, asserting a right to protect citizens and defend the canal. General
Noriega flees into hiding and a new President is sworn in on a U.S. base. Chaos
consumes the country as thousands of American troops struggle to establish
control.

In Rumania, the last holdout against reform in the East bloc, angry crowds of
pro-democracy demonstrators, backed by some army units, force the hard-line
leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, to flee Bucharest. Thousands are reported to have
been killed in unrest days earlier; fighting continues between rival security
forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: End of an ordeal: After 444 days of captivity in Iran, the American
hostages exulted as they stepped off a plane at an American base in West Germany
(The New York Times/Fred R. Conrad); Ethiopia, 1983: Belatedly, television drew
world attention to the agony (Black Star/Anthony Suau); Disaster in space: The
Challenger blew up shortly after liftoff in 1986 (Associated Press); Elephant
(Black Star/Norman Myers); Hospital (Matrix/Louie Psihoyos); Duty, honor,
country: Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North appearing at 1987 Iran-contra inquiry
(Photoreporters/James Colburn); The wall comes down: With political reforms
sweeping Eastern Europe this year, East and West Berliners stood on the
barricade that divided Berlin since 1961 (Sygma/Regis Bossu)

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Shall We Dance?;
As Two Worlds Warm, A Post-Postwar Order Awaits

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1509 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


RETROSPECT often makes the most recent moments seem the most vivid. That is
usually a trick that our minds play upon us, but surely not in the 1980's. The
pictures of Berliners dancing upon, pouring through, chipping hunks out of their
hated wall, symbolizing the end of 45 years of cold war, seem incredible now,
and surely they and what they epitomize will still seem extraordinary in the
next century.

For they mark the climax of a decade and the end of the world order that had its
origins in the ashes of World War II. To two generations and more, ''normal''
seemed to mean East vs. West, as for tens or hundreds of years in the past it
meant Germany vs. France or Christians vs. Muslims. Suddenly, as a hurricane of
change blew across Eastern Europe this fall, through Prague and Sofia and East
Berlin and Budapest and at last Bucharest, through the lives of millions whom
Marxism had ruled but never wholly subjugated, the wall and the cold warriors
who built it seemed as out of date as the forts of Malta, beneath which the last
summit conference of the 1980's took place, and the Crusaders who manned them.

Who would have predicted it, 3,600 days ago, at the dawn of the decade, with
Jimmy Carter preparing his campaign for a second term in a country that was down
on itself after defeat in Vietnam and humiliation in Iran? With Leonid I.
Brezhnev clinging grimly to life and power in a Soviet Union whose
vulnerabilities had been detected by only a few keen experts in the West, and in
a Communist bloc that seemed totally under his thumb?

Ronald Reagan, fated to be one of the two leading players of the 1980's, was to
step into the spotlight in that first year of the decade and to stay there for
nine years. In the end, though, he was upstaged by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who
began the decade as an obscure apparatchik in Stavropol but ended it as the man
of the decade, the father of glasnost and perestroika.

Which is not to denigrate the role of the brave men and women who fought,
without guns or tanks or hand grenades, for human rights and human liberties -
celebrated people like Lech Walesa and the late Andrei D. Sakharov, as well as
anonymous ones like the students of Prague, the Lutherans of Leipzig and the
marchers of Timisoara and Bucharest.

But as Dr. Sakharov himself wrote not too long before his death, it was Mr.
Gorbachev, for all his failings, who made the decisions ''that completely
changed the situation in the Soviet Union and the psychology of its people.''

Without Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, the cold war would have ended in the
1990's or the 2010's or sometime, but assuredly not in the 1980's.

Some would argue that the United States and its allies ''won'' the cold war by
applying relentless military pressure, giving Mr. Reagan's vaunted arms buildup
much of the credit, and it is no doubt true that without vigilance during the
era of Soviet hostility things would have been different.

But it was the utter failure of the Marxist economies that set the stage for Mr.
Gorbachev's reforms and signaled the demise of traditional Communism, and if
heavy military spending contributed to that failure, it also helped make the
United States a debtor nation.

Much was made of Mr. Reagan's military muscle-flexing, including the invasion of
Grenada, the bombing of Libya and the war by proxy in Nicaragua, but the
egregious Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi remains in power, and things haven't changed
all that much in Central America.

Indeed, President Bush had to invade Panama in the decade's waning days to
achieve a Reagan goal, the ouster of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega.

Mr. Reagan did manage to reduce the frequency of terrorist attacks, though a Pan
American jet was blown up only last Christmas. Through the judicious application
of American power, he helped install a fragile democratic government in Manila.

For a time, the tide of freedom seemed to be running in China as well, where the
introduction of limited capitalism temporarily carried in its wake limited
democracy. But that link was broken with the massacres in Tiananmen Square,
which, like so many of the seminal events of the decade - the destruction of the
spacecraft Challenger also leaps to mind - were engraved on the public eye by
the modern magic of global television.

But Ronald Reagan was a domestic President, more than anything else, his two
terms marked by a giddy celebration of free enterprise and its bounty, of
American pride and patriotism, and of family values.

At its best, the Reagan Presidency provided a tonic of self-confidence that
helped to restore vigor to the national economy and psyche; at its worst, it
fostered greed, chauvinism and intolerance.

Its monuments were an economic boom of unprecedented length, the uprooting of
much bureaucratic underbrush and a vastly heightened sense of national unity;
its failures the scandals and then the crash in Wall Street, the intractable
budget deficit and the resultant starvation of programs to aid the homeless and
the drug-ridden.

Mr. Reagan planted the Republican standard on the hilltop and kept it there
throughout the decade. If he fell short of his goal to make his party the new
majority, he redefined, for the moment at least, the parameters of American
politics, forcing even the opposition to address his agenda (viz. the hapless
Michael S. Dukakis driving a tank to earn his macho credentials).

Yet by decade's end, Mr. Reagan, out of office less than a year and still one of
the most popular figures in postwar American history, seemed curiously passe.

The ''evil empire'' had vanished, Ivan Boesky and Leona Helmsley, the paramount
symbols of greed, were paying the price, nobody talked about the yuppies much
any more, and the serious problems seemed more serious than ever to many people.
The 1980's were the decade of AIDS and of the homeless, of ever-mounting threats
to the environment and ever-widening concern about the quality of American
education, and of fresh doubts about the very viability of the American
political system.

Whether because they saw little need for the Government to act or because they
questioned the ability of the politicians to make a difference, fewer people
than ever bothered to vote. Fewer officeholders than ever seemed to excite wide
admiration, and it was an age of scandal, of what some saw as an absurd
preoccupation with personal behavior: Jim Wright, Douglas Ginsburg, Gary Hart.
Neither the budgetary system nor the legislative process seemed to function very
well any more, and electoral campaigns, more and more trivial, more and more
dominated by the political consultants instead of the candidates, did little to
set alternative policies or programs before the electorate.

The doubts extended to America's role as a world economic power. The 1980's were
the decade when the astounding rise of Japan (and of smaller Pacific nations
like Taiwan and South Korea) began to cause real angst in the United States. The
omnipresence of Japanese cars and television sets, the purchase by the Japanese
of iconographic American assets like Columbia Pictures and Rockefeller Center,
and the new dominance of Japanese banks, set American teeth on edge, giving new
life to the old idea of tariff barriers.

Looking ahead, many in the United States foresaw similarly tough competition
coming from Europe, where greater economic and perhaps political integration,
scheduled for 1992, would threaten American business from the other flank unless
it could become more efficient and more innovative.

For some seers, such as the historian Paul Kennedy, the great paradox is this:
at the very moment when the United States, as the leader of the West's
protracted crusade for capitalism and democracy, should be savoring victory, it
may well be an empire doomed to a long, slow economic decline.

And yet, and yet . . . If the 1980's proved anything, they proved once again the
power of ideas, and the ideas that have triumphed have been those of the great
American experiment. Even in the third world, with its seemingly limitless
suffering, where Marxism was for so long the intellectual fashion, the
free-market alternative has been embraced by some with eagerness and by others
with reluctance. A few African nations are headed up that path, as is Argentina,
led by a Peronist.

The Middle East remains locked in its dismal strife, China bedevils George Bush
and remains an enigma, the whole world worries about pollution and the
greenhouse effect and the fate of the rain forests, to say nothing about feeding
a population that passed five billion in the decade that ends in just a week.
There is no dearth of problems, and many of them face Eastern Europe, the arena
of the great victory of the 1980's, as it copes with the 1990's.

But who can begrudge the old decade its last Christmas present and most vivid
symbol: the wall breached at the Brandenburg Gate in the heart of Berlin, nearly
50 years after the end of World War II, 200 years after the first of Europe's
great revolutions swept France.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Inching Forward in Cambodia

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


Prince Sihanouk, Cambodia's former chief of state, is a puzzlement. He says
nothing wounds him more than the charge that he's an accomplice of Pol Pot,
leader of the murderous Khmer Rouge. ''Pol Pot is like Hitler,'' he remarked in
an interview with The Times's Steven Erlanger. ''Unless you kill him, you cannot
oblige him to stop fighting and killing people.'' And yet the Prince's prime
ally in Cambodia's agonizing civil war is none other than Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge.

A way is open for Prince Sihanouk to sever this indecent connection. Under
Chinese pressure and with U.S. approval, the Prince has insisted that the Khmer
Rouge be given a share of power at every level in an interim regime that would
oversee elections. But he says he would drop that demand if the United Nations
assumed trusteeship over Cambodia for a year. A similar U.N. formula
successfully ended a civil war in Namibia.

Now comes an intriguing report that the Vietnam-installed regime in Cambodia led
by Prime Minister Hun Sen is also willing to follow the Namibia formula and
disband its Cabinet for a year. But the Hun Sen Government proposes to continue
to administer Cambodia at the local level -a condition that Prince Sihanouk
rejects out of hand.

It is hard to see why. In Namibia, the former colonial power, South Africa,
continued local administration under U.N. oversight. Now that Vietnam's
decade-long occupation has ended, Mr. Hun Sen can no longer rely on foreign
bayonets to keep him in power. He can only win support at home and approval
abroad by being on his best behavior.

The trouble is that Prince Sihanouk is less than a free agent. His armies, as
well as Pol Pot's, he frankly concedes, rely on China: ''We are obliged to be
friendly with the Khmer Rouge. Otherwise China will send no support to us.'' If
he rebuffs a reasonable U.N. formula for ending Cambodia's conflict, it will be
seen as devastating evidence that he is the prisoner of his Beijing patrons.

It's possible to understand the circumstances that yoke Prince Sihanouk to the
hateful Khmer Rouge, whose victims include members of his family. It is harder
to grasp Washington's need to follow the Prince's lead by scorning every offer
from Mr. Hun Sen and by pressing for inclusion of the Khmer Rouge in an interim
coalition.

Is America's Cambodian policy also a prisoner of Beijing?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hospital Seeks Homeless Veterans to Fill Beds

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 5, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 504 words


THE State Veterans Home and Hospital, criticized in recent years as insensitive
to the needs of Vietnam-era veterans, plans to start recruiting homeless Vietnam
veterans throughout the state to fill some of its empty beds.

Robert Getman, the executive director of the veterans home, said that the home
has about 300 veterans, mostly from World War II. It has 100 empty beds and is
looking for Vietnam veterans to fill them, he said.

''We decided we're tired of hearing people criticize us for this, and we're
going to reach out,'' Mr. Getman said.

Likely Stops

He said the home plans to seek out homeless veterans by visiting shelters that
have been identified as likely stops for veterans and by inviting shelter
directors to a meeting in January to tell them about the home.

The home has already taken in 5 of an estimated 256 Vietnam veterans who use
shelters in Hartford, and it plans to accept more homeless veterans, Mr. Getman
said.

Advocates for Vietnam veterans welcomed the invitation, but said that it is of
no value to many veterans who need drug treatment and psychiatric counseling not
offered at the hospital.

'Philosophy of Warehousing'

''We're elated,'' said James S. Tackett, a service representative in Connecticut
for the Vietnam Veterans of America. ''However, you just can't take homeless
Vietnam veterans off the street and put them into a facility that for years has
had a philosophy of warehousing.''

Social workers from the home visited two Hartford shelters earlier this month
and offered housing to homeless veterans who were capable of caring for
themselves at the home.

Brian Baker, the director of the South Park Inn, a Hartford homeless shelter,
said none of the homeless Vietnam veterans who have passed through the shelter
this year accepted offers to go to the Rocky Hill hospital.

No Methadone Treatment

Mr. Baker said that heroin-addicted veterans avoid the Rocky Hill home because
it does not offer methadone treatment and provides no transportation to
methadone clinics in Hartford.

Mr. Getman said that he is working with other state agencies to arrange
transportation to a state-run methadone clinic for heroin-addicted veterans.

''What we are doing is trying to coordinate the services of other state
facilities,'' he said. ''We're not convinced we need to do all those things
here.''

Mr. Getman said veterans who have serious drug problems could live at the home,
if they agreed to enter a 14-day intensive care program, followed by a longer
drug rehabilitation program. But veterans who need a ''hospital level of care,''
for either drug addiction or mental health, are not likely to be accepted to the
home, he said.

He said the five Vietnam veterans who recently moved to the 415-bed home came
from a group of seven homeless men interested in living in the home. One of the
other two had been dishonorably discharged from the military, making him
ineligible to live in the home, and the other turned out not to be a veteran,
Mr. Getman said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hollywood Is Taking Notice of the Diversity of Long Island

BYLINE: By NANCY HARRISON

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 1, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1606 words


IN ''Married to the Mob,'' Frank and Angela Demarco live in a modest but gaudily
decorated Long Island home. One of the few films to focus on Long Island's
middle class, the movie, a hit in 1987, marked a departure of sorts for
Hollywood's view of Long Island, which, in films like ''The Great Gatsby,''
''Sabrina'' and ''The Godfather'' tended to concentrate on the area's wealth.

Some students of film believe that ''Married to the Mob'' was the start of a
trend toward a more diverse representation of Long Island's varied cultures
because it depicted working-class people speaking in heavy New Yawkese doing
their own grocery shopping because they do not have maids to do it for them.

''Movies are getting closer to the common experience on Long Island,'' said
Nicholas Petron, chairman of the Performing Arts Department at Adelphi
University and an acting and directing teacher there.

''Most Long Islanders are not rich, and movies are at least starting to show
what most of us experience on Long Island, like normal-sized homes and shopping
centers. But the movies still have a long way to go.''

A Native of Massapequa

Although ''Married to the Mob,'' Mr. Petron said, ''is a caricature and not
entirely realistic - the main characters belong to the Mafia, and how many
second-level mob figures do we know?'' - the new Oliver Stone film, ''Born on
the Fourth of July,'' is based on the life story (and autobiography) of a
Massapequa native, Ron Kovic.

It will be released on the Island and around most of the country on Jan. 5,
although it already has been released in New York City so that it could qualify
for Academy Award consideration.

The movie, which traces Mr. Kovic's evolution from a gung-ho young American from
Massapequa who enlists in the Marines during the Vietnam War to a disenchanted
and disabled veteran, presents a serious view of a side to Long Island that
moviegoers rarely get a chance to see.

Mr. Kovic, played by Tom Cruise, grows up in a small house in Massapequa. His
mother is a housewife and his father manages an A. & P., where Mr. Kovic works
as a stock boy before going off to war.

''I think you've hit on something here,'' Mr. Stone said during a telephone
interview from his office in California. ''It's sort of fresh to show an aspect
of Long Island that hasn't been seen very much.''

Hollywood, it seems, may have discovered the different-colored threads that are
woven into Long Island's fabric.

According to Jerome Delamater, who runs the film program at Hofstra University,
the new awareness may have something to do with society's increasing intolerance
of stereotypes. It also may be that film makers are picking up on Long Island's
deepening diversity, he said. More likely, Mr. Delamater said, it is a
combination of both. ''As stereotypes are becoming less acceptable,'' he said,
''film makers are focusing on the growing number of different ethnic groups that
make up Long Island.''

But although the Hollywood image of Long Island may be changing, said Debra
Markowitz, director of film coordination for Nassau County, ''Most current films
still focus on the wealthy.'' .

For example, in the current comedy ''She-Devil,'' the romance novelist Mary
Fisher, played by Meryl Streep, lives on Long Island in ''a palace by the sea''
brimming with servants and expensive ornaments.

Just as ''Married to the Mob'' parodied the middle class, ''She-Devil''
exaggerates the life styles of the rich and famous and ''should be taken with a
grain of salt,'' according to Christopher Cook, director of the Suffolk County
Motion Picture and Television Bureau. ''But it still projects an image of wealth
that the audience picks up on.''

A Backdrop of Opulence

In fact, a majority of the films made in the 1980's that have a Long Island tie
have been set against a backdrop of opulence, including ''Arthur,''
''Masquerade,'' ''Crocodile Dundee 2,'' ''Hello Again,'' ''Interiors,'' ''Wall
Street'' and ''Deathtrap.'' ''Long Island continues to be portrayed as a place
that people move to when when they make it,'' Ms. Markowitz said.

In ''Wall Street,'' for example, a young lawyer boasts that he is doing so well
that he has even bought a house in Oyster Bay.

''Hollywood's most common perception of Long Island fits in with Hollywood's
perception of itself,'' Mr. Delamater said. ''People there live in fancy houses
and drive fancy cars, and film makers tend to pick up on the areas of the
country with that same life style.''

Not only that, Mr. Petron says that film makers prefer to showcase success.

''And how do we define success?'' he asked. ''Money, which translates into
beachfront homes in the Hamptons.''

'A Perfect Example'

''Wall Street,'' which was directed by Mr. Stone, is a perfect example.

A corporate raider, Gordon Gekko, played by Michael Douglas, owns a spacious
waterfront home in the Hamptons, a setting Mr. Stone selected because, he said,
''Many of the younger crowd of brokers had homes in the Hamptons. It's
considered to be trendy, and I was trying to show that.''

Despite the string of movies that center on Long Island's well-to-do, Frank
Perry, the producer-director whose film ''Compromising Positions, ' based on the
Susan Isaacs novel, concerns an affluent North Shore housewife's attempt to
solve a murder case, argues that any image is pure coincidence.

''Wall Street'' and several of the other films were Manhattan-based productions,
Mr. Perry said, and Long Island was a convenient location for a suburban
setting.

''Basically, Long Island is chosen as a location when it has a setting that is
consistent with the story line,'' he said. ''It's just happenstance that wealth
has been a recurring theme.

''In 'Compromising Positions,' the focus was on the role of women in an upwardly
mobile society. It could have been set in any affluent community.''

The same could be said about ''Born on the Fourth of July.'' The film offers a
number of scenes set in Massapequa, and mentions the blue-collar community
frequently, because that is where Mr. Kovic came from.

But according to Mr. Stone, ''Massapequa, in a sense, is Anyplace U.S.A.,
because most of the people who fought in the war came from working-class
districts. In this film, it happened to be Massapequa, L.I.''

Dallas Serves as Substitute

As it happens, most of the ''Massapequa'' scenes in the film were shot in Dallas
to hold down production costs. But Mr. Stone went to great lengths, he said, to
insure the setting's authenticity, relying on ''thousands of photographs'' to
help him re-create the community, right down to street signs, lampposts and
shingles on the homes.

He even went so far as to import actors and actresses with Long Island accents
to play Mr. Kovic's neighbors, he said.

Most of the films that are set on Long Island are shot there, although some
movies, like ''Arthur,'' which used the exterior of the Marshall Field 3d
mansion in Lloyd Harbor as a Southampton estate, substitute one part of Long
Island for another. The de Seversky Center in Greenvale was used for other
exteriors and some scenes in that film were shot at the Planting Fields
Arboretum.

In some cases, Long Island is used to represent another part of the country,
which is the case with ''Shock to the System.'' It will be released in March by
Corsair Pictures, a company headed by Mr. Perry.

The movie, which stars Michael Caine, takes place in Connecticut but was shot on
Long Island because ''it was easier and more familiar to use,'' says Mr. Perry,
who has a home in East Hampton.

Similarly, in ''Sweet Liberty,'' Sag Harbor was used to depict a small South
Carolina town and, in the 1981 movie ''Roll Over,'' Nassau County stood in for
Washington.

Result Is 'an Image of Wealth'

''Even if it's just happenstance,'' Mr. Delamater said, ''there is a result. And
the result is an image of wealth.''

Mr. Delamater concedes that this image is, in part, rooted in reality.

Long Island has affluent communities and mansions fit for kings, he said, and
the Hamptons are the setting for a myriad of films because they are an actual
place that tends to attract upscale city residents.

Not all of Long Island is like that, Mr. Delamater said, despite what many
movies would have audiences believe. He noted that Hollywood was built on
fantasy and that film makers had license to blur the line between reality and
make-believe to make a movie more appealing.

A film about the excesses of the rich is more likely to lift the spirits of the
audience than one about the banality of the middle class, Mr. Delamater said.

Still, many local film fans would like to see the rest of Long Island get more
attention. ''Born on the Fourth of July'' and ''Married to the Mob,'' they hope,
are the first steps in that direction.

Mr. Petron is pinning his hopes on a crop of film makers who have recently
graduated from the upgraded film programs at local colleges. Many, he says, are
remaining in the area, rather than going to California, and they are more in
touch with the ''ups and downs of life here.''

Most students of film agree that it is difficult to predict how Hollywood will
present Long Island in the future. Local film production, which quadrupled
during the 1980's, is expected to increase in the 1990's as the Nassau County
Film Commission and the Suffolk County Motion Picture and Television Bureau
continue to court the lucrative movie business to Long Island.

But the local agencies have no impact on film content. According to Ms.
Markowitz, ''Film makers usually have a pretty good idea of what they want
before they come to us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scenes from ''Born on the Fourth of July'' pg. 1, pg. 13);
scene from ''Sabrina''; scene from ''Married to the Mob'' (pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

FIGHTING IN PANAMA;
For the Families Left Behind, A Holiday Comforted by Duty

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1575 words

DATELINE: HOPE MILLS, N.C., Dec. 24


Snow robbed the church of one musician. War robbed it of another. As the two
guitarists who remained beckoned Christmas with faltering hymns, the Rev.
Phillip Leach spoke of the need for faith to overcome confusion.

He spoke of the challenge of faith that the Virgin Birth had brought to Joseph
and Mary. Near sprawling Fort Bragg, the challenge for the members of the Good
Shepherd Catholic Church was the invasion of Panama, which had sent their
friends and relatives to war at Christmas time.

Father Leach spoke of watching a young girl ask her mother, ''Why won't my Daddy
be home for Christmas?''

'God Was in the World'

Because he's in Panama, the mother said, then hugged her child.

''Somehow that mother's embrace made sure God was in the world,'' Father Leach
said.

Like the 35-year-old priest, many people in the communities surrounding Fort
Bragg spoke of simple things this week, as more than 2,000 local soldiers went
to war. As many people here describe it, the invasion of Panama is not an
adventure; it's a job.

Renae Hodge conveyed that sense of sober professionalism when she described her
feelings this week at having her husband, Capt. James Hodge, parachute into a
Central American war.

''I know that Jim is having a good time, to be honest with you,'' she said.
''This may be the only time he ever gets to exercise those excellent skills that
he's been preparing for 10 years.''

No Sign of Swagger

Perhaps as important as the language invoked is the language omitted. No one
mentions Rambo. Swagger, for the most part, is out.

And only a few soldiers or their families here emphasized the misdeeds of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega. But a more neutral pride, in simply carrying out orders,
is more frequently stressed.

As the peacetime Army turned to war, there were other emotions being expressed
here, too. Along with pride in professional soldiering, there was renewed - or,
for the young, new - appreciation of its perils.

Many teen-agers here expect to inherit lives in the military, which seems to
offer stability: a paycheck, a pension, privileges on the post. In Hope Mills
this week, a military commitment offered something else: the death of Jerry
Scott Daves, a 20-year-old private killed in Panama.

'You Can Get Killed'

''I had one teen-ager say to me this week: 'I've always thought of soldiering as
a job, Father, but this is something you can get killed in,' '' Father Leach
said before Mass.

''I wouldn't say it shatters their world view; that would be too melodramatic,''
the priest said. ''But it does shake it.''

Rumors that the advent of Christmas would compete with the advent of war were
circulating and the surrounding Fayetteville region the weekend before the
American invasion.

But it was not until the soldiers reported to work on the morning of Monday,
Dec. 18, that most of the them learned they had been placed in a state of
emergency readiness that would keep them from returning home in the evening.

No Chance to Call Home

With plans calling for phones to be guarded, many soldiers did not have the
chance to call home. Mrs. Hodge said her husband, who did reach a phone, said
simply: ''I'm busy working and I won't be home for supper.''

Readiness drills like these take place dozens of times a year at Fort Bragg,
with troops loaded, lifted and dropped by parachute, sometimes right back onto
Fort Bragg. But beginning Monday night and continuing through Tuesday, Army
officials said, the troops were herded into secured areas and told of their
destination.

Lieut. Col. William L. Hufham, the division chaplain, visited with the assembled
paratroopers on Tuesday afternoon, as they waited in a North Carolina ice storm
for their night drop into the tropics.

How Word Was Spread

''The attitude was, 'We're trained to do the job and we'll go in and do it to
the best of our ability,' '' he said. ''What I did not see was any bravado or
macho displays.''

Once word of the invasion became official on Wednesday morning, it reached most
families through a network of wives. Mrs. Hodge said she was called by the wife
of her husband's commanding officer, passing along a brief official statement.
She wrote it down, careful not to paraphrase, and in turn notified families of
the soldiers under her husband's immediate command.

''I just said, 'Let me find out who's involved, and what's going on, and we'll
go from there,' '' she said.

Support groups assembled on the post later that day. A family assistance center
addressed problems like lost keys, and chaplains began distributing food to
families caught short. Colonel Hufham, the division chaplain, said some soldiers
had drawn advances for Christmas, leaving behind skipped paychecks for their
families.

Caroline McElligott, an 18-year-old Fayetteville student, greeted the news of
the invasion with less matter-of-factness than Mrs. Hodge did.

'What if He Dies?'

''I was shocked when I found out my boyfriend got deployed,'' she said. ''We had
just gotten in an argument and just made up, and I was like, 'Oh my God, what if
he dies?' ''

The news that carried one kind of meaning for the girlfriends and wives of the
soldiers in battle carried another for the soldiers left behind, including
regret over missed chances for glory or the simple opportunity to perform.

The First Battalion of the 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment was enjoying the
end of a two-week leave on Wednesday when news of the invasion reached them at
scattered points across the country. The battalion was immediately recalled to
Fort Bragg and placed on the Army's highest readiness status, meaning that if
paratroopers are needed anywhere in the world, they will be the next to go.

In mess halls, offices and barracks this week, they talked of the frustration,
and occasional fears, that come from being left behind.

Lieut. Ted Schjoth said that of the eight members of his infantry school class
now stationed at Fort Bragg, he is the only one not in Panama. ''You're missing
out on a lot of things,'' he said. ''The ultimate test of an infantryman is
combat. They're getting that test and we're not.''

In slightly different terms, Brian Pruitt, a 20-year-old private from Canton,
Tex., echoed the feeling. ''It's like practicing all your life for a football
game and never getting to play,'' he said.

''They're going to get gold stars and all that good stuff,'' he said.

As the week wore on, news of the war traveled home in greater detail, including
phone calls from soldiers who had found their way to Panamanian phones.

At a post with a saying of ''Train the way you fight in order to fight the way
you train,'' most of the storytelling emphasized competence and calm.

'You Just Do Your Job'

Lieut. Patrick Fahy of the Air Force was a navigator aboard one of the personnel
planes that flew low and slow over hostile fire while the parachutists jumped.
''You just do your job,'' he told reporters at a news conference at Fort Bragg.
''We train around here every day, and it wasn't much more than a training
mission.''

Sgt. Berry Kelly was one of 37 wounded men transported back to Fort Bragg by
Saturday, and wearing a prized Purple Heart, he met reporters in a hospital
conference room.

Sergeant Kelly said he went into a 150-foot free fall after another paratrooper
passed over the top of his chute, causing it to collapse. The crash landing left
the 23-year-old squad leader with torn ligaments in his ankle.

''I love the 82d Airborne Division,'' he said. ''I live for the 82d Airborne
Division. As a leader, I don't feel it's right for me to be back here and me to
still have men back in Panama.''

As Sergeant Kelly was emphasizing duty and discipline in a Fort Bragg hospital,
freer emotional rein was being given several miles away, at Cross Creek Mall.

A Card From a Town

A local television station erected a huge makeshift Christmas card - a series of
panels 4 feet wide and 8 feet tall, to be shipped to Panama - and invited the
town to sign.

Lynn Carraway, the mall's marketing director, said 200 people were already in
line to sign the card when the panels arrived Saturday.

Here was an impulse outlet, for bravado and sentiment alike.

''Kick Ass and Don't Bother Taking Names,'' wrote ''Meathead and Annie.''

''I love you with all my heart, Shawn,'' wrote ''Mom, Dad, Jen and Tim.''

But the card was also one of the few places in town that drew skeptics. ''It
sets a bad example, because the Soviets are in the process of curtailing their
military expenditures,'' said Robert Lint, the 32-year-old manager of a jewelry
store in the mall.

Such thinking is clearly a minority view here.

But for a community sending thousands of men to war, in a season of peace, the
dutiful refrains now being sounded may disguise more complicated reactions to
emerge later.

Father Leach, who says much of the counseling he does relates to events that
occurred in Grenada and even Vietnam, takes this view.

The attempt to support men at war while celebrating the ''Prince of Peace,'' he
said, is at best ''a real conundrum.''

''What usually comes out is: 'My devotion to the Prince of Peace is what gives
me the strength to do my job,' '' he said.

As the two guitarists at Sunday's Mass - both of them on active service -
strummed the entrance hymn, they stopped before the second chorus: ''Comfort all
my people; the time for war is gone.''

Just a coincidence, they said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of North Carolina showing location of Ft. Bragg

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

FIGHTING IN PANAMA: The Palace;
In Noriega's Home, Decor Paints a Picture of Extravagance

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, Dec. 24


As maximum leader of Panama, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega lived almost as
garishly and as extravagantly as the Colombian drug traffickers who for years
are said to have been his business partners.

General Noriega was gone when the Americans stormed his offices on the grounds
of Fort Amador at the mouth of the Panama Canal as they began their invasion of
Panama early Wednesday morning. Under heavy cannon and rifle fire that broke
holes in walls and shattered windows in adjacent barracks, dozens of his
soldiers threw down their weapons and surrendered.

The general was also missing when the United States troops broke into his
Spanish Colonial house in the elegant Altos de Golf neighborhood in northeastern
Panama City on Friday. $3 Million in a Safe In a closet at his home, the
invading United States troops said they found a safe containing more than $3
million. In another closet were big portraits of Hitler and of Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader.

United States troops showed the places to foreign journalists on Saturday,
pointing out a large gun collection, a bust of Napoleon sharing a shelf with the
deposed military leader's graduation photograph and a collection of teddy bears
dressed up in paratroop uniforms.

Both the house and the office were built like fortresses. The interior loggias
of the house, facing an open courtyard, were closed in by heavy wrought-iron
grillwork. The office had no glass windows, with small louvered cement openings
instead.

A first-floor room in his office complex had been turned into an armory, stocked
with hundreds of automatic rifles and crates of ammunition, and a sort of museum
of weaponry with submachine guns on one wall, revolvers on another and automatic
pistols, some with gold and silver decorations, on another.

There was a weapon of the James Bond variety: an attache case fitted with a
submachine gun, a port cut for its barrel and its trigger built into the handle
of the case. There was also a crate of silencers for submachine guns.

Erotic Drawings on Coasters

In the room where he had his desk, the general evidently served drinks on
coasters bearing classical Greek drawings of men and women in erotic embraces.
Close-up shots of naked women were stacked in an out-basket. On a shelf behind
his desk were family portraits in silver frames. On a side table were stacks of
compact disks of operas.

The Americans said they found about four pounds of pure cocaine in the safe in
General Noriega's home and another 100 pounds in his office.

United States officials contend that most of General Noriega's wealth came from
letting Colombian drug traffickers use Panama as a refuge, a banking center and
a stopover for cocaine shipments to the United States, as charged in indictments
in 1988 in Miami and Tampa. He also is believed to have made tens of thousands
of dollars as an operative of the Central Intelligence Agency.

There were two formal dining rooms in the house and a huge kitchen with a
professional stove, two big refrigerators, an electric oven and a microwave
oven. Above one long dining table were three shelves holding pre-Columbian
pottery and figurines. Several carved elephant tusks were displayed in a sitting
room.

In a study at his home was a submachine gun in a case inscribed to the general
by the Marine Corps of Peru. General Noriega also displayed what appeared to be
a French Legion of Honor award, bearing what appeared to be the signature of
President Francois Mitterrand.

Fully Appointed Chapel

Off one of the bedrooms was a fully appointed chapel with silver implements for
saying Mass, a set of priest's robes and a bench with a folding
red-velvet-covered knee rest.

Behind the armory in the office were rooms containing bundles of pamphlets the
general had printed as part of his war of words against the United States. One
was entitled, ''It's Not Vietnam, It's a Country of Latin America, It's
Panama.''

Another room was jammed with blue jeans and T-shirts that the Americans said
were destined for the civilian paramilitary groups that General Noriega called
the Dignity Battalions.

A wine cellar boasted Israeli wines, French cognacs and half a dozen varieties
of inexpensive scotches and liqueurs.

The walls of a briefing room were lined with plaques from friends and visitors,
including one from the United States 82nd Airborne Dvision and another from the
18th Airborne Corps in Fort Bragg, N.C., both of which had participated in the
invasion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Panama: The Chief of Staff;
Vital for the Invasion: Politically Attuned General

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 24


Had President Bush not chosen a politically attuned Army general as the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the United States might not have mounted a
full-scale attack against Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega.

The ascension of the general, Gen. Colin L. Powell, as the nation's top military
leader marked an important turning point in the attitude of the American
military toward intervention in Panama.

General Powell's predecessor, Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., publicly expressed
skepticism about plans in the Reagan Administration to use force against General
Noriega. But General Powell, who formally assumed his post shortly before a coup
attempt in Panama failed, has exhibited no such hesitance.

Even before he assumed his new duties, General Powell had reviewed the United
States plans for an attack on Panama and found them deficient, a senior Pentagon
official said. Together with Gen. Maxwell Thurman, the new commander of the
United States Southern Command, he changed the plans to allow for a quicker
operation.

Capabilities and Intentions

There is an old saying in strategic philosophy that capabilities create their
own intentions. By changing the war plans, General Powell made it more feasible
for President Bush to order a full-scale attack on Panama.

And once the attack was launched, General Powell calmly explained the mission to
a packed room of reporters, addressing them by their first names as the Bush
Administration sought public backing for its intervention.

In a recent closed-door seminar at the National Defense University, General
Powell reportedly stressed that to be effective, military commanders need to
develop a public relations strategy, an axiom at the White House but a thought
that does not sit easily with some military leaders who are accustomed to
developing plans in secret and who tend to be wary of reporters.

Supporters of General Powell say that his previous Washington experience, most
notably his service as the national security adviser in the Reagan
Administration, makes him sensitive to the foreign policy objectives of the
White House. But his background also raises the question of whether General
Powell might be overly conscious of White House policy considerations when the
President considers using military force.

General Powell, 52 years old, is the son of Jamaican immigrants and was born in
Harlem. He won a Bronze Star and a Purple Heart in the Vietnam War and later was
a White House fellow. General Powell served as Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger's top military assistant and then commanded one of the two Army Corps
in Europe for six months.

No Link to Panama

General Powell replaced Frank C. Carlucci as Mr. Reagan's national security
adviser when Mr. Carlucci became Defense Secretary. President Reagan later
appointed General Powell the commander of Army and tactical Air Force units in
the United States.

In August, President Bush selected him over more senior officers to be the
chairman of the joint chiefs, saying that it was important that the new chairman
be a person of breadth and experience.

When General Powell was picked in August there was no particular reason to
believe that his first major test would be to oversee an attack against General
Noriega. But just days after he assumed his duties in October, the failed coup
attempt accelerated the military planning by General Powell and General Thurman
that was used in the American attack last week.

A military official familar with General Powell's thinking said that after the
coup in Panama failed ''it became increasingly clear that more decisive action
might be needed to bring change to Panama.''

Under General Powell's direction, the attack plans were changed so the United
States would be ready to begin a full-scale attack on short notice, Tanks and
helicopters were secretly moved to Panama, and parts of the operation were
rehearsed.

Plans Influence Decision

A senior Pentagon official said the new plans developed by General Powell
strongly influenced President Bush's decision to order the attack.

The plans in place before General Powell took over, he said, would have required
a longer buildup, which the President might have been reluctant to order.

''The earlier plans were fairly unresponsive.'' the senior Pentagon official
asserted. ''There is something to the notion that the military had tried to make
the operation appear impossible.''

This official said that General Powell's Army background made him more
comfortable with plans to use ground forces in a large-scale attack than his
predecessor, Admiral Crowe. Admiral Crowe has publicly argued for a cautious
approach, noting for example that plans considered in the Reagan Administration
for establishing an alternative government of Panama on an American base there
would hurt the United States effort to negotiate military base rights around the
world.

But the attack plan developed by General Powell and approved by President Bush
has been criticized for not taking sufficient account of the political
dimensions of the operation: the need to help in quickly establishing the
legitimacy of the new Government, as well as maintaining order.

After staying all night with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney in the Pentagon's
command center to oversee the attack on Wednesday morning, General Powell voiced
confidence that the United States would eventually apprehend General Noriega.

''We will chase him, and we will find him,'' General Powell said. ''I'm not
quite sure he's up to being chased around the countryside by Army Rangers,
special forces and light infantry units.''

General Noreiga proved to be more elusive than General Powell suggested and was
never captured.

But this evening when General Noreiga went to the papal representative in Panama
and asked for political asylum, it appeared that General Powell's military task
was made dramatically easier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Fast-Changing Events Shape Holiday Rituals

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words


For Daniel Pomerleau and his daughter, Tasha, their Christmas ritual had
outlasted the Cold War.

''I turned 43 two days ago,'' Mr. Pomerleau, a business executive from Fair
Haven, N.J., said yesterday as he and Tasha, 18 years old, walked arm in arm up
Fifth Avenue after Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral, as they have every Christmas
for more than a decade.

''I came into this world at the end of World War II and the beginning of the
Cold War,'' Mr. Pomerleau continued. ''I fought in Vietnam. I was stationed in
Germany as a captain in the Army in 1970-71. Tasha was born there. This is the
best the world's been since I've been on the planet. Millions of people are
free. I never thought I would live to see this happen.''

All over New York yesterday people like Mr. Pomerleau and Tasha were repeating
the timeless rituals of the holiday - gathering in churches, exchanging
presents, sitting down to eat and give thanks together. But for many, those
rituals were tempered by the times.

For Rumania, Joy and Tears

At a special memorial service at St. Dumitru's, a Rumanian Orthodox Church, for
the thousands of people believed killed in Rumania in the last few days, many
people said they felt joyful at the overthrow of the long-entrenched regime of
Nicolae Ceausescu, but sorrow for their countrymen who were slain in the
nation's streets.

''It's a mixed feeling,'' said Viorica Niculescu, a sculptor who lives on the
Upper West Side. ''We are Christians, so we pray on Christmas and we are joyful.
But it's full of tears, this joy. We feel sorrow for the people there who have
been killed.''

Mrs. Niculescu left Bucharest for the United States 12 years ago. Three years
ago, she said, the Communist regime murdered her aunt.

''She was killed because she was old and spoke freely,'' Mrs. Niculescu said.

''This Christmas we celebrated the freedom in Rumania,'' said Emil Panzaru, who
is the vice president of the parish council at the church, at 50 West 89th
Street in Manhattan. ''This Christmas will be remembered in Rumania's history as
not only the day that the Christ child was born, but the day that the Rumanian
nation was reborn.''

Throughout the holiday weekend, members of the parish have been telephoning each
other with meager news of friends and relatives at home. Few have been
successful in reaching loved ones there.

Jon Schiau, the president of the parish council, has sisters and other close
relatives in Rumania. ''I haven't heard from them,'' he said. ''I've tried, but
I haven't gotten through.''

From Bench to Safe Bed

At a Salvation Army shelter in the Bronx, as at dozens of other shelters
throughout the city, volunteers served turkey and all the trimmings to homeless
men and women.

''This means that somebody cares,'' said 36-year-old Tom Carrion, for whom the
world seems during the rest of the year to be populated with Ebenezer Scrooges.

Another homeless man, Kevin Williams, was grateful to have exchanged the wooden
bench at the Wall Street subway station where he had been sleeping for a bed at
a drug treatment center in the city's Greenpoint Men's Shelter.

Mr. Williams, who said he had managed to kick his crack addiction two months ago
without help, was accepted into the program Friday. He was assigned to a room
with one other man - a rare luxury in the city's shelter system, where hundreds
of men often sleep side by side in huge armories.

''Last Christmas I got high,'' Mr. Williams said. ''This is a beautiful
Christmas. It's a chance to get my life together.''

On Christmas Eve, he attended a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous. He took a hot
shower. For the first time in many months, he was able to sleep with his shoes
on the floor beside his bed - instead of lying on top of them to protect them
against thieves.

Dinkins Feeds Homeless

Mayor-elect David N. Dinkins spent much of Christmas working. In the morning he
conferred by telephone with members of his staff.

In the afternoon he donned a chef's white paper hat and heaped turkey onto
plates at the Sheraton Centre's Christmas dinner for some 1,200 homeless people.

Cheers greeted the Mayor-elect as he promised that his administration would make
homelessness a priority.

''We've got to fight harder and I intend to do it,'' he said.

''I don't mean that I can wave a magic wand and solve all problems by any
means,'' he added. ''But I have an opportunity to do something about it.''

Mr. Dinkins said he hoped to drop by his neighborhood church on his way home. He
said he planned to spend the evening with his wife, Joyce, his father-in-law,
Daniel Burrows and his son, David Jr. He said his daughter, Donna, who is a
nurse, would have to work during the evening.

''She won't be with me, which means that my grandson won't be with me so that's
a little distressing,'' Mr. Dinkins said. ''But I'm a whole lot better off than
a lot of people.''

On Christmas Eve, at the midnight Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral, Mayor Edward
I. Koch received an emotional public farewell from his friend and co-author,
John Cardinal O'Connor.

''He and I have differed privately and publicly on some fundamental theological
and philosophical issues,'' the Cardinal said, looking at Mr. Koch in the front
row. ''But we've differed always with integrity and mutal respect.''

The two have disagreed on the city's gay rights bill and abortion rights, among
other issues.

''It would be difficult to imagine a mayor of New York who has been more
supportive of the church than has been Mayor Koch,'' the Cardinal said.

Mr. Koch seemed to fight back tears as the congregation - about 4,000 people -
broke into sustained applause.

The Cardinal smiled. ''If every one of those people had voted,'' he said,
''you'd still be Mayor.''

Freezing and Happy

After weeks of gridlock and frantic consumerism, much of the city was almost
quiet yesterday. It was that brief, non-commercial interlude between buying
goods and exchanging them that comes but once a year. On a day when temperatures
eased into the 20's after several days near zero, people strolled rather than
hurried along the streets. Strangers exchanged holiday greetings. Men who might
be in pinstripes today promenaded up and down Fifth Avenue in Santa caps.

''This is the center of Christmas -right here,'' said Mr. Pomerleau, ''The
chestnuts, the music from the windows at Saks, the tree.''

The ritual Christmas trip to Manhattan began when Tasha was a little girl. Now,
she is a freshman at Loyola Marymount College in Los Angeles. But she said she
would not dream of interrupting the ritual. Neither, apparently, would her
father.

''We just asked each other: 'If you could get a ticket to go anywhere in the
world right now - Paris, London, Rome - where would you go?' '' Tasha said.
''Both of us said we would want to be right here in New York -freezing
together.''

Married This Day

On Christmas Day, 13 months after they met, Adam Gershbein and Kim Garcia, from
the Canarsie section of Brooklyn, got married. Mr. Gershbein, 24, owns Happy
Hour Limousines. Mrs. Gershbein, 28, is a sales representative for the Rolex
watch company.

''We met at a party,'' Mrs. Gershbein said yesterday as she and the groom
celebrated with friends and relatives at the Tavern on the Green. ''For me it
was love at first sight.'' ''It took me six months,'' Mr. Gershbein said.

The Gershbeins' joy at finding each other was irresistable, drawing in the other
Christmas celebrants at the surrounding tables.

''This guy and this lady got married today,'' said the best man, Billy Hansen.
''That's all that matters.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Carmen Nastu and her daughters (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee) (pg.
A1); Stephen Langford (NYT/Dith Pran); Daniel Pomerleau and his daughter; Adam
and Kim Gershbein (NYT/Sara Krulwich) (pg. B8)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

FIGHTING IN PANAMA: ADVERSARIES;
Bush's Obsession: President Says Noriega's Hold on Power Has Left Him
'Extraordinarily Frustrated'

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 822 words


President Bush and his advisers had ''become obsessed with'' Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega in the last 11 months, according to a longtime friend of the
President's.

Indeed, besting the shrewd and unscrupulous Panamanian dictator, whom he has
known for 13 years, has stirred Mr. Bush's competitive juices, as few other
things have done during his time in the White House. General Noriega has often
seemed to delight in taunting the President, like a schoolyard tough daring a
teacher to put up his dukes and fight.

To use the image favored by another Bush counselor, the Panamanian has behaved
like a dog snarling through the fence at the mailman.

General Noriega held the upper hand for years, as first the Reagan
Administration and then the Bush Administration tried negotiations, threats,
elections, sanctions, third-party pressures and indirect assistance to coup
plotters - all without driving him from power.

The general outfoxed Vice President Bush, who at the time had special
responsibility for combating drugs, and more recently, President Bush. All the
while, American officials say, he was growing richer on the profits from illicit
drug trafficking.

'Extraordinarily Frustrated'

''I've been frustrated that he's been in power so long, extraordinarily
frustrated,'' Mr. Bush said last week, briefly dropping the veil to reveal the
passions that lay behind the bland bureaucratic language used for the official
explanation of the invasion last week. ''I won't be satisfied until he's been
brought to justice.''

The President seized the initiative when he sent in the troops, then lost it
when the attack seemed to falter amid unbridled looting in Panama City and
difficulty in finding General Noriega. With the Panamanian's surprise decision
Sunday to seek asylum in the Vatican embassy, Mr. Bush again gained the
advantage over his resourceful nemesis.

Like another President from Texas, Lyndon B. Johnson, who used to exhort his
commanders in Vietnam to get him ''a coonskin on the wall,'' Mr. Bush would no
doubt have liked a neater, more clear-cut victory. Noting Mr. Bush's
difficulties in projecting himself as a tough, decisive leader, Kevin Phillips,
the political analyst, said this weekend, ''You've got to wonder to what extent
Bush's Texas psychology figures into this, and to what extent he needs a hunting
trophy.''

U.S. Pressing Vatican

From that personal point of view, the endgame now under way must seem
unsatisfactory and indecisive. And, in fact, the State Department is reported to
be pressing the Vatican to release General Noriega to the United States.

But it can also be argued that short of his death, the shelving of General
Noriega as a long-term resident of a Papal Nuncio's mission is about as good an
outcome for the United States as any. Extradition of the deposed dictator to
face trial in this country is constitutionally forbidden, according to President
Guillermo Endara, who says he will follow the law strictly.

If the United States were to kidnap the general, in the face of Mr. Endara's
stated views, that would undercut the new President's credibility, to say
nothing of American policy in recognizing him. Quite beyond that, there are
those who think that a Noriega on trial, in the United States demanding
documents and revealing secrets, might prove to be more trouble than a court
conviction was worth.

A similar calculation, after all, led half a dozen American Administrations and
dozens of officials, including Mr. Bush, as Director of Central Intelligence in
1976, to play along with General Noriega rather than denounce him.

Competitive and Instinctive

Mr. Bush, who met General Noriega in 1976 and again in 1983, is a competitive
man, who relies on instinct more than detailed strategic planning. But he is
also highly disciplined. After General Noriega tried to suggest that he had been
involved in the Iran-contra affair, crowds chanted ''What about Noriega?''
during Mr. Bush's 1988 campaign, and his rival, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, brought
the matter up in a televised debate.

Mr. Bush kept his counsel then, and did so again in October, when he was
attacked for not more vigorously backing an anti-Noriega coup that failed. A
close aide concedes that ''the personal vendetta, the personal factor'' was
always with the President, ''but at least he always fought it down'' until
deciding to make his strike last week.

Perhaps, with General Noriega a semi-permanent guest of the Vatican, like Jozsef
Cardinal Mindszenty in the American Embassy in Budapest a generation ago, Mr.
Bush will be satisifed. Or perhaps he will still not feel that the general has
paid his debts.

In either case, it has been an absorbing contest between these two men, both
former intelligence chiefs, one a patrician born to command, the other the
street-fighter risen to power. Further surprises, more twists and turns, would
come as no surprise to anyone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Maxwell Thurman (AP)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Phnom Penh Faces United Front

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 303 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 25


Cambodian guerrillas backed by the United States said today that they had
combined forces with the Communist Khmer Rouge in new attacks on the Phnom Penh
Government.

The army of the former Cambodian head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk; another
non-Communist group, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, and the Khmer
Rouge killed 35 Cambodian soldiers and wounded 50 others in attacks in western
Battambang last week, Prince Sihanouk's group said.

''Our combined forces surprised the enemy,'' a statement issued in Bangkok said.
''After a short clash, five enemy positions were overrun and five important
bridges were destroyed.''

It said three of the Prince's companies joined with rebels from the other groups
to attack strongholds of the Vietnamese-installed Government at Bosbeuv and Soth
Mon.

Railroad Said Cut

The Khmer Rouge radio, also monitored in Bangkok, said guerrillas had cut the
railroad linking Battambang, Cambodia's second-largest city, with the capital,
Phnom Penh, since last Thursday.

The Khmer Rouge, which killed a million people during a brutal rule from 1975 to
1979, remains far stronger militarily than its non-Communist allies.

Western diplomats said the Khmer Rouge and the two non-Communist groups, which
belong to a loose guerrilla alliance, were cooperating more in Northern and
Western Cambodia, forcing the pro-Vietnamese Government to give up sparsely
populated areas.

The United States has been trying to build the non-Communist guerrilla groups as
an alternative to the Khmer Rouge and the Phnom Penh Government. The Bush
Administration has urged that the Khmer Rouge be included with the other
factions in a coalition government with Cambodia's present leaders.

The United States, Britain, Singapore and Thailand back the non-Communist
guerrillas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

David V. O'Brien, Federal Judge, 57

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 9, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25


David V. O'Brien, Chief Judge of the United States District Court in the Virgin
Islands, died Friday at Georgetown University Hospital, where he was undergoing
treatment for Hodgkin's disease. He was 57 years old.

Judge O'Brien had been head of the Virgin Islands court since 1988 and had been
a member of it since 1981. Before joining the bench, he was a lawyer in the
Virgin Islands and in New York, where he also was a journalist.

A graduate of the University of Vermont and Syracuse University, he served in
the Marine Corps in the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER NORIEGA: U.S. COMMANDER - MAN IN THE NEWS;
Noriega's Nemesis: Maxwell Reid Thurman

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 27


A few months after he was due for retirement, and 14 years after he last
commanded troops in the field, Gen. Maxwell Thurman finds himself at the center
of the largest United States military operation since the Vietnam War.

As head of the United

States Southern Command, General Thurman has directed the American military
action in Panama. Since the invasion began last week, he has also directed the
American press briefings there, attacking Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega with words
as well as tanks. And since Sunday, he has met with the Vatican representatives
about the fate of the deposed Panamanian strongman.

The sudden visibility of General Thurman and the pivotal role he has played in
the last week are a major departure for a career officer who spent much of the
last 14 years concentrating on Army training and personnel matters and who
assumed his command in Panama less than three months ago.

But by all accounts General Thurman has been a ''hard charger'' who played a
central role in drafting invasion plans along with Gen. Colin L. Powell, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

A Sense of Mission

Throughout the operation, General Thurman has demonstrated an intense sense of
mission, describing the conflict starkly as a fight for the ''patriots'' of the
new Government of President Guillermo Endara against the ''narco-terrorist''
regime of General Noriega.

Pentagon officials say the contempt of General Thurman for General Noriega is
heartfelt. When he escorted Defense Secretary Dick Cheney through one of General
Noriega's houses in Panama this week, he used a derisive epithet to refer to the
deposed Panamanian leader, an official said.

Maxwell Reid Thurman was born on Feb. 18, 1931, in High Point, N.C. After
receiving a bachelor's degree in chemical engineering from North Carolina State
University at Raleigh, he entered the Army in 1953 and was trained in artillery.

General Thurman served in Vietnam, first as an intelligence officer and later as
commander of a howitzer battalion. After a series of other postings he became
the commander of artillery units of the 82d Airborne Division at Fort Bragg,
N.C. That was his last troop command until he became the head of the United
States Southern Command in October.

Retirement Is Deferred

During the Reagan Administration, General Thurman served as the Army's Deputy
Chief of Staff for Personnel, helping to develop the all-volunteer Army. From
1983 to June 1987 he served as the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army, a posting
that involved him in the organization and management of the entire Army. Then he
became the commander of the Army Training and Doctrine Command at Fort Monroe,
Va.

With retirement mandatory after 35 years of service, General Thurman was to
leave the Army in August. But Mr. Cheney picked him to head the United States
Southern Command and at the Defense Secretary's request President Bush deferred
his retirement.

A bachelor, General Thurman has developed a reputation in the Pentagon as a
demanding taskmaster with a keenness for numbers. Army officers nicknamed him
the ''Maxatollah'' when he was the Army Vice Chief of Staff.

''In many ways he is commanding the Army he helped to build,'' said one Army
officer, referring to General Thurman's past service.

For their part, civilian officials in the Defense Department appear pleased with
General Thurman's more aggressive approach toward Panama. General Thurman's
predecessor, Gen. Frederick A. Woerner Jr., has complained that the Bush
Administration did not effectively carry out its nonmilitary options for trying
to oust General Noriega.

A senior Pentagon official said that General Woerner was too cautious and
praised General Thurman as ''more of a forward leaning, gung-ho type.''

A War on Tyranny

General Thurman took over the United States Southern Command days before the
Oct. 3 coup attempt in Panama. But even before that failed coup, General
Thurman's disdain for General Noriega was clear.

''The United States will not recognize nor accommodate with a regime that holds
power through force and violence at the expense of the Panamanian people's right
to be free,'' he said at a ceremony in Panama marking his assumption of command.
He pledged that the command would confront ''tryanny in all its insidious
forms.''

The failed coup was a turning point for the Bush Administration, persuading key
officials of the need to speed planning for action against General Noriega in
case President Bush decided to order an attack. And General Thurman and his top
aides, like Lieut. Gen. Carl W. Stiner, the Army field commander in the
operation, were soon immersed in planning for military action in concert with
General Powell.

During the attack, General Thurman became a familar figure, appearing before the
press in combat fatigues at the Southern Command headquarters in Panama Heights.
But with American tanks and troops surrounding the Vatican Embassy, General
Thurman has remained a commander in pursuit of his quarry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Maxwell Thurman

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Nominations Made For Golden Globes

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., Dec. 27


''Born on the Fourth of July,'' ''Glory'' and ''When Harry Met Sally . . .''
each received five Golden Globe Award nominations, which were announced today by
the Hollywood Foreign Press Association.

''Fourth of July'' and ''Glory'' are war films - one about Vietnam and the other
about the Civil War - and ''Harry Met Sally'' is a romance comedy. The three
films were followed by ''Dead Poets Society,'' ''Do the Right Thing'' and ''The
Little Mermaid,'' each of which gained four nominations.

The Golden Globes, the first of the Hollywood award season, often serve as a
bellwether for the Oscars, though the foreign press members are noted for
eccentricities.

The foreign press also makes television awards, and the leading nominee was
''L.A. Law'' with eight. ''Cheers'' and ''Lonesome Dove'' followed with four
each.

The Golden Globes, which are to be presented at the Beverly Hilton Hotel on Jan.
20, divide films and star performances into two categories, drama and musical or
comedy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Networks Look Back at What They Saw

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words


Once again, the network news departments are succumbing to the seasonal
obligation to remind us of times past, without expending too much time present.
On Tuesday evening ABC, abetted by Time magazine, offered ''Images of the
80's,'' Peter Jennings presiding. Last night, Tom Brokaw and Jane Pauley shared
the burden of ''The 80's,'' on NBC. And tonight, at 10 P.M. on CBS, Andy Rooney
puts his particular spin on 1989.

''A Year With Andy Rooney: 1989'' comes off best: first, because it's a year,
not a decade, and second, because it gives the feeling of having been compiled
by an individual instead of an institution. Fans of Mr. Rooney's act on ''60
Minutes'' are likely to enjoy him in this long form.

He covers big events like the winds of democracy and Hurricane Hugo and smaller
ones like the troubles of Pete Rose. He does not pretend to have anything
particularly deep to say, but his offhand comments are agreeably wry.

Air crashes move him to remark, ''No one should be surprised to find airline
maintenance is in the same league as baggage handling, on-time performance or
even with the food on board.'' As pictures appear of George Bush visiting other
heads of state during his first year in office, Mr. Rooney observes that the
President ''seemed to be following the television anchormen around the world.''
He reports that Tammy Bakker ''was sure God would get Jimmy off, but He
didn't.'' All right, the targets are easy, but compared with the canned stuff on
the other networks, Mr. Rooney actually seems to be saying what is on his mind.

The ABC and NBC recapitulations, though differing in some ways, inevitably used
many of the same clips. Both programs demonstrated the extent to which news in
the 80's has meant television news and why that is troubling.

''The 80's,'' on NBC, can be seen as a nightmare vision of the journalism of the
future. A main criticism of even the most respectable examples of news by tube
is that the pictures tend to overwhelm the story. That's why we rush to the set
when earthquakes and hurricanes strike, but anything less graphic and more
complicated presents problems. ''The 80's'' presented mostly problems.

Montages from the past 10 years rushed at one, forced along by pounding or dire
music: Afghanistan, South Africa, Northern Ireland, the Philippines; Poland, the
Soviet Union, China, Czechoslovakia, East Germany; Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Jimmy
Carter, Ronald Reagan, George Bush, Michael S. Dukakis, Jesse Jackson; the
Challenger disaster, Lyme disease and Baby M. Hey, there's Oliver North and
lookie there, some homeless people, and isn't that Ivan Boesky? There's Menachem
Begin cheek by jowl with Yasir Arafat. Gee, somebody's climbing a mountain. As
10 years of happenings flash by, you realize that what you are seeing is not
history but a manic comment on the way the camera covers events.

Several of the pictures, like the Willy Horton commercial from the 1988
Presidential campaign and the lone Chinese student holding up the line of tanks
in Tienanmen Square, evoke strong memories. Others may be dimmer: What exactly
was Attorney General Edwin Meese in trouble about when he said, ''There's no
basis for any sleaze factor?'' If you don't recall the details of the Wedtech
deals, involving favoritism in Government contracts, you'll get no assistance
here. (Mr. Meese was investigated, but not charged.) One NBC montage went from
Eddie Murphy to Michael Douglas delivering the ''Greed is good!'' speech in the
movie ''Wall Street'' (also used by ABC for much the same purpose) to Mr.
Boesky, Leona Helmsley, Tammy and Jim Bakker, Bernhard Goetz. Crime as fun; show
biz as news.

Each section of the NBC hour gets a brief introduction from Mr. Brokaw and Ms.
Pauley, in artificial converse. Their unremarkable comments were swept aside by
the pictures, which segued from the wedding of Prince Charles - ''a living fairy
tale,'' Ms. Pauley called it with typical inventiveness - to Grenada, El
Salvador, South Africa, the Philippines. A couple of minutes about AIDS made a
coherent if unstartling piece, but 10 minutes of hopscotching around
Afghanistan, Armenia, Eastern Europe, China, Israel, Iran and other interesting
spots was enough to produce jet lag. Journalistic terrorism. If there was a
mention along the way of the economic and political problems that face the new
governments in Eastern Europe, it went by too fast for me to catch.

What do we have here? In one of its meanings, to review means to re-examine
critically. Forget it. This was MTV journalism, images with little context or
content. A giddy child of the unhealthy marriage of news and entertainment that
all the networks have been nurturing in the past year or two.

ABC's less frenetic ''Images of the 80's'' began with a useful reminder of the
glum spirit in America at the end of the Carter Presidency and ended with an
album on the worldwide surge toward freedom. It was in general a more
straightforward performance than the NBC gyrations. But Mr. Jennings's polished
narration could not gloss over the awkward and senseless transitions. In the
most unfortunate of them, he used the word ''rise'' to bridge a report on the
success of black politicians and the Challenger disaster. The word ''honor''
took him from the nation's reconciliation over Vietnam to the exploits of Jimmy
Swaggart, John Tower, Gary Hart and others whose troubles made the front pages.

Such peculiar bouncings about drew attention to the grab-bag nature of the
enterprise. For a moment, I thought that the first commercial was part of the
show - but it turned out to be merely A.T.&T.'s way of merchandising the opening
of the Berlin wall.

On ABC, too, the pictures drove the narrative and, as so often, obscured as much
as they revealed. As shots of Israeli soldiers going after young stone throwers
were followed hard upon by pictures of the South African police going after
protesters, Mr. Jennings likened the situation of the Palestinians to that of
black South Africans. Reductio ad video. Mostly, however, his comments were as
commonplace as such a project requires. (The writing was credited to several
hands, a sure defense against originality.) But in fairness, what is there left
to say in a couple of minutes about drugs or about AIDS? He and Ms. Pauley were
both properly pious about the environment.

One item not reported in either of these looks back was the decline in the
number of network documentaries since 1980. Maybe in the 1990's, the news
divisions will cover events more deeply as they happen and spare themselves 10
years from now the bother of putting together another batch of hit-and-run
snapshots of -good grief! - the 20th century.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Andy Rooney

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Why Hong Kong Is Turning Back Boat People;
Illegal Immigrants

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


To the Editor:

''Sinking the Boat People'' (editorial, Dec. 9) suggests that Hong Kong is in
violation of Article 33 of the United Nations Convention on Refugees by
repatriating Vietnamese boat people.

But it is precisely this article - that no one fearing persecution because of
race, religion, membership in a particular social group or political opinion
should be forced to return to his country - that provides the basis for finding
many of the Vietnamese boat people illegal immigrants.

This determination has been made after exhaustive screening and appeals designed
and monitored by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which may
still declare any person to be a refugee, even if that person has been screened
out and had his appeal rejected. It has done so in more than 100 cases.

The United States abides by the same criteria, as the boat people in Hong Kong
have been told by United States officials visiting them - counseling that is
vital because nearly all the boat people left Vietnam with the expressed hope of
going to America.

The Lawyers Committee on Human Rights has chosen to present a highly distorted
and misleading picture of how the authorities in Hong Kong are handling this
difficult problem. It is nonsense to suggest that the boat people are ''helpless
to contest adverse findings.''

The reason so few of Hong Kong's boat people are eligible for refugee status is
largely that more than 90 percent are from North Vietnam. Relatively few can
show a well-founded fear of persecution.

You call for a one-year grace period so that the United States, Britain and
others can come up with a better solution, notwithstanding the agreement reached
by the international community at a conference in Geneva last June that all
illegal immigrants would have to go home.

In the last year, Hong Kong has had to cope with a flood of boat people. If
nothing is done before the next ''sailing season,'' which begins in February,
another substantial influx is likely over the next 12 months. A grace period
would, therefore, only exacerbate the problem.

There is, finally, no question of sending illegal immigrants home without firm
assurances from the Vietnamese Government of proper reintegration.

KERRY MCGLYNN
Director, Hong Kong
Economic & Trade Office
  New York, Dec. 11, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Why Hong Kong Is Turning Back Boat People

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


To the Editor:

Your reporting on Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong, most recently in ''Hong
Kong Forcibly Returns 51 Boat People'' (front page, Dec. 12), misrepresents the
problem. Having lived in Hong Kong and having volunteered in the Vietnamese
detention camps, I share your viewpoint that their situation is pitiable, but
the blame for it cannot rest solely, or even mainly, on the shoulders of Hong
Kong.

When the British Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher proposed making
Hong Kong the port of first asylum for Vietnamese boat people, it was proposing
a system in which Hong Kong was a clearinghouse for refugee resettlement to
Britain, its allies and its European partners. It is the failure of those
countries to accept the Vietnamese influx that has caused the backlog of boat
people in Hong Kong.

You note that some 13,000 individuals who have been granted refugee status by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees await resettlement, and it is
the 40,000 who were not declared refugees who face repatriation. You fail to
explain that this distinction between economic and political refugees is not
Hong Kong's but the creation of destination countries, like the United States,
which do not accept economic refugees. For those who do not receive refugee
status, the system does not work.

For many readers, repatriation will seem cruel in any case, and they may wonder
why Hong Kong does not absorb these immigrants. The answer is threefold: (1) the
boat people do not want to settle in Hong Kong - they are willing to wait almost
endlessly for resettlement, but they see Hong Kong only as a way station; (2)
while Hong Kong is wealthy compared with Vietnam, it is crowded and ill equipped
to provide social welfare to so large a group, and (3) China, which resumes
sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997, has indicated it will not accept the
Vietnamese boat people.

Beijing has also indicated that it will use the Army if necessary to quell
social disturbance in Hong Kong. Since riots in the camps (which are frequent,
as there are groups from both North and South Vietnam) would qualify, the
specter of Chinese troops in Hong Kong has added weight to the arguments of
those proposing rapid repatriation.

Hong Kong is composed of refugees; more than half of its population derives from
the flood of humanity that left China after 1949. Hong Kong residents understand
the risks one takes in starting a new life elsewhere. But they too face an
undesired repatriation, in 1997, and must prepare for it as best they can. The
decision to repatriate the Vietnamese refugees was not made lightly, but only
after years of feeding them, keeping them and hoping that destination countries
would accept them. Given our own failure, can we blame Hong Kong?

EDWARD T. L. HARDIE
Stanford, Calif., Dec. 13, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1246 words



A Role With Everything

Right about now, if everything goes according to plan, Elizabeth Pena should be
winding up work on ''Jacob's Ladder,'' Adrian Lyne's first film since the
immensely popular ''Fatal Attraction.''

Co-starring in the thriller opposite Tim Robbins (''Bull Durham,'' et al.), Miss
Pena - who made a powerful impression as the mistreated wife in ''La Bamba'' -
plays the role of Jezzie.

''Jezzie, a k a Jezebel, is a little bit of everything - child, mother, Florence
Nightingale, wild animal,'' Ms. Pena said. ''She's sweet, she's bitchy, she's
giving, she's a taker. She's basically a collage of all women.''

''I've never played anything like her before,'' said Ms. Pena, who has appeared
in such films as ''Down and Out in Beverly Hills'' (as a sultry maid), in
''Batteries Not Included'' (as a pregnant tenement dweller helped by
extraterrestrials) and in ''Crossover Dreams'' (as the love interest of Ruben
Blades).

Jezzie, it seems, is the lover of Jacob Singer, played by Mr. Robbins. He's a
divorced man with three children who is struggling with nightmares of Vietnam
that begin to impinge on his everyday life in New York.

Ms. Pena said that although she was haunted by the Bruce Joel Rubin script for
''Jacob's Ladder'' when she read it last January, the biggest attraction for her
was the opportunity to work with Mr. Lyne. ''He knows how to deal with actors
very well,'' she said. ''He's the only director I've met who can make you feel
you're having a completely private moment while surrounded by 300 people.''

In preparing to portray Jezzie, Ms. Pena said: ''I did a lot of quote and
unquote - and I hate the word - intellectual stuff. I did a lot of reading and
designing in my mind. Once I got that established, my character basically
functions through her subtext. Then I took everything - all my homework - and
threw it in the garbage and prayed a lot.

''The most important thing for me in this movie is the relationship with Tim. If
I can pull that off, I have more than half the battle won.''

While the production crew goes off to finish work in Puerto Rico (standing in
for Vietnam) during the next few weeks, Ms. Pena - who will next be seen on the
big screen as Jamie Lee Curtis's best friend in another thriller, ''Blue
Steel,'' opening in March - is turning to new challenges. Among them are
''Shannon,'' an hourlong television film written by John Sayles, and ''The
Camarena Story,'' a mini-series for NBC about the drug war.

But looking ahead, Ms. Pena knows exactly what she'd like: ''A movie with
Scorsese,'' she said. ''A movie with Seidelman. Two movies with Lumet. All
starring and all involving just me. A fabulous Broadway show. And six
children.''

Costa-Gavras Revisions

You know what they say about the best-laid plans.

After ''Music Box,'' his new film starring Jessica Lange as a Chicago lawyer
defending her Hungarian-immigrant father against charges of Nazi war crimes,
Costa-Gavras was planning to start another film that involved characters from
Eastern Europe.

But along came the historic upheavals that toppled and shook Communist
governments, and the plans of the director - noted for his films rooted in
politics - for a film about a couple of Poles living in Paris were overtaken by
events.

''We have to find different solutions now,'' he said. ''Characters, when they
speak about the country, have different speeches now. They don't have
difficulties going there that they used to. Everything is upside down.''

While waiting for script revisions, Costa-Gavras said he'd be spending the
holidays with his family in Paris.

'The First Emperor'

In midyear, when political upheaval led to bloody violence in Beijing, the
American Museum of Natural History canceled its plans to show ''The First
Emperor of China,'' a superscreen IMAX film, saying it felt the event would be
out of place.

Now, in an atmosphere of efforts to thaw relations between the United States and
China, the museum plans to begin showings of the film, produced by the National
Film Board of Canada and China's Xian Film Studio in association with the
Canadian Museum of Civilization.

''The First Emperor of China'' re-creates the power struggle to unify China 22
centuries ago by telling the story of Qin Shihuang (pronounced chin SHIH-hwan),
China's first emperor. As a young ruler, he averted revolution in his home
province by quashing a coup; having established complete control, he turned his
sights on conquering six powerful warring states and unifying all of China. In
221 B.C., Qin declared himself emperor of China.

He introduced sweeping reforms, unified the system of measures and currency,
standardized the written language, constructed a vast network of roads and
completed the Great Wall. He also buried dissenters alive, burned thousands of
books and amassed enormous riches. At his death in 210, he had 270 palaces and
3,000 concubines.

In 1974, workers digging a well in Shaanxi Province uncovered a huge undergound
vault: the tomb of Qin, where they discovered his extraordinary legacy - an army
of 7,000 life-size terra-cotta clay soldiers, horses and chariots. The final
sequences of ''The First Emperor of China'' are set in today's China, where
Qin's guardian army is slowly being excavated.

''The First Emperor of China'' will be shown daily at 4:30 P.M. beginning next
Friday in the museum's Naturemax Theater. On Friday and Saturday evenings at 6
and 7:30, the film will be offered as a double feature with ''To the Limit,''
which documents the ways in which the human body adapts to vigorous activities.

Filmgoers pay admission to the American Museum of Natural History ($4 suggested
for adults; $2 for children), and Naturemax Theater admission ($4 for adults and
$2 for children at single features and $6 and $3, respectively, for double
features). Information: 769-5650.

Zsigmond Tribute

At the American Museum of the Moving Image, the second in an annual series of
tributes to eminent cinematographers is to open next Friday.

''Images and Obsessions: The Cinematography of Vilmos Zsigmond'' deals with his
work on such films as ''The Deer Hunter,'' ''Heaven's Gate,'' ''Deliverance''
and ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind.''

During the coming year, Mr. Zsigmond's cinematography will be on display in Jack
Nicholson's ''Two Jakes,'' the sequel to ''Chinatown.''

Highlights of the series (last year's honoree was Nestor Almendros), which runs
through Jan. 26 at the museum, in Astoria, Queens, will be several screenings of
the complete ''Heaven's Gate'' and of ''Close Encounters,'' as well as a
selection of documentaries, industrial films and commercials photographed by Mr.
Zsigmond.

Among other films to be shown are ''McCabe and Mrs. Miller,'' ''Cinderella
Liberty,'' ''Deliverance,'' ''The Witches of Eastwick'' and ''Revolt in
Hungary,'' filmed by Mr. Zsigmond and Laszlo Kovacs as they fled Hungary during
the 1956 Soviet invasion.

The opening attraction of the series, at 7:30 P.M. next Friday, is ''Close
Encounters,'' the 1977 Steven Spielberg film for which Mr. Zsigmond won an
Academy Award.

In connection with a screening of ''The Deer Hunter'' scheduled for 1 P.M. on
Jan. 7, Mr. Zsigmond will deliver a lecture at 5 P.M. to discuss his work on
that film.

Admission to the museum and to its screenings is $5 for adults, $2.50 for
children. Information on this and other events at the museum: (718) 784-0077.
Directions: (718) 784-4777.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

HONG KONG POLICE RAID REFUGEE SITE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Dec. 29


The police raided a Vietnamese refugee camp today and clashed with
stone-throwing boat people who reportedly feared that they would be forced to
return to their homeland. Officials said 40 people were wounded.

The police fired tear gas after the Vietnamese set fire to blankets and threw
rocks to prevent a search for homemade weapons, a Government spokesman, Timothy
Li, said. Twenty-seven Vietnamese were arrested and more than 700 weapons were
seized, the police said.

Television showed policemen equipped with helmets and shields firing tear gas,
and smoke from the fires could be seen rising above the center on outlying
Lantau island, which houses more than 3,000 Vietnamese.

''The boat people, in order to make the operation more difficult, pushed their
women and children to the front,'' said Security Secretary M. Geoffrey Barnes.

Reports on Repatriation

The violence came one day after clashes broke out between Vietnamese at another
center, in which one person was killed and 10 others were hurt.

The Government-Financed radio reported that the resistance may have been set off
by reports that some of those in the center may be in the next group of boat
people forced to return to their impoverished homeland.

Earlier this month, the Government returned 51 Vietnamese to their homeland
against their will in the first such repatriation.

Although officials refused to say how many police officers joined in the
operation, the radio put the number at 300.

Brawls Between Rival Gangs

The police said tonight that 14 Vietnamese and 26 guards and policemen were
wounded in the camp.

The officials said five hours of counseling by staff members of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and voluntary agencies failed to persuade
the Vietnamese to cooperate.

The police reported two clashes Thursday night between Vietnamese armed with
homemade weapons at the Shek Kong Detention Center, in which one person was
killed and 10 others were hurt.

The police said they were investigating the cause of the brawls between two
rival groups from Quang Ning. About 100 people were involved in the fighting.

Homemade Swords and Lances

The police have classified the case as homicide. The wounded at Shek Kong ranged
in age from 16 years old to 28, and one was hospitalized in poor condition, the
police said.

No arrests were made at Shek Kong, but the police found homemade weapons like
swords and lances in the detention center after the battles.

According to the police, five people have died this year in factional fighting
that erupts frequently in the crowded and squalid Vietnamese camps.

About 44,000 boat people who have sailed into Hong Kong since mid-June 1988 and
are considered illegal immigrants unless they can prove they fled persecution.
Those who are denied refugee status and have their appeals rejected can
volunteer to go home or face forced repatriation.

The 12,000 boat people in Hong Kong who arrived before the screening program
took effect were automatically granted refugee status and are awaiting
resettlement overseas.

The eighth group of boat people to volunteer to return to Vietnam flew back to
Hanoi today. The 111 people who took the chartered flight bring to 874 the
number of boat people who have returned home voluntarily since March.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Forty people were hurt yesterday when Hong Kong police raided a
Vietnamese refugee camp. Smoke billowed from the camp when police fired tear gas
after the Vietnamese set fires and threw rocks to prevent a search for homemade
weapons. More than 700 weapons were seized. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Tokyo Drops Issue of Lost U.S. Bomb

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Dec. 29


Japan has agreed to drop its demand for further information about the
circumstances in which a hydrogen bomb fell overboard from an American aircraft
carrier 24 years ago off the coast of Okinawa, Japanese and American officials
said today.

Details about the incident, in which the bomb sank to the bottom of the ocean,
came to light in May.

The disclosure revived a long-running debate in Japan about the extent to which
the United States keeps Tokyo informed of the comings and goings of nuclear
weapons in the vicinity, and it forced the Japanese Government to demand
information about the incident from Washington.

Japan prohibits the ''introduction'' of nuclear weapons here, but the Government
generally overlooks the arrival of American ships believed to be carrying such
weapons into Japanese ports. Japan is equally sensitive about the presence of
American nuclear weapons in the area generally.

The United States, at the same time, takes the position that it respects Japan's
ban on nuclear weapons but that it never confirms or denies the presence of
nuclear weapons aboard warships.

A Ritual of Avoidance

The 1965 incident, which was publicized in a report issued by the environmental
group Greenpeace and the Institute for Policy Studies, a Washington-based
research center, at first threatened to damage the carefully constructed ritual
of not delving too deeply into the subject.

But according to the Japanese and American officials, both sides decided this
week to consider the case closed, on the ground that any further discussion
about the accident might ''compromise'' American operations and create an
''adverse effect'' on American national security interests.

The agreement to drop the matter came after an oral message conveyed by the
United States Defense Department to senior members of the Japanese Embassy this
week in Washington, the officials said.

A Japanese Foreign Ministry official, asked about the agreement, said this week,
''The Japanese Government understands the U.S. Government's position and has no
intention of making further requests of it.''

Country Virtually Shut Down

It was not clear whether the dropping of the case would still the controversy
created by the May revelations about the lost hydrogen bomb. News accounts about
Japan's agreement this week appeared in the press at a time when the country was
virtually about to shut down for the New Year's holiday.

As a result, there were no critical comments or denunciations this week from
those on the left wing of Japan's political scene who assert that the United
States often violates the longstanding Japanese principle that nuclear weapons
be barred from Japanese territory.

The 1965 episode was originally disclosed in 1981, when the Pentagon reported
the loss of a nuclear weapon in international waters but did not give out the
location. Last May, however, the Pentagon confirmed that the bomb was lost off a
small Japanese island a few hundred miles from Okinawa.

American officials also said this year that the bomb was in more than 16,000
feet of water and that although it may have leaked some radioactive plutonium on
the ocean floor, its loss had ''no environmental impact'' and there was no
danger of any kind of detonation or explosion.

The bomb fell off the aircraft carrier Ticonderoga in December 1965, when an
A-4E Skyhawk aircraft rolled off the ship, killing the pilot.

Carrier Reported Due in Japan

In addition, the researchers from Greenpeace and Institute for Policy Studies
said the Ticonderoga had left Vietnam and was bound for Yokosuka, an American
naval base south of Tokyo. This assertion has not been confirmed. If it is true,
it would seem to confirm that the United States does occasionally bring nuclear
weapons into Japanese ports.

In 1981, the Defense Department gave a report of 32 accidents involving nuclear
weapons, of which the Ticonderoga incident was the only one occurring in the
vicinity of Japan. That report said the Ticonderoga incident occurred 500 miles
from land.

But this May, the American version was revised, making it clear that the
incident was 500 miles from the Asian mainland but only about 80 miles from
Japan's Okinawa chain.

Japanese officials said in May and July that they accepted various assurances
about the incident but were still under some pressure in Parliament to pursue
the matter. An opposition lawmaker this month raised the question of what the
Government was doing to obtain more details.

That question in Parliament, in turn, led to the meeting this week between
Japanese and American diplomats in Washington, officials in both Governments
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Pacific showing site of lost bomb

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words



International    2-10

The Vatican blamed Washington for the impasse over the fate of Gen. Manuel
Noriega, calling the United States an ''occupying power'' with no right to
demand that he be handed over to its forces.    Page 1

U.S. troops searched the Nicaraguan ambassador's residence in Panama City for
two hours. In retaliation, President Daniel Ortega has ordered 120 U.S. Embassy
workers to leave Nicaragua.    1

The body of an American in Panama was exhumed from a common grave. The victim, a
long-time resident of Panama, was abducted by armed men the night of the U.S.
invasion.    6

Reporter's Notebook: Blasting rock'n'roll at Gen. Noriega    6

Deal reached on Panama's U.N. seat; invasion is condemned    6

The toll of the ''terror'' in Timisoara, the city where the Rumanian revolution
began, appears to have been far lower than the thousands claimed at first, but
the fear was not.    1

Ties between Rumania and Moscow are now improving after a long chill. Unlike the
changes in other Eastern Europe countries, the Rumanian revolution has been
missing an anti-Soviet component.    8

In Nicolae Ceausescu's birthplace, residents want to change the city's name from
Scornicesti to Liberty to erase its connection to the deposed and executed
dictator.    8

Vaclav Havel was elected President of Czechoslovakia by the National Assembly.
Mr. Havel insisted he would serve only until free parliamentary elections are
held next year.    1

Man in the News: Vaclav Havel, the playwright and human rights campaigner who is
Prague's first non-Communist President since 1948, was reviled by the Government
as an enemy of socialism just two months ago.    10

Major economic reforms for Poland were approved by the Polish Senate after a
heated debate over the pain the program would inflict on the Polish people. The
plan ends price controls and privatize many state-owned companies.    9

Economists are scrambling to grasp the biggest issue in economics today: how to
transform the centrally run economies of Eastern Europe into free-market
systems.    33

Riots in a Vietnamese refugee camp in Hong Kong erupted as police looking for
weapons clashed with stone-throwing refugees who feared they would be forcibly
returned to Vietnam.    3

Japan's inquiry of a hydrogen bomb that fell overboard from an American aircraft
carrier and sank near Okinawa 24 years ago will be dropped, Tokyo and Washington
officials said.    3

A suspension of civil rights in Punjab enacted in 1987 by former Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi has been repealed by the lower house of the Indian Parliament.    3


Elections for a Lebanese parliament to rival the Government of President Elias
Hrawi have been postponed by the rebellious Christian commander, Gen. Michel
Aoun.    2

Police and protesters clash at women's march in Jerusalem    2

Pretoria courts skilled East German immigrants    4

National    11-12, 26

Drug use inside America's prisons, which for years has been denied or ignored,
has begun creating myriad problems, from controlling inmates' behavior to
corrupting prison staffs.    1

A New Year's fad of firing guns in the air is adding new dangers to the
celebration. The police in several cities are stepping up efforts to halt the
skyward spray of bullets ringing in the New Year.    11

Evidence has linked recent bombings in the South to a series of letters claiming
responsibility, Federal investigators said.    11

Civil rights legislation will be pushed during the next session of Congress by
rights groups aiming to reverse recent Supreme Court decisions narrowing
protection against employment discrimination.     11

Supreme Court rejects Pittsburgh appeal against Menorah    11

A student's death in police custody was ruled a homicide by the Los Angeles
County coroner. The 19-year-old student died after he was choked while being
arrested outside a Grateful Dead concert.    12

Rape victim jailed for failing to go to court    12

An increase in the Social Security tax should be repealed, said Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan of New York, who called the scheduled tax rise regressive and
unfair.    12

U.S. scraps rules on conflicts in health research    26

Thornburgh won't pursue disclosure involving Gray    11

Index of leading economic indicators rises 0.1 percent    33

Regional    27-30

A gas main in the Bronx exploded, killing one man and forcing a shutoff of power
and subway service in large sections of the Bronx and Manhattan. At least six
other people were injured.    1

Stranded in darkness, thousands must wait    29

The macabre slaying of a family in Ellis Hollow, N.Y., has sent a shudder
throughout upstate New York. A week after the slaying on Dec. 23, the state
police lack a motive and a suspect.    27

Metro-North fares in Connecticut will not rise on Jan. 1 as fares in other
Metropolitan Transportation Authority areas, under a compromise that delays
improvements.    27

Edward Koch's last day in City Hall as Mayor was spent writing letters, visiting
police precincts, taping a television program, hosting an open house at City
Hall, and coping with one last emergency: the fire in the Bronx.    27

New Yorkers want David Dinkins to overhaul the city's schools, house its poor,
make its streets safe, and most of all, treat its drug addicts.    27

David Dinkins names three more heads of departments    28

An effort to save the income-tax cut scheduled in New York next year is being
pressed by business groups around the state, despite appeals from the Cuomo
administration.    30

Cuomo grants no clemencies for the first time    30

Furrier Antonovich files for bankruptcy    33

Neediest Cases    30

Business Digest    32

Arts/Entertainment

Will Beckett's wishes prevail?    13

Reflections of a Rumanian writer    13

Philosophers take clients    18

Theater: ''The School for Wives''    17

Music: Carman Moore's ''Magical Circles''    14

Book: ''Spock on Spock''    20

Consumer's World    50

All-terrain vehicles remain a safety hazard

Telephones are becoming easier for the disabled to use

Coping with dry, chapped skin

Winterizing your car

Guidepost Sports

Baseball: Thousands at Martin's funeral    45

Column: Berkow on Martin    45

Football: Fighting words from Holtz    45

Damian Johnson on comeback trail    46

Wild-card games a clue to conference styles    46

Texas Tech seeking respect    47

Peach Bowl coaches enthusiastic    47

Hockey: Devils beat Rangers    45

Sports People    46

Obituaries    31

Abraham Worcel, professor

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    24

Human rights: the hard part

Every day's a holiday, almost

Bridgeport's hot trash

Letters    24

Russell Baker: Thanks to year zero    25

Matei Calinescu, Nicolas Spulber: Charade in Rumania?    25

Abba Eban: Pursue peace, not just elections    25

Barbara Boggs Sigmund: I didn't give myself cancer    25

Peter Gorman: Marijuana McCarthyism    25

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Making of a Pediatrician and Seeker of Peace

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 985 words



Spock on Spock
A Memoir of Growing Up With the Century
By Benjamin Spock, M.D., and Mary Morgan
Illustrated. 282 pages. Pantheon Books. $19.95.

Dr. Benjamin Spock has probably had the distinction of being handcuffed, in the
course of a number of arrests and indictments for civil disobedience, by police
officers whose mothers helped to bring them up by reading his famous book,
''Baby and Child Care.''

That compendium of pediatric and psychological wisdom has sold more than 39
million copies since it was first published in 1946, an author's note states,
and it has been translated into 26 languages. Countless parents must have asked
each other ''What does Dr. Spock say?'' when their newborns cried. Even today's
confident parents, reading updated editions, undoubtedly still take comfort from
the book's steadying words of advice: ''You know more than you think you do.''

Now, at the age of 86, the doctor has written a rather casual but charming
memoir with his second wife, Mary Morgan, who taped his stories and organized
them into ''Spock on Spock.'' In a preface she brings his activities up to date:

''Life shows no signs of slowing down. Ben is now working on a new book,
revising 'Baby and Child Care' for the sixth edition, writing his regular column
for Redbook, filming his first video on child care, completing a documentary
film on his life, and regularly crossing the country in his demanding speaking
schedule. And, of course, continuing to work for peace, which he has always said
he wants to be remembered as inseparable from his other work.''

''Spock on Spock'' tells the story of a well-bred young man from New Haven who
grew up in a wealthy and politically conservative family, went to all the right
schools, played all the right sports (he rowed on the winning Yale crew in the
1924 Olympics in Paris), and did not really enter the depths of a democratic
society until he attended the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia
University and, in effect, became a New Yorker.

''When I got to Columbia,'' he writes, ''I was greatly surprised to find that
some students were avowed Democrats, a few even Socialists. My father had given
me the idea that no university graduate would be a Democrat. As he put it, the
Republicans create all the wealth in the United States, and the Democrats,
incapable of creating wealth or anything else, use politics to try to cut a
slice for themselves.''

As a young pediatrician in Manhattan, he simultaneously studied and developed an
interest in psychiatry. While in private practice, he became a consultant in
pediatric psychiatry to the New York City Health Department. Meeting a cross
section of patients and their families, he began to reconcile the ideas he
gained in psychoanalytical training with what mothers told him about their
children, and he wrote ''Baby and Child Care.'' After serving as a lieutenant
commander in the Navy in World War II, he took what he regarded as a natural
next step: supporting a test ban treaty to save children from radiation. That,
in turn, led to his service as co-chairman of the National Committee for a Sane
Nuclear Policy, known as SANE, in 1962 and his defiant opposition to the Vietnam
War.

He writes: ''I realized that if we didn't have a test ban treaty, more and more
children, not only in America but around the world, would die of cancer and
leukemia or be born with mental and physical defects from fallout radiation. So
I thought that it was a pediatric issue.''

The first Presidential candidate for whom he campaigned was Adlai E. Stevenson,
who supported Federal aid to education; Dr. Spock felt that Stevenson's
opponent, Dwight D. Eisenhower, had demonstrated insincerity about expanding
education. In 1972, he was persuaded to run for the Presidency himself as the
People's Party candidate. His description of the campaign, with his Secret
Service protection, is amusing. But he casts little light on the national and
foreign policy issues in that year of continuing war in Southeast Asia.

Because of his opposition to the bombing in Vietnam and his participation in
antiwar protests, Dr. Spock became a special target of J. Edgar Hoover. When the
F.B.I. Director died, Dr. Spock publicly commented that ''it was a relief to
have this man silenced who had no understanding of the underlying philosophy of
our Government or our Bill of Rights, a man who had such enormous power and used
it to harass individuals with whom he disagreed politically, and who had done as
much as anyone to intimidate millions of Americans out of their right to hear
and judge for themselves all political opinions.''

Dr. Spock calculates that in 25 years he has committed civil disobedience only
about a dozen times. He says such acts still make him feel uncomfortable because
he was brought up to respect the authorities. ''But organizations know that a
well-known, white-haired pediatrician in a three-piece suit getting arrested
will help get the right attention, so they recruit me,'' he writes. ''And if
it's a good cause, my fear of nuclear weapons or my outrage about homeless
people or my anger at racial injustice is greater than my fear of being
arrested.''

So Dr. Spock is still ready to storm the barricades whenever he feels the need
to lend his name and presence to what he believes in. Yet he emerges from this
book with surprisingly few chips on his shoulder. ''Spock on Spock'' is the only
autobiography I know of that talks about toilet training and political training
with equal assurance and consideration. If some of Dr. Spock's opponents think
that at his age it is time for him to take down his flag and begin behaving
himself, he leaves the quiet impression that it is their problem. Somehow,
reading ''Spock on Spock'' is a cheering experience that lends perspective to
the old century and infectious hope for the new decade. Advance
Publicationsd(Pantheon)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Dr. Benjamin Spock (United Press International)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Final Self-Defense

BYLINE: By Teresa Carpenter; Teresa Carpenter is a Pulitzer Prize-winning
reporter for The Village Voice and the author of ''Missing Beauty: A True Story
of Murder and Obsession.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 882 words



TERRIFYING LOVE
Why Battered Women Kill and How Society Responds.
By Lenore E. Walker.
342 pp. New York:
Harper & Row. $19.95.

ONE spring night in 1977, a Michigan housewife named Francine Hughes suffered a
sadistic beating at the hands of her husband. Waiting until he had staggered to
bed in a drunken stupor, she went upstairs and set fire to him, killing him as
he slept. The harrowing years of abuse that led up to that night were chronicled
in ''The Burning Bed,'' a book by Faith McNulty and later a deeply disturbing
television movie starring Farrah Fawcett. As awful as the death of James Hughes
had been, one couldn't help cheering when Francine was acquitted by reason of
temporary insanity. So justice was done. Or was it?

During the decade since the Hughes case, feminists have debated whether the
verdict sent the wrong message. It is not the acquittal that troubled them, but
the premise that a woman who kills an abusive husband must surely be insane. It
bothered Ann Jones, who postulated in her exploratory work, ''Women Who Kill,''
that in light of apathy from police and the courts, homicide sometimes becomes a
woman's only recourse, hence an act of sanity. And it bothers Lenore Walker, a
feminist psychotherapist, who asserts in her new book, ''Terrifying Love,'' that
killing can be a ''normal'' response to an abnormal situation.

As one of the nation's leading proponents of the so-called battered woman
defense, Ms. Walker has appeared as an expert witness at more than 150 murder
trials. In these instances, she has testified that the defendant had a
''reasonable perception of imminent bodily danger'' and therefore acted in
self-defense. Ms. Walker's testimony is controversial. Many of her defendants do
not seem to have perceived imminent danger as an ordinary person might. A case
in point is ''Roberta'' (one of several women in the book whose identities have
been disguised). Roberta, a Colorado woman, endured a battering during which her
husband threatened to tear out her windpipe. When the attack ended, Roberta
walked into the bedroom and loaded her husband's hunting rifle. Then she walked
back into the living room, where he was watching television, and shot him
through the head. A psychiatrist who examined her after the incident attested
that Roberta knew right from wrong, ruling out an insanity plea. The problem
facing the defense was how to explain why Roberta felt the need to defend
herself after the beating had stopped. Lenore Walker testified that the windpipe
threat triggered a flashback to an earlier beating, leading the defendant to
believe she truly was in imminent danger. Roberta was acquitted.

Others of Ms. Walker's defendants used more force than would have seemed
necessary. Joyce Hawthorne, the first battered woman to be acquitted on a plea
of self-defense, shot her husband nine times. Ms. Walker explains that a woman's
reasonable perception of danger may differ from a man's, and she may not be able
to assess the amount of force required to subdue an attacker. Consequently, she
may be perceived as having acted out of anger when, in fact, her excesses were
motivated by fear. WHY don't these women simply leave their abusers behind? The
''bizarre'' behavior exhibited by women like Joyce Hawthorne and Roberta, the
author explains, is similar to that demonstrated by Vietnam veterans who suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorder. In the case of battered women, they feel
increasingly helpless, retreating into unlikely coping strategies they feel will
minimize further abuse. According to Ms. Walker, this explains why a battered
woman prefers to try to control the circumstances she is in rather than face the
unknown.

Ms. Walker's theories are, predictably, anathema to prosecutors. The state's
attorney in the Joyce Hawthorne case argued that allowing Lenore Walker to
testify would mean an ''open season on killing men.'' Ms. Walker has met with
mixed success in the courts; of the 35 or so cases she mentions, she was allowed
to offer testimony in a little over a third. Until recently, her testimony was
often ruled inadmissible because judges did not perceive battered woman syndrome
as a recognized field of psychological study. Ms. Walker, however, reports
improvements in the legal climate in recent years, citing decisions such as one
by the New Jersey Supreme Court, which identified battered women as a ''special
group in special danger'' who were entitled to have an expert witness explain
their perceptions of imminent harm.

''Terrifying Love'' is provocative, but not as powerful as it should be. Its
rhythm is uneven and it is oddly structured, leaving the explanation of law
until the final chapters. Ms. Walker also seems to be preaching to the
converted. Her feminist rhetoric becomes repetitive and is likely to repel the
very readers who should be moved to action -police, prosecutors and - her pet
peeve - ''ignorant, old, white, male judges.'' But despite its shortcomings, the
book makes its point. Battered women are victims of terrorism, living under
conditions that force them to adopt seemingly incomprehensible strategies to
survive. They are indeed a ''special group in special danger,'' and decency
demands they be given special consideration under the law.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Francine Hughes

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Aiming High Under the Big Top

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN CUSHMAN; KATHLEEN CUSHMAN is co-author of ''Cir cus Dreams:
The Making of a Circus Artist,'' to be published next fall by Little, Brown. She
is working on a book about the new circus.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 8, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1750 words


IN Europe, the circus is not just something to take your kids to - grown men and
the government fight about it passionately in the popular press. So when the
Olympics of circus arts is held in Paris every January, the historic Cirque
d'Hiver building becomes the hottest spot in the city on a chilly winter
weekend. Here under its gaudy Baroque dome, the best young circus artists in the
world test themselves in a weeklong competition that can launch a star across
the continents.

Making one's way to the Cirque d'Hiver, on Rue Amelot, is almost as much fun as
watching the show. The neighboring Boulevard Beaumarchais, in the 11th
Arrondissement, specializes in piano and musical instrument shops, photography
equipment stores, and crafts materials for artists. Nearby is the architectural
treasure house of the Marais district and the Place des Vosges, with its
increasing number of top-rated restaurants. It's an easy walk (or two Metro
stops) to the Place de la Bastille, where the construction of Paris's new opera
house, in which performances are scheduled to begin in March, is quickly
gentrifying what was once the furniture quarter.

The circus building itself is as round as a birthday cake, adorned with lights,
flags and decorations. The Festival Mondial du Cirque de Demain (International
Festival of the Circus of Tomorrow) attracts competitors from some 30 countries
on six continents. This year's festival, from Jan. 24 to 31, is the 13th. Most
contestants are under 25 years old (clowns are allowed to be older), and some
compete in a category for children under 14. When their acts combine in a single
show, the circusgoer is treated to a spectrum of artistic styles and
philosophies, from the controlled exoticism of the Far East to the exuberant,
bawdy satire of Latin America.

Most circus, of course, is not competition but pure fun. This international
event, though, has an edge of national rivalry that cuts the cuteness and lifts
it to a much more serious level.

Before last year's competition, in the circular corridor of the Cirque d'Hiver,
onlookers mingled with jugglers, clowns and spangled beauties before the Parade
of Nations around the ring. Coaches hovered close at hand, giving rapid
last-minute encouragement in Russian and Chinese, Hungarian and French and
Spanish. A British boy made nervous circles on his unicycle through the crowd,
warming up; a little American clown hyperventilated from her last-minute
jitters. And the powers of the circus world were there, vying for new acts and
greeting each other - the Big Apple's Paul Binder; the director of Montreal's
Cirque du Soleil; the ancient French circus family of Bouglione, who own, and
live in, the Cirque d'Hiver building and whose geese could be heard cackling in
a rare pause in the commotion.

Adults far outnumbered children in the audience that packed the circular rows of
seats ascending steeply from the ring, and they were a far cry from the
conventional cotton-candy crowd. The director of France's national circus
college made critical asides to his colleagues in a front-row seat; and the
upper tiers were alive with the knowing chatter of the aspiring trapeze artists,
jugglers and clowns who might someday present their own acts before the panel of
judges. Seated high in the jury box above the ring, the judges were a careful
mix of circus elite from the old guard and the new - a few grand old names of
the big top, a few upstarts from across the Atlantic, a sprinkling of luminaries
from the Far East, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.

But only when the show began did the most fascinating currents of modern circus
begin to show themselves to the attentive observer. Here in the intimacy of a
single ring - far from the sprawling spectacle of its three-ring American cousin
- the borders of circus are being pushed beyond entertainment toward art.
Between the predictable balancing acts and buffoonery, a new theatric is
emerging, energizing its audiences and lighting a fire in a new generation of
artists.

Nowhere was this difference between the traditional and the new more apparent
than in the trapeze duo that took one of the '89 festival's three gold medals.
Here were no signs of the conventional, stagy progression of gymnastics figures
punctuated by glamorous poses and toothsome smiles. Instead, to a pulsing Latin
beat, a young Quebec couple, Helene Turcotte and Luc Martin, wearing simple,
unadorned leotards and barely made up, used their single trapeze as a stage for
a seething, erotic aerial tango.

The best entries in the festival, like this one, were those with stories to
tell, with implicit awareness of the ironies and deeper waters of life. A
Vietnamese acrobat balancing on the slack rope held a bayonet, point up, in his
teeth, on its point balancing an AK-47 rifle, and on the rifle's tip a pot of
flowers. And in a hilarious, sardonic Brazilian number, the advances of a macho
Latin lover on enormously tall stilts were resisted and overcome by a blonde
woman on an elongated unicycle. Their fight - also a violent and erotic tango,
but with an entirely different flavor from the Canadians' - won wild approval
from the crowd, but it split the panel of judges down the middle. Too much like
street theater, too unsettling - perhaps, uncomfortably, too much meaning for
the sparkling surface of traditional circus.

Besides such glimpses of the future, the festival allowed a comparison of the
Asian circus tradition and its Western counterpart. The strictly classical style
of Chinese acrobatics was displayed in act after act from Mongolia, China and
Vietnam - exotic, balletic displays of precision and strength. An act on the
Russian barre was the best of these and finished as a gold medal winner - a
young Chinese troupe flying in perfectly placed aerial somersaults to land on a
flexible horizontal pole, and then bounce high into the air again.

The most enchanting act of all demonstrated with vivid poignancy just how such a
tradition is bred. A 5-year-old girl from China, with a stack of delicate china
bowls on her head, ascended to a precarious handstand on the feet of her young
partner, himself in a handstand atop a pyramid of several small tables. She made
it all the way to the top - a tiny, birdlike figure, her legs poised like wings,
her eyes big as saucers - and then, on the way back down, the bowls fell and
shattered in the ring. Trembling, she mounted the delicate pyramid twice more,
with new bowls, before she pulled off the trick; and this time the audience
erupted at her successful dismount.

The prospect of failure, in fact, is one thing that makes this festival far more
than a routine circus outing. Some of these young artists have rarely performed
in front of a real audience; most are just at the start of their careers.

Last year, on the solo trapeze high above the ring, with no nets below, a young
Russian woman attempted a difficult move and fell, dangling in near shock from
her safety belt as we all held our breath to see her go bravely and shakily on.
A Hungarian ensemble balancing atop five teetering cylinders twice rolled too
far and went crashing to the ground. This is real circus, one is painfully
reminded, not the Olympics - time and again a feat must be attempted more than
once before it is achieved or abandoned.

It's fair to say that the sophistication of the clowns in a circus show is a
good test of its quality, and this festival's offerings ranged from classic to
clever to merely cute. Clearly the best - and deservedly the favorite of the
admittedly chauvinistic French audience - was the shy, intellectual bumbler
called Mimosa. Dressed in a rumpled tuxedo, his fair unruly hair springing from
a balding pate, he looked more like a runaway angel than the graduate of one of
France's prestigious engineering schools. Straining, he leaned with all his
strength against a balloon in midair but could not budge it.

In juggling acts, too, an emerging new style was clearly evident. A French
juggler called Boule (bubble) took the stage encased in a giant plastic sphere.
Then, at an elegantly choreographed pace, he stepped from it to play meditative
games with a single crystal ball, created an aerial explosion of smaller balls
emerging from his mouth and ears, and concluded with a stylized series of poses,
one ball balanced in the angles of his flexible limbs.

Contortion and balance, Eastern specialties in circus for centuries, were well
represented by the various Asian nations at the festival, and in general they
were impressive acts, classic in style and superb in execution. It is tempting,
though, to regard these numbers in an entirely different category from the
Western circus as it is evolving today. When the rock beat backing up two Soviet
acrobats sizzled across the ring and the pair leaped with impish glee through
their hand-to-hand balancing routine, the effect was electric, unsettling, above
all new.

Though children are welcome at the festival, the crowd that filled the Cirque
d'Hiver were mostly insiders to the competition - an international mix of fans,
families and circus students with stars in their eyes. You can find few better
windows into the complex ambiguities of European culture than an afternoon, an
evening or even a week at this circus of tomorrow's stars.

Seats for the circus and for dinner

A Week of Shows

Tickets to festival performances (Jan. 24 to 31) are available by writing
Association Francaise pour le Cirque de Demain, 27 Rue de Marignan, 75008 Paris
(telephone, 45.63.51.48 or 48.78.76.00). Each show is different, starting with
the first round on Wednesday and Thursday, progressing to the semifinals on
Saturday and Sunday and the grand finale, including the winning acts on the
second Wednesday. Tickets start at about $18, with discounts available for
students and seniors. The Metro stop for the Cirque d'Hiver is Filles du
Calvaire.

Apres Circus

Few good restaurants are directly at hand near the Cirque d'Hiver. One can dine
at the fin-de-siecle-style Alsatian restaurant Bofinger (on the Place, next to
the Opera), or at La Tour d'Argent, a brasserie (not to be confused with the
Tour d'Argent). Otherwise, try any of these small eateries on the way along
Boulevard Beaumarchais between the circus and the Bastille:

Le Bar a Huitres (no. 35), with a splendid selection of seafood; L'Enclos de
Ninon (19-21); Chez Leon (11-13), moderately priced, with daily specialties
including paella.K. C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of circus performers (pgs. 8 & 9) (Michael Carroll); map of
Paris showing location of Cirque d'Hiver (NYT) (pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SHOPPER'S WORLD;
Brilliant Silks Woven by Hand In Thailand

BYLINE: By WILLIAM WARREN; WILLIAM WARREN is the author of ''Bangkok's
Waterways, an Explorer's Handbook,'' published in October by Ian Lloyd in
Singapore.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 6, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1459 words


''PEEP SHOW,'' a mostly routine 1950 revue produced by Mike Todd, deserves at
least a footnote in theatrical history as probably the only Broadway show ever
to contain a song by a ruling monarch. The number was ''Blue Night,'' written by
Thailand's jazz-loving young King Bhumibol Adulyadej. The show also brought Thai
silk to the New York stage for the first time.

Irene Sharaff, the costume designer for ''Peep Show,'' had discovered the fabric
only a few months before when a photograph in a magazine caught her professional
eye. It showed a weaver in far-off Thailand displaying a selection of
brilliantly colored silks. ''I cut out the picture,'' she later wrote, ''in case
by some lucky chance I would be able to use them.''

''Blue Night'' provided an ideal chance, and Miss Sharaff was able to track down
a limited amount of the material through a New York outlet called Thaibok -
''silk of gold and bronze tones,'' as she recalled, ''deep purple and acid
greens and pinks.'' The next season a far more spectacular opportunity arose
when she was asked to do the costumes for ''The King and I,'' and this time she
was able to get a sumptuous array of vibrant silks specially woven in Thailand,
creating a sensation in the world of high fashion and interior decoration.

The silk for both shows was produced under the supervision of a former American
Army officer, Jim Thompson, who went to Thailand in 1945. Thompson did not
invent Thai silk, as some tourists at the time may have thought when they came
across him hawking pieces in the lobby of the old Oriental Hotel, where he lived
for a few years. Silkmaking is a craft intertwined with Thai history and many
families, particularly in the northeastern part of the country, were weaving
small quantities for personal use when he arrived. But when Miss Sharaff made
her fortuitous discovery, he was in the early stages of transforming the
production of silk into a thriving industry, introducing colorfast chemical dyes
and looms capable of producing longer, wider fabric lengths; within a few years
of ''The King and I,'' Thompson had almost single-handedly made silk Thailand's
best-known exported handcraft.

Thompson disappeared in 1967 while on a vacation in Malaysia, but the company he
founded and the Thai silk industry in general have continued to flourish.
Indeed, they have reached heights Thompson probably never imagined as he made
his daily rounds of weaving families working in ramshackle homes across the
canal from the Thai-style house, now famous, he built on Klong Maha Nag, at the
end of Soi Kasemsong 2, off Rama I Road. Silk prices, too, have reached new
heights, especially at leading outlets, which may dismay some repeat visitors
searching for the bargains they remember from a decade ago.

In 1988 4.9 million feet of silk fabric and 1.5 million silk garments were
exported - the two biggest customers were the United States and Japan - and silk
sold on the booming local tourist market doubled from the amount sold in 1986,
to 39.36 million feet. In Bangkok alone some 500 shops deal mostly in silk, and
there are many others in Chiang Mai, to the north, and such tourist resorts as
Pattaya, to the south, and Phuket, farther south. Of 30 companies that regularly
export, Jim Thompson Thai Silk (as the company is now known) is still the
leader, with 35 percent of the total. The company no longer operates from its
old cottage-industry base; to insure quality, nearly all its silk is now woven
under careful supervision at what is believed to be the biggest hand-weaving
facility in the world - a plant covering 44,280 feet and employing about 1,000
workers, at Pakthong Chai in the northeast.

The current silk boom, however, has brought several headaches. The most serious,
according to Surindr Supasavasdebhandu, the production manager at Jim Thompson,
is the shortage of raw silk. ''Not enough is being produced in Thailand to meet
the demand, both for export and for the local tourist market, which is now
growing by 20 to 30 percent every year,'' he said. ''Moreover, of what is grown,
only about 25 percent is really top quality.''

Some silk yarn, especially that used for the warps - the stronger thread
stretched lengthwise across the looms - has always been bought abroad and woven
with the locally produced yarn. Now, however, imports of both weft and warp
yarn, especialy for weaving lightweight fabrics, have risen sharply, from 588
tons in 1986 to more than 1,000 tons in 1988, mainly from China, Brazil, North
Korea and South Vietnam. (By contrast, the amount of locally produced raw silk
supplied to weaving houses in 1988 amounted to only 300 tons.) At the same time,
production costs have increased sharply. Imported silk yarn that sold for $18 a
pound in 1986 is now $50, chemical dyes have increased by nearly 10 times in the
last eight years and labor costs have almost doubled in the same period.

Various steps are being taken to relieve these difficulties, particularly the
supply of raw silk. The Jim Thompson company, for example, has entered an
agreement with a group from China to bring technicians to help on mulberry
cultivation, silk egg production and other steps in the process; staff members
will also be sent to the China Sericulture Research Institute at Jiangsu for
intensive training. Another big exporter, the Chun Thai Silk Group, is offering
courses to farmers who want to take up silk production and providing other kinds
of help. Similar assistance is being given by the Thai Government, Kasetsart
(Agricultural) University and a project started by Queen Sirikit. According to
Mr. Surindr, within 10 years Thailand should be able to produce all the silk it
needs and perhaps even begin exporting yarn. Thai silk costs a third to a
quarter less in Thailand than it does in the United States, but the day of the
$10 top-quality necktie and the $9 cushion cover is past; neckties at Jim
Thompson now sell for $19.50, and cushion covers range from $15.50 to $32,
depending on the weight and design. Many smaller shops, it is true, do offer
much lower prices, but the buyer often loses on such bargains, which may prove a
mixture of silk and synthetic threads passed off as the real thing, loose weaves
that look good but don't hold up or material entirely woven of imported yarn and
lacking the lustrous sheen and texture characteristic of true Thai silk.

To minimize such risks, an experienced local shopper advises sticking to shops
that have their own label, as opposed to those that merely claim the silk is
made in Thailand. A shop with its own logo usually has been around for a while
and has a reputation to protect.

Thrifty homeowners who come expecting to save on expensive designs they see at
decorators' shops in the United States are likely to be disappointed. Thompson,
for example, makes a special export line that cannot be sold locally; the
well-known designer Jack Lenor Larsen also has an exclusive collection, woven to
his specifications, that can only be bought through his company in the United
States.

Nevertheless, many handsome designs are being made and sold in the country and,
particularly on large purchases of heavier-weight silks for home furnishings,
savings can more than justify a trip to Thailand.

Jim Thompson (9 Suriwong Road, telephone 234-4900; open daily from 9 A.M. to
6:30 P.M.) is still the pacesetter for the industry, with correspondingly higher
prices.

Lightweight silk at the shop is now $15 to $18.75 a yard, while light
heavyweights range from $22.25 to $35, depending on the design (the most
expensive are tie-dyed Ikats) and extra-heavyweights (six ply) are $27 to $37.

Luncheon sets for six are $106, gold-brocade stoles range from $72 to $432, and
a multicolored cosmetic case is $8.40. In the extensive ready-to-wear section
caftans are $120, men's shirts start at $80 and long kimonos are $160. The
company will also make clothes to order, copying models if desired.

If you go

Despite its fame, Jim Thompson's is not the only game in town. The following are
also worth checking for both silk yardage and made-up items:

Anita Thai Silk, 294/4-5 Silom Road; telephone 234-2481. Open Monday to
Saturday, 9 A.M. to 7 P.M.  Cushion covers are $11, lightweight silk starts at
$15 a yard, and heavyweight silk starts at $22 a yard.

Design Thai, 304 Silom Road; 235-1553. Open Monday to Saturday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.

Cushion cover is $16; light and heavyweight silk is $24.50 a yard and men's
longsleeved shirts are $71.

Choisy, 9/25 Suriwong Road; 233-7794. Open Monday to Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.,
Saturday until noon.

Men's neckties are $12, a long kimono is $80, a women's long-sleeved blouse is
$36.

Long evening dresses start at $200.    W. W.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of silk garments (Photos by Mangkorn Khamreongwong) (pgs. 6 &
20)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 9, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words




SNOW SCULPTURE

The Norwalk Recreation Department is hoping for a white winter to get its snow
sculpture contest out of the doldrums. Four years ago, when the event began,
''we got some entries,'' said Mike Mocciae, the city's recreation supervisor,
''but for the past two years it's been a flop because there was no snow.''

The contest begins New Year's Day and continues to the last snowfall. Sculptures
may be made by a single individual, by 2 to 14 people, and by 15 or more. When
the piece is completed, the sculptors must call the recreation department at
854-7806 to request a judge, who will take pictures before the thing melts.

Judging is based on creativity, originality, significance, how much snow the
sculptors had to work with, how much work went into the piece and the ages of
the sculptors.

Trophies and certificates for first, second and third place are awarded in the
spring, using the photographs for reference. There are no rules concerning added
color, fabric or other materials, but the contest is limited to Norwalk
residents. The recreation department will keep a list for spectators who would
like to drive around and see the work.

SICILIAN PUPPETS

The Macri-Weill Sicilian Puppet Theater, a far cry from Punch and Judy shows,
features 80-pound puppets standing four to five feet tall, manipulated with
steel rods from a bridge six feet above the stage. A current production of ''The
Taking of Jerusalem,'' based on a 17th-century poem, ''Gerusalemme Liberata'' by
Torquato Tasso, may be seen at 8 P.M. Friday and Saturday and on Jan. 12 and 13,
at the Puppet House Theater, 128 Thimble Island Road in Stony Creek.

A general outline of the plot, based on the battles of the Crusades, is followed
by the puppeteers as they improvise dialogue to accompany the movements. One rod
controls the head and torso, another the sword, and a heavy string moves the
left hand bearing a shield.

Steel-reinforced hardwood figures covered with hemp and canvas become knights
outfitted in hand-embossed brass armor, Moors in flowing robes, kings, wizards,
heroes, jesters and villains, all elaborately costumed.

Salvatore Macri is a third-generation puppeteer whose father brought the last 50
remaining puppets to the United States from a collection of 300 built at the
turn of the century in Italy. Tickets are $8. Call 773-8080 for reservations.

VIETNAM MEMORIAL

A two-part traveling exhibit organized by the New York State Vietnam Memorial
Project may be seen in the gallery of the Lyman Center for the Performing Arts
at Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven from Wednesday to Jan. 29.

''Vietnam: A Photographic Essay of the Undeclared War in Southeast Asia'' is a
display of 64 photographs taken by military personnel and journalists who died
in the war or are listed as missing.

The second part, called ''Vietnam: Fragments and Images; The Brutal Illusion
Revisited'' is the work of Robert Bracci of Trumbull and Richard Dana Kuchta of
Stratford, artists who were members of the United States Army First Air Cavalry
in Vietnam.

Using paper, foil, wire, thread, putty and other materials, they have fashioned
models of war scenes out of their own experience. One depicts a soldier giving
blood to another soldier in the field, titled ''Medevac to Cam Rinh,'' and
another, called ''Old Soldiers Never Die, Young Ones Do'' has four soldiers
cradling a dead buddy in his poncho as they carry him through a swamp.

The gallery is open from 8:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. weekdays and noon to 5 P.M.
weekends. Call 397-4225 or 397-4329 for more information.

FIRST NIGHT IN STAMFORD

First Night in Stamford, now in its third year, will have some statewide
competition for the first time from three other cities: Hartford, New Haven and
Danbury.

Buttons that were $5 to Dec. 25 are now $8 in Stamford, $6 in New Haven and
still $5 in Hartford and Danbury. They are available at numerous downtown sites
in all four cities and they will admit the wearers to most attractions.

Some of the highlights among the 180 events in 35 places in Stamford are a
costume parade at 3 P.M. and a countdown to midnight with video and live
performances beginning at 11:30 P.M.

The Xavier Cugat Orchestra will play for dancing in the Town Center from 8 to
11:30 P.M., and an Aquacade in the Y.W.C.A. pool at 5 and 6 P.M. features Sarah
and Karen Josephson, Olympic silver medalists.

A pair of new plays by Charles Leipart of the Westport Theater Workshop will be
presented from 7 to 11:30 P.M. at the First Presbyterian Church Hall, and the
premiere of ''Harmonius,'' a science-fiction instrumental work for children by
Duilio Dobrin will be performed by the Children's Ensemble of the Chamber
Orchestra of Connecticut at 4, 5 and 6 P.M. in the Old Town Hall. Mr. Dobrin
will conduct.

One of a few extra-charge events is a performance by Josh White Jr., the folk
singer, at 10:30 P.M. in the Palace Theater. Tickets are $5.

IN NEW HAVEN

In New Haven, artists will exhibit and performers will participate in more than
100 music, theater and dance events from 2 P.M. to midnight at more than 20
sites from the Chapel and College Street theater district to the arts complex on
Audubon Street, all within walking distance. The green is the focal point,
marked by a 40-foot-high inflatable sculpture, and fireworks will be displayed
at 11:45 P.M.

IN DANBURY

Mary Ann Freed, an organzier of the Danbury First Night, believes that the four
cities will not compete with each other ''if each one stays within reasonable
limits. When they get too big and try to draw from other towns, people are
disappointed because many events are so crowded they can't get in.''

Spyro Gyra will perform at 7 and 9:30 P.M. in the Danbury High School with an
extra charge of $10; admission to performances of the Paul Winter Consort will
cost $7.50 at the Ives Auditorium of Western Connecticut State U. at 7 and 9:30
P.M., and the Clark Eno Orchestra will play for dancing at the Elks Hall at 8:30
and 10:30 P.M. The extra charge is $5. Gordon of Sesame Street will perform for
children at 3, 5 and 6 P.M. in the Elks Hall, and a puppet show is scheduled at
3:30, 4:30 and 6 P.M. in Immanuel Lutheran Church, free of charge, as are dozens
of other events. Just before midnight, fireworks on a nearby mountain, will be
visible throughout downtown.

IN HARTFORD

First Night in Hartford starts at 2 P.M. with a children's festival that
continues to 6 P.M. A procession of giant puppets and costumed individuals at 6
P.M. ends at the Fox Gate of Bushnell Park where a fireworks display, especially
made for children, will be seen at 6:45 P.M.

Continuous jazz at Union Station features Rob Silvan and his Fine Line
traditional jazz group at 8, 10 and 11 P.M., and the Big Easy Jazz Band at 7 and
9 P.M. Rosenshontz, the music and comedy duo, will give a family concert at 4
and 7 P.M. in Bushnell Hall, for which there is an extra charge of $5, and a
gala ball will be held in the newly opened J. P. Morgan Hotel from 9 P.M. to 1
A.M. Tickets are $125 a person and proceeds will go to the support of emergency
shelters for the homeless in Hartford. $90ELEANOR CHARLES

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DINING OUT;
Memorable Meals: A Critic's Choices

BYLINE: By PATRICIA BROOKS

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 17, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1380 words


WHILE 1989 was not a banner year for discovering restaurants rated excellent,
there was one clear winner in that league. La Provence (86 Washington Street,
South Norwalk, 855-8958) combines a comfortable decor inspired by the south of
France, with food to match. The restaurant, operated by two graduates of the Guy
Savoy restaurant in Paris, features some of the most original and delicious fare
to be found in Connecticut in years. Among especially memorable dishes were a
savoy cabbage salad with Roquefort, pecans and bacon; sauteed chicken Moroccan
style, and shrimp and sea scallops sauteed with garlic, parsley and petite
French green lentils. Desserts were uniformly ambrosial. What makes La Provence
all the more remarkable are the moderate prices: a three-course prix-fixe dinner
was $17.

If an excellent rating proved elusive, there were at least 17 very good
restaurants, out of more than 90 visited in 1989. The very good restaurants fell
into four categories of cuisine: five were New American, five were Italian, four
were Asian, two were French and one was Middle Eastern.

What has been widely labeled New American cooking is essentially the combination
of fresh, indigenous ingredients with light, nouvelle-style cooking techniques.
A knowledgeable practitioner is Carol Peck's Restaurant (373 Litchfield Road,
Route 202, New Milford, 355-1310; dinner only, Wednesday through Sunday). The
restaurant is in an old-fashioned farmhouse, with a seasonal menu that changes
weekly; some delectable choices included beets in a Belgian endive, Gorgonzola
and walnut salad; roast goose with braised celery and chestnuts, and mocha and
chocolate mousse dacquoise.

Francine's (7 Sconset Square, Westport, 454-9531; dinner only, Wednesday through
Sunday) also does a commendable job of melding fresh ingredients with culinary
expertise in an intimate, relaxed setting. Dishes like onion tart, eggplant with
arugula salad, weakfish in shallot sauce, tuna in a basil sauce, and jumbo
shrimp with caramelized garlic all had the artful simplicity of food prepared by
a gifted home cook.

The instant success of L'Abbee (64 Main Street, New Canaan, 972-6181) means
quick expansion. In February the tiny tearoom and retail food store will move
next door into the roomy quarters of the old Veterans Hall and add a proper
dining room. Meanwhile, devotees of L'Abbee's salads and desserts will find
them, along with muffins (hot from the oven) at breakfast, excellent main
courses at lunch, and apricot scones and brewed tea or hazelnut coffee at
teatime.

At Caper's (265 Federal Road, Route 7, Brookfield, 775-1625), the menu features
California-inspired dishes in a breezy, attractive setting. Among good choices
were lime-ginger chicken, fresh yellowfin tuna in wasabe sauce, grilled duckling
on a bed of braised red cabbage, and chicken stuffed with ricotta, spinach and
prosciutto .

Arizona Flats (3001 Fairfield Avenue, Bridgeport, 334-8300) is a lively
restaurant, done in soft desert pastels, punctuated with Southwestern art and
artifacts. But the real art is in the kitchen, which draws on the Spanish,
Mexican and Indian influences of Arizona and New Mexico, regional ingredients
and a deft New American cooking style revealed in dishes like chilies rellenos
(Anaheim peppers stuffed with herbed goat cheese, rolled in blue cornmeal and
lightly fried), Navajo blankets (enchiladas with chicken and cilantro cream
sauce or beef with juniper chili sauce) and shrimp Azteca (shrimp in a fiery
chili sauce).

This year Italian restaurants seemed to combine traditional dishes with the
flair of nuova cucina. This was demonstrated with particular style at Centro
(1435 Post Road, Fairfield, 255-1210), a place with an airy, witty decor, the
style of a trattoria and a menu with a variety of smaller dishes. Their pizzas
and pastas make first-rate light meals. Centro now serves lunch as well as
dinner, but continues its unfortunate custom of not taking reservations.

Doc's (Route 45 and Flirtation Avenue, New Preston, 868-9415; in winter, lunch
on Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, and dinner Thursday through Sunday) is a
prime example of how far the finest ingredients, laced with culinary know-how,
can go. In a simple frame house facing Lake Waramaug, Doc's offers fried polenta
with Gorgonzola, prosciutto bruschetta, sausage and kale soup, and a series of
pizzas and pasta dishes. The crusty, herb-scented pane pugliese should not be
missed.

Ziti's (528 Main Street, Middletown, 346-3217), a Wesleyan University hangout
that serves an abundance of good seafood, pasta and pizza dishes,has its own
style and signature. The restaurant is under the same ownership as an adjacent
Mexican restaurant, La Boca, and the spicier seasonings of the second have found
their way into Ziti's in at least one memorable dish: ravioli with pine nuts in
jalapeno pesto and marinara sauce. Lobster and leeks with a fresh tomato and
saffron sauce was another in a string of dishes fondly remembered.

Sunrise Pizza Cafe (211 Liberty Square, East Norwalk, 838-0166; no reservations)
is a newcomer that gracefully manages to link the oldtime pizza parlor concept
with the new excitement of pizzas with unusual ingredients. Particularly choice
pizzas included a pesto with ricotta, two vegetables and melted mozzarella; a
nacho with ground beef, sausage and a ranchero sauce of Cheddar and Monterey
Jack cheese, tomato, onion and jalapenos; and a dish of Italian sausage, slices
of apple, leeks, Gorgonzola and mozzarella.

On revisiting Bella Italia (Padanaram Road, Danbury, 743-3828) after a hiatus of
seven years, we were pleased to find the cheerful family place continues to
offer an array of hearty and tasty Italian dishes that range from eggplant
Sicilian style to fettuccine Alfredo, from risotto to a filet of salmon Grenoble
style.

Among the best of Asian restaurants visited this year was Meera (227 Summer
Street, Stamford, 975-0479), a handsome Indian restaurant with many good dishes
to recommend: tangdi kebab (chicken legs marinated in yogurt and spices), a cold
salad called chicken chat, chicken tikka masala (in a spicy sauce), fish
simmered in curry, ginger, garlic, onion and coconut) and cubes of cheese with
sauteed bell pepper, onions, tomato and spices).

Little Kitchen of New Canaan (64 Main Street, New Canaan, 972-6881) uses minimal
space to provide a serenely pretty backdrop for dishes from Indonesia, Vietnam,
Malaysia and China. The restaurant is at its best with Sichuan dumplings, crispy
eggplant pancakes, green jade chicken, prawns Bali style and lamb with basil.

Shanghai-style cuisine is a rarity in Connecticut, but at Tiger Bowl (1872 Post
Road East, Westport, 255-1799) we found pan-fried noodles Shanghai-style, along
with pleasing versions of sesame chicken, eggplant and shrimp, and sliced duck
with scallions and hoisin sauce.

Adding to New Haven's ethnic versatility is Saigon City (1180 Chapel Street,
865-5033), a bustling, modestly decorated storefront where dishes like lime
chicken, Saigon noodle soup, roasted duck, spicy beef curry, ginger squid and
lemon grass chicken are popular.

In 1989 the best French restaurants were not new but in altered states.
Stonehenge (Route 7, Ridgefield, 438-6511), which was reopened after a fire, has
a new decor and configuration but a comfortingly familiar country French menu.
Wild mushroom crepe, warm duck salad with spinach, and veal loin with foie gras
and morel sauce were dishes of seamless perfection - though a new menu has
probably supplanted them by now.

What once was Le Coq Hardi metamorphosed into La Cave (Big Shop Lane,
Ridgefield, 431-3060). The sophisticated country look is the same, but the menu
is now a heartier bistro style, still prepared with a knowing and creative hand.
Warm goat cheese salad, sauteed wild mushrooms and veal scaloppine with
mushrooms were all excellent as were the desserts.

Finally, but by no means the least, is Sesame Seed (68 West Wooster Street,
Danbury, 743-9850), which is housed on two floors of an old frame building. One
can feast quite inexpensively on Greek, Middle Eastern and vegetarian dishes
that include stuffed squash, baba gannouj, spinach pie, fava beans in a tahini
and lemon sauce, kafta and kibbee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM
FILM VIEW: Oliver Stone Takes Aim At the Viewer's Viscera

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words


THE CROWDS LINING UP AT THE Ziegfeld are liable to be a lot less festive than
ordinary holiday moviegoers, even those on their way to see a big film whose
star is surely Oscar bait. In fact, they're apt to be experiencing serious
apprehension. ''Born on the Fourth of July'' is a film with a painful subject,
and it's the work of a director extremely adept at inflicting pain. It's clear
that Oliver Stone isn't one to regard moviegoing as a passive experience. Part
of his method is to make audiences squirm. Mr. Stone, who sends his actors to
boot camp as a means of preparing them to play soldiers, clearly believes in the
power of experience to hammer home ideas that might otherwise remain abstract.
All of his films, even ''Wall Street'' (with the soul-searching comeuppance it
affords Charlie Sheen's ambitious young stockbroker) and certainly the jittery,
volatile ''Salvador,'' the frighteningly ominous ''Platoon'' and the
vituperative ''Talk Radio,'' are harrowing to watch. And the anxiety they
generate in audiences is a significant part of what makes these films work. Mr.
Stone presents a visceral experience that greatly overshadows his films'
rational side and at times even eclipses it completely.

Because of this, it's easy to fault Mr. Stone's films for their sheer
hot-bloodedness, for their eagerness to manipulate and their utter disregard of
quieter, more considered tactics. It's also easy to resent feeling so thoroughly
pummeled, pounded and overwhelmed by what is, at least nominally, a work of
popular entertainment. And it's particularly easy, in light of such responses,
to overlook how terrifically expert Mr. Stone has become in achieving these
effects. In ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' Mr. Stone reaches out instantly to
his audience's gut-level emotions and sustains a walloping impact for two and a
half hours.

What he achieves in this way is not a considered portrait of Ron Kovic, the
young man who left Long Island an eager patriot and came home an embittered,
paralyzed Vietnam veteran. ''Born on the Fourth of July'' is much bigger than
that; it's a film drawn on a very broad canvas, a roiling, furiously turbulent
work of social history.

Although Mr. Kovic's personal ordeal and Tom Cruise's fiery performance occupy
center stage in the movie, and although the film addresses every intimate aspect
of Mr. Kovic's struggle, it isn't this private story that makes the film such an
emotional powerhouse. It is Mr. Stone's ability to surround his central figure
with huge, vivid tableaux that wrenchingly depict the progress of a nation; his
chilling vision of the forces that shape American notions of manhood, and the
consequences they may bring; and his way of grafting sights, sounds and
sensations together so breathlessly, making the whole film hurtle forward at
such a breakneck pace.

''Somebody once wrote, 'Hell is the impossibility of reason,' '' the young hero
of ''Platoon'' writes in one of his letters home. If that's so, then much of
''Born on the Fourth of July'' is intentionally hellish, and brilliantly so.
Reason simply does not apply to the kinds of devastating contrasts with which
the film bombards its audience, like the sight of Mr. Cruise resplendent in a
marine's full-dress uniform, emptying his catheter bag into a toilet before he
appears in a Fourth of July parade.

Elsewhere in the film, a fresh and youthful-looking Ron Kovic sits paralyzed
among fellow hospital patients and then slowly, miraculously rises and begins to
walk and then run - only to have this dream interrupted by the image of a
red-faced, unkempt Mr. Kovic howling with rage because hospital attendants have
left him upside-down for two hours, staring at his own vomit.

Some of Mr. Stone's hardest-hitting images are as cruel and physical as this:
the snapping of a bone, the emptying of bedpan slop, the silence that halts the
terrifying racket of battle when Mr. Kovic is shot. (The tiny gurgle that he
emits here is far more horrifying than any scream.) But many of the film's most
unsettling images are more indirect in their power to disturb. The expansive,
dreamlike suburbia in which Ron grows up and to which he returns home a stranger
has been so eerily rendered that Mr. Stone's blue skies and smiling faces recall
''Blue Velvet'' in its ability to suggest a placid exterior masking a nightmare.
In this setting, even the sight of a cheerleader can be made to look sinister,
and it has been.

Are Mr. Stone's overpowering tactics truly appropriate to his material here?
Does ''Born on the Fourth of July'' really need a 360-degree circling shot
around young Ron Kovic working as a stock boy at the A. & P.? It's easy to argue
that such touches are excessive; perhaps they are. But they've been used with
great skill, and they are vital to the groundswell of emotion that this huge,
overwhelming film is able to generate.

It's more than an hour into ''Born on the Fourth of July'' before two characters
ever sit down to have a quiet, thoughtful conversation without the attendant
excitement of hand-held camerawork, shocking transitions, ironically chosen pop
music, vigorous editing or John Williams's majestically mournful score. ''Born
on the Fourth of July'' simply isn't about talk. It isn't about reason. It's
about American popular culture as a source of tenets that Ron Kovic and many
others once thought they could live by, and about the rage and disappointment
Mr. Kovic experienced once those tenets fell apart. When, in the film's most
agonizing scene, Ron rails in drunken anguish at his mother about God, country
and his own lost virility, as if these things were interconnected, he sounds
overwrought and irrational. But in some way he's also expressing a fundamental
truth, a truth that the film makes hit home. Tom Cruise hasn't heretofore seemed
a deeply intuitive actor, and he doesn't seem like one now. The tremendous
effectiveness of his performance in this film is as much a function of who he is
as what he does. A perfect physical embodiment of health and strength; a
reserved, polite figure with a soft voice and gentle manner; an eager hard
worker. The waste and betrayal of these shining virtues, as conveyed by Mr.
Cruise's very presence, is a dreadful thing. Its impact lingers long after
''Born on the Fourth of July'' is over.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: At far left, Michael Douglas in ''Wall Street''; Tom Berenger,
restrained by Ivan Kane in ''Platoon''; and, above, the wheelchair-bound Tom
Cruise, comforted by Raymond Barry in ''Born on the Fourth of July'' - harrowing
to watch; James Woods in ''Salvador'' - Anxiety helps make it work. (Page 19)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

More Americans Are Killing Each Other

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words


After a hopeful but apparently transitory pause early in the decade, Americans
are killing each other at an increasing rate.

Although national statistics lag months behind the actual deaths, reports from
several major cities at the close of 1989 indicate record numbers of homicides
and surprising agreement among law-enforcement officials that criminal disregard
for life seemed to be growing. The Federal Bureau of Investigation estimates
that the national homicide rate increased 5 percent this year over last.

Experts predict that continuing wars among drug dealers combined with easy
availability of more lethal weapons, greater social acceptance of violence and
some demographic changes will lead to further significant increases in killings
well into the new decade.

''The high murder rate in many of our nation's cities can be traced directly to
turf wars over the marketplace for such new drugs as crack,'' said Jim Fyfe, a
criminologist at American University.

Every 25 Minutes

Last year, 20,680 Americans were slain - one killing every 25 minutes. That was
up from 20,100, one every 26 minutes in 1987. Complete national figures for 1989
will not be released for months. But many individual cities report record
numbers of killings this year, generally attributing more than half to drugs.
Chicago has reported 725 slayings, compared with 660 last year; San Jose,
Calif., jumped to 49 from 39, Philadelphia to 489 from 402, Los Angeles to 817,
from 736 and Atlanta to 242 from 219. New Orleans surpassed its 10-year-old
record of 240 two weeks ago.

New York City killings totaled 1,773 as of Nov. 24, 28 more than in the same
time in the record-breaking year of 1988, when 1,876 people were killed. That is
about one slaying every five hours.

The nation's capital, which reported only 197 killings as recently as 1986, had
the country's highest homicide rate, 69 per 100,000, in 1988, and is expected to
have this year's highest rate, as well. In 1989, as of last week, Washington had
tallied 430 homicides, compared with 369 in 1988.

Drugs and gang activity were the major causes. ''The struggle over turf
continues,'' said Steve Rickman, director of the Statistical Analysis Center.
Even adjacent Prince Georges County, Md., registered its second straight record
year for killings.

Increases in Smaller Cities

While some cities like Detroit or Denver reported static figures or slight
declines, many other smaller cities showed clear increases. In the first six
months this year, Charlotte, N.C., had 29 killings, up from 21; Cleveland had
75, up from 66; Fort Worth had 52, up from 44; Oakland, Calif., 63, up from 47;
Phoenix 63, up from 41; St. Louis 76, up from 66, and Toledo, Ohio, 24, up from
10.

''People are still killing each other for the same old reasons: envy, greed,
revenge,'' said Lieut. David Kane of the homicide division in Milwaukee, which
has had 115 new cases so far this year. ''But the factors that lead to that are
more varied with the drug situation.''

Violent death has been a theme of United States history, which began with a
bloody revolution, moved through a turbulent rural frontier era and a civil war
and went on into a predominantly urban style of living replete with
disadvantaged minorities. Next door in Canada, barely 500 killings occur each
year among its 26 million citizens.

What is different today is the scale of killing. In its busiest year the Boot
Hill cemetery in rough-and-tumble Dodge City, Kan., welcomed only 20
gunfighters. Now, 50 percent more Americans die at the hands of other Americans
than died under enemy fire in the worst year of hostilities in Vietnam.

A Growing Viciousness

And many police departments report a growing viciousness now in slayings. Today,
Lieutenant Kane said, ''People want to solve their problems right away and they
don't worry about the consequences. It's an instant gratification of anger.
Years ago, guys would duke it out with their fists. Now they whip out their
Magnum and start firing.''

''Before,'' added Richard Knudten, a Marquette University sociologist, ''even
among thieves there was a certain code of honor. Now these controls have
disappeared. And whatever you can get is what goes.''

Comdr. William Booth of the Los Angeles Police Department said: ''Most of these
street gangsters are not mental giants. They can be offended by a whole lot of
things like the color red. Or they kill out of plain old boredom.''

After 1980, the country's most murderous year, with 23,040 killings, the nation
experienced a slow but steady decline from 10.2 killings per 100,000 population
that year to 7.9 in 1984 and 1985. The decline, officials say, was due mostly to
the drop in the numbers of people in their teens and 20's. But then the rate
began to climb to last year's 8.4.

Although the rate has fluctuated, many characteristics of American murders
remain standard. Six of every 10 killings involve guns, making firearms now the
eighth leading cause of death, after diabetes but ahead of liver disease and
arteriosclerosis, according to the Federal Centers for Disease Control.

Most victims are killed by someone they know. More killings happen in summer,
when people are outdoors more. Most killers are men, as are most victims; an
overwhelming majority of victims (63 percent) and killers (72 percent) are
between the ages of 18 and 39, the F.B.I. says.

Detectives continue to solve most homicides, although in some cities the number
has fallen well below the usual 80 percent as fear of retaliation from drug
dealers grows among witnesses.

Experts attribute the increase in killings to a complex variety of factors that
seem likely to contribute to further increases in violence. Most often cited is
drug use and its culture, including the tendency of newer drugs to cause
aggression among addicts and the potential for huge profits by organized gangs
of dealers.

'Knock Each Other Off'

''Groups servicing the illegal desires of society,'' Professor Fyfe said, ''have
traditionally been very oppressed minorities: the Irish, Sicilians, Jews. You
don't find lots of Norwegian gangs. But you do have gangs of blacks, Hispanics,
Chinese. They knock each other off in territorial disputes until the surviving
smarter ones learn they get less official heat when there's less killing.''

James A. Fox, a criminology professor at Northeastern University, adds that
another cause is the arrival in their teen-age years of the babies of the baby
boomers. ''The good news is there will be more baby sitters for some years,'' he
said. ''The bad news is that the teens and 20's are the most crime-prone years
in our society. There will be more crime because there will be more potential
criminals.''

Adolescents, he noted, typically pay little attention to the consequences of
their actions. And with the decline of socializing institutions like the church,
the family and the coherent neighborhood, there are fewer tools to teach morals
and responsibility at a time when graphic portrayals of violence are common
throughout society.

Professor Fox, who has compiled computer records of homicides throughout the
80's, also notes some changes hidden within the larger statistics. He found that
beginning in 1986 the percentage of black victims increased each year. He
attributes this to two factors: the arrival of heavy crack use in inner-city
areas and the earlier emergence of the baby boom's babies in black families,
which typically begin having children earlier than white parents do. ''The white
baby boomers' babies will start hitting their teens in the early 90's,'' he
explained. ''And we'll see their crime rate grow, too.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs showing figures of total figures of homicides, the scenes of the
crimes, the weapons used, the victims and the drug factor from '80-'87 (NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Resistance Stirs Among Boat People

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Dec. 30


With the next forcible return of Vietnamese boat people expected within two
weeks, Hong Kong officials disclosed today that refugees inside detention camps
here have drawn up resistance plans that include setting fires, arming
themselves with homemade weapons and taking hostages.

Officials got a preview of the opposition they may face when they tried to
search a camp for weapons on Friday. Boat people there, fearing that they were
being rounded up for repatriation, stoned the police, jammed the locks on the
camp gates and set huge bonfires at both entrances. A camp official said the
boat people continued to resist even when warned that the police ''might be
obliged to open fire on them.''

Officials said the Vietnamese began preparing to resist the police after the
first repatriation on Dec. 12, a step that prompted wide international
criticism. Hong Kong, which has 56,000 boat people, fewer than 13,000 of whom
are considered refugees awaiting resettlement in a third country, hopes to
repatriate tens of thousands of Vietnamese over the next few years.

Knives Made From Bed Slats

When the police arrived on Friday at the Chi Ma Wan camp, Vietnamese armed with
knives made from metal bed slats lined up along the camp's wire fence, poking
their weapons through the mesh. Some hauled out pots of water and soaked towels
and scarves to use as masks when the police threatened to use tear gas.

Officials said resistance was so fierce that before they could gain control of
the camp and enter to conduct their search, scores of tear gas cannisters were
fired and hundreds of extra police were called in, some of them armed with
shotguns. The police said 14 Vietnamese and 26 guards and police officers were
wounded.

A top official in charge of guarding the camp, I. K. Bhagat, said once the
weapons search was completed and the Vietnamese could see that no forced returns
were planned, ''life immediately returned to normal, and everyone had their
evening meals, children were running around playing.''

Today, the authorities said the camp, on an island near Hong Kong Island, was
quiet. But in a news conference today, at which some of the 700 homemade weapons
confiscated at the camp were displayed, Mr. Bhagat and Barry Deegan, a top
police official, painted a dark picture of mounting resistance inside detention
centers. The Hong Kong Government does not permit reporters inside the camps.

Almost Daily Marches

Mr. Deegan, deputy regional commander of the Royal Hong Kong Police Force, and
the man who outlined the tactics the Vietnamese were believed to be planning,
said ''all we have feared came to pass, except the hostage-taking.'' He said
that since the first group of relatively docile Vietnamese was sent home, there
have been almost daily marches and demonstrations inside the detention centers
and ''tensions are high.''

According to Mr. Bhagat, assistant commissioner of the Correctional Services
Department, intelligence reports from inside Chi Ma Wan said that many of the
3,200 boat people there were ''manufacturing a large number of weapons and
storing them because of the fear they would be repatriated to Vietnam.'' He
added that the Vietnamese ''said they would use these weapons against any forced
repatriation.''

The camp, which houses the largest number of Vietnamese ''screened out'' as
non-refugees and thus candidates for forced repatriation, is normally patrolled
by 15 to 24 prison guards, half of whom are women.

Mr. Bhagat said the guards often see the Vietnamese fashioning weapons now but
are afraid to take them away, adding: ''The boat people say to them, 'We will
only use these when the police come for us.' ''

Relief workers and prison guards inside the camps have said that each night the
Vietnamese go to sleep to the steady grinding sounds of metal being sharpened
into weapons. And they said many Vietnamese now sleep in their shoes so they can
run if the police come to send them back.

International Criticism

The first group of Vietnamese to be sent back to Hanoi against their will was
made up of 51 boat people, most of them women and children, who were put aboard
a plane under heavy guard in a secret, middle-of-the-night operation. Officials
said that while more than 100 police and prison officers were involved in
escorting the 51, no physical force was used and the operation went smoothly.

Still, the forced return of the boat people prompted international criticism,
especially from the United States. Moreover, Vietnam, edgy and concerned about
world opinion, said it would accept boat people who were made to return, but not
if any physical force was used against them.

Relief officials today said that distinction was clearly understood by the
Vietnamese in camps here. ''They know now they have nothing to lose, and they
are willing to fight,'' said a relief worker, who asked not to be named. ''They
are going to resist any way they can.''

When the police finally took control of Chi Ma Wan and began a hut-to-hut search
for weapons, they encountered ''a large group of hysterical females'' who were
so upset by the idea the police were coming to send them home, they ripped off
all their clothes. The wailing and mass hysterics ''proved so bad, we had to
leave hut No. 7 and search it at the very last,'' Commander Deegan said.

Mr. Bhagat said he envisioned more violence as the repatriations continued, but
refused to discuss what measures would be needed to control the Vietnamese. A
senior Government official, who asked not to be named, said that the riots and
resistance ''changed nothing,'' and that the repatriations would continue.

He said the authorities would simply seek out docile Vietnamese and leave ''the
tough nuts'' for later. The official refused to speculate on what might happen
should the more militant Vietnamese try to violently block the police from
sending back the less militant, saying, ''Let's cross that bridge when we come
to it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Hong Kong officials have disclosed that Vietnamese refugees in
detention camps have armed themselves with homemade weapons. A search on Friday
yielded several such weapons, displayed on the table, and resulted in a clash
between the police and refugees in which an officer's shield was broken. (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 325 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 910 words




International    3-17
American troops made a ''screw-up'' when they searched the Nicaraguan
ambassador's residence in Panama City, President Bush conceded. The Nicaraguan
government ordered 20 U.S. diplomats to leave Nicaragua within 72 hours in
protest.    1

U.S. versions of search of embassy residence differ     6

U.S. denies it has top Noriega aide    6

Case against Noriega has not been bolstered by the invasion     8

Military analysis: The U.S. invasion of Panama on such a large a scale increased
the number of casualties and possibily forfeited the opportunity to seize
General Noriega.    1

Rumania's intelligentsia emerged this week from decades spent in the darkness of
Ceausescu's shadow and found itself groping for words.    1

In a dictator's palace, lavish echoes of power     14

The Soviet republic of Moldavia appears on the verge of its own rebellion.
Moldavians have been closely watching the revolt by their blood kin in Rumania,
just over the border    #15

Protesters expel Communist leaders from Azerbaijani city     15

News analysis: Poland's reform plan is leading the way among Eastern European
nations in the move from Communism to capitalism. The trail- blazing experiment
is being closely watched in the West.    14

The East bloc's espionage in the West has not slackened, despite the democratic
revolt that has shaken Eastern Europe.    15

Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong detention camps have made plans to resist the
next forcible return of boat people to Vietnam by setting fires, using homemade
weapons and taking hostages.    16

China condemns British decision to accept Hong Kong families     16

Policeman is your friend, Chinese are told     17

South Korea's former President, Chun Doo Hwan, is to answer questions today
about the abuses of power and corruption that marked his repressive eight-year
rule.    3

Segregated education in South Africa is being debated again after the disastrous
showing this year of black high school seniors, 58 percent of whom failed their
final examinations.    3

Trade dispute over wheat imports splits Nigeria and U.S.     9

On the Ganges River, a last waterlord's last stand     11

P.L.O. tries to block spread of Lebanese fighting     12

Jews and Palestinians hold a rally in Jerusalem     13

National    20-23

President Bush's image has changed in his first year in office. He is more
complex than he once seemed, showing flaws that were not apparent before and not
showing flaws for which he was once disparaged.    1

The threats to the nation's forests include ozone and other natural factors, as
well as acid rain. Although acid rain appears to pose a long-term threat,
evidence suggests these factors may be more harmful in the short run, scientists
say.    1

A proposed ban on disposable diapers is part of a general recycling effort in
Vermont that would push mandatory recycling, extend the bottle-deposit law and
force newspapers to use partly recycled newsprint.    22

As giants battle for Maine paper mill, a town waits     21

Study finds no cracks in first of reactors at Savannah River     21

Two bald eagles build nest, and Florida project trembles     22

The nation's homicide rate has risen 5 percent during the year, reaching record
levels in several major cities. Law-enforcement officials agree that criminal
disregard for life seems to be growing.    20

An airplane threatened by terrorists landed uneventfully in Detroit amid media
attention and fortress-like security. Northwest Airlines informed ticket holders
Thursday of a ''security threat'' against the flight.    20

San Francisco Journal: A hotel's last New Year's Eve     20

D.E.A. refuses to relax restrictions on marijuana     20

Lelyveld succeeds Gelb at The New York Times     21

Taiwan held liable for killing of U.S. journalist     23

Growls and howls as North unleashes classic performance     22

Regional    24-30, 34-35

H.U.D.'s double subsidies for families in New York City have been uncovered.
Eager to fill quotas, H.U.D. has given almost $2 million a year to 600
households already subsidized by the city and the state, records show.    1

Mayor-elect David Dinkins' salary, like that of other members of his
administration, will go up significantly tomorrow, but whether the city and
state need to pay such high salaries is being debated.    30

12,000 invitations, only 6,000 chairs at Dinkins' swearing-in     30

The cause of the gas main explosion in the South Bronx is still under
investigation. The explosion killed two men and cut power and subway service in
large parts of the Bronx and Manhattan.    24

Two killed, one injured in shooting at a nightclub     26

Two teen-agers arrested in drive-by killings in Queens.     34

Study finds that fewer teen-agers are using drugs     35

New York's anti-smoking law goes into effect tomorrow.     29

Neediest Cases    26

Arts/Reviews    50

Campus Life    39-40

Fashion    46-47

Life Style    41-42

Obituaries    32

Weddings    48-49

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
