
                               1 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Cuba Is Mired in Angola, Top Defector Says

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


The Cuban Air Force general who defected to the United States in late May has
broken his silence in a series of interviews that detailed widespread
disillusionment within the Cuban military over its involvement in Angola.

The general, Rafael del Pino, also told of large numbers of casualties as well
as numerous desertions from the armed forces.

In interviews with Radio Marti, the United States Government-sponsored radio
station that broadcasts to Cuba, General del Pino said the Cuban Army has had
56,000 deserters in the last three years in Angola and more than 10,000
casualties there over the last 12 years.

Cuba maintains a 30,000-man force in Angola to help defend the Marxist
Government against an insurgency backed by the United States and South Africa.

''Only Fidel and Raul Castro have any faith in victory,'' General del Pino said
in a segment of the interview broadcast on Monday evening, adding that morale is
so low that members of the high command of the Cuban armed forces in Angola
believe that ''the war is lost'' and refer to Angola as the Cuban Vietnam. In
the interview, General del Pino was not asked for any evidence to support his
assertions.

The general complained bitterly about the treatment of young military recruits,
saying they are often sent to Angola after minimum training and then sent into
battle immediately. He said that in 1985 he flew to Angola with 13 new recruits.
When he asked about them a few weeks later, he said, he was told they had been
sent into combat only five days after arriving without any training about local
conditions, and were killed by rebel forces.

He also asserted that when Cuban soldiers die in combat, they are buried in
Angola and relatives are not permitted to bring their bodies back to Cuba.

''Nobody has the right to arbitrarily dispose of the mortal remains of a dear
one,'' he said.

On May 28, General del Pino fled Cuba with his wife and three of his children,
flying in a Cessna twin-engine aircraft from Havana to Key West, Fla. State
Department officials have described the 48-year-old man as the highest-ranking
officer ever to flee the Castro Government.

Since his defection, he has been granted asylum and has been interviewed
extensively by United States intelligence officials.

Though State Department officials say they hve no reason to doubt that his
defection was genuine, some have voiced skepticism about the ease with which
General del Pino was able to flee Cuba in a small aircraft, escaping Cuba's jet
fighters.

General del Pino, who commanded Cuba's air force for two years in Angola, said
he had defected because of the Cuban Government's insistence on continuing the
fighting in Angola and what he said was Fidel Castro's tolerance of widespread
corruption among some of his top party officials.

The general, a former deputy commander of the Cuban Air Force, challenged
estimates that Cuba has 3,000 military advisers stationed in Nicaragua. He said
the number was between 300 and 400, adding that the Cuban public was so
disillusioned by the Angola conflict that it ''would not accept another major
foreign intervention.''

The interviews were arranged by the director of Radio Marti, Ernesto Betancourt.
They met for nine hours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

KATHARINE GRAHAM AT 70; ONE WOMAN, TWO LIVES, MANY MEMORIES

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 841 words


While Katharine Graham may love a party, the purpose of the glamorous affair
held last night was to mark her 70th birthday, a milestone she says she would
have preferred to pass with less attention.

''I mean it really freaks me out because, fun is fun, but it's a reality of life
that you don't adore to contemplate,'' said Mrs. Graham, chairman and chief
executive officer of The Washington Post Company, one of the nation's most
influential women. Although the party may have appeared as one that would mark a
person's retirement, she said she had no plans to step down.

Last week, before she began supervising the seating arrangements for the party,
Mrs. Graham looked back over her life in an interview in her office at The
Washington Post.

''I have, in a sense, led two separate lives,'' she said, referring to the
drastic changes that came into her life after she took command of the Washington
Post Company 24 years ago.

Fear of Public Speaking

''You sort of are formed by what you are engaged in,'' she said. ''And so just
gradually you get some confidence, and what that means is not that you're going
to be something else, but it means you can forget yourself and become engaged in
what you are doing.''

On an August day in 1963, Mrs. Graham summoned the company's top executives and,
trembling with a fear of public speaking that she has never completely overcome,
told them that she was taking control of the family business.

Three days earlier, her husband, Philip L. Graham, who had directed the company
since shortly after World War II, had shot himself to death after a long bout
with mental illness.

At the time she was 46 years old and until then had spent much of her adult life
rearing four children, including Donald E. Graham, The Post's current publisher,
and Lally Weymouth, a writer for The Post.

She remembers feeling extremely unprepared for what she had decided to
undertake.

''I grew up in a society in which most women considered themselves unequal
citizens and were considered unequal citizens,'' she said, ''and I had grown up
with some pretty dominant individuals and I didn't consider myself equal to them
and I wasn't. And so, if you start there, it was an agony.''

Annoyed by Image

In the years since she took over, Mrs. Graham's company has flourished, and she
has been transformed. She now radiates confidence and sprinkles her conversation
with casual profanity and humor.

But she is often pictured as cool, tough, and an almost imperial figure, a
portrayal that annoys her. ''I hate that picture,'' she said. ''I mean I'm not
being demure. I think I have a responsibility, but, without saying, 'Aw,
shucks,' I think whatever power I exert is collegial.''

She said part of her image as a vastly powerful figure was based on a
misperception of ''what the head of a communications company does. They think
you go down and say, 'Write a story,' and you don't do that.''

High Cost of Success

Mrs. Graham describes herself as a feminist and said she feels strongly that
women should have an equal chance to ascend the corporate ladder. But for women,
including herself, corporate success has a high personal cost, she said.

''I very much worry about women these days who are trying to do it all,'' she
said.

Despite her anxious moments over her newspaper's work in the Watergate
investigation and over a violent strike there in 1975, Mrs. Graham said the real
crucible for her came in 1971 over the publication of the Pentagon Papers.
Benjamin C. Bradlee, executive editor of The Post, agreed.

Bradlee 'Was Driven Crazy'

The New York Times, which first published portions of the classified documents
outlining the Government's conduct of the Vietnam War, had been prevented from
publishing more by a Federal judge.

''Ben was driven crazy by The Times having this enormous and important
material,'' Mrs. Graham recalled, and The Post had located much of the same
information after a furious search.

At Mr. Bradlee's home, a team of editors and reporters frantically prepared an
article for publication.

But as the deadline neared, The Post's lawyers became extremely worried that,
because of the judge's injunction against The Times, publication would risk a
criminal indictment that could, in turn, jeopardize The Post's plan to sell
shares of the company.

Mrs. Graham, who was then the publisher, was holding a party at her Georgetown
home. She had to decide whether to publish the article.

''There was this chorus on my right saying, 'Wait a day. Wait a day.' '' she
said. Frederick S. Beebe, who was chairman of the company and Mrs. Graham's
trusted mentor, advised her to delay publication. The editors, on the other
hand, arguing that a delay would be cowardly and embarrassing.

''They said we have to go in this edition, so you have to say yes or no right
now,'' Mrs. Graham said. ''So I said, 'Okay, go ahead.' ''

She added that the decision left her numb and scared, but there was no
indictment and the stock offering went through without a problem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
Gore to the Fore

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


With Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee in the Presidential race, we now have
nine announced candidates, seven ''leaners,'' six drop-outs, and 432
commentators who differ on who's likely to win.

Most of the analysts think Mr. Gore doesn't have a chance, counting him out
before he's in, just as in the early days of past campaigns they wrote off Jimmy
Carter, Lyndon Johnson, Gerald Ford and Richard Nixon.

We had better be careful. Everybody knew that Senator Robert Dole of Kansas was
finished when he blew the Vice Presidential campaign of l976, but here he is
creeping to the head of the Republican pack.

At 39, Mr. Gore is older than James Madison, Alexander Hamilton and most of the
other founders were when they wrote the Constitution 200 years ago. After the
last six years, he thinks his youth is a distinct advantage, and he has other
things going for him.

He's a little south of center, a little to the left of Sam Nunn, a little to the
right of Joe Biden of Delaware, and he's better looking than all of them.

Moreover, he doesn't have ''fire in his belly''; he doesn't ''stand tall in the
saddle''; and he's not a ''great communicator.'' Considering the record of these
so-called ''advantages,'' he has to be taken seriously. He's the only Southerner
in the hunt, forgetting that he was born in Washington, D.C., and graduated with
honors from Harvard. He gave up journalism for politics, which shows he's not as
smart as he looks, but he's a Vietnam veteran of sorts, and he's now a Tennessee
farmer in his spare time.

That will do him no harm. The Democrats haven't won a Presidential election
without a Southerner on the ticket since l960, and on next March 8 - Super
Tuesday - Democrats will go to the primary election polls in as many as 20
states, 14 of them in the South, including Tennessee.

His credentials as ''the Southern candidate'' will lose some of their appeal if
Mr. Nunn of Georgia enters the race, but Senator Nunn's conservative voting
record hurts him as much in the North as it favors him in the South. And even
Mr. Nunn's reputation as the most knowledgeable student of military affairs in
the Senate is challenged by no less an authority than Paul Nitze, President
Reagan's principal disarmament adviser, who thinks Mr. Gore knows more about the
nuclear tangles than Mr. Nunn.

For the last few years, Mr. Gore has put aside at least an hour every day to
study the nuclear problems, now approaching a Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting,
probably this fall.

What he loses by his comparative youth he gains by his energy. In the past 10
years - eight in the House of Representatives and two in the Senate - he has
addressed 1,800 town meetings in his area and earned a reputation for integrity
and hard work.

In his announcement speech, he stuck to moderate themes, but said his first
promise to the American people would be to fire immediately any Government
offical who steals from the American people or lies to the United States
Congress.

He also promised to fight unfair trade practices overseas, create an effective
agricultural policy, help the homeless, encourage strong personal values and
''restore respect for common sense in managing the business of Government.''

Nothing particuarly new in all this. In explaining his reasons for seeking the
Presidency, he sounded a bit like the class valedictorian, but he stressed his
youth as an asset in negotiation with General Secretary Gorbachev of the Soviet
Union.

''For the first time in at least a generation,'' he said, the Soviet Union is
led by a man ''who combines youthful energy and innovation with experience. The
free world urgently needs a leader who can match him, test him, bargain with him
and make the most of this possibly historic opportunity for a safer, saner
world.''

The question is whether Mr. Gore can energize his own rising generation to
follow this theme, as Woodrow Wilson did in 1916 and Jack Kennedy did in 1960.
He referred to both in announcing his candidacy, and since a majority of the
electorate will be under 45 next year, this will be his best shot at the
nomination.

Vice President Bush and Senator Dole on the Reublican side, however, have the
advantage of experience over him. He is not well known outside the Congress or
his district, which is also true of the other Democratic candidates, but both
Mr. Dole and Mr. Bush are tied to their jobs in Washington, with little time to
match Senator Gore and the other Democrats. It's not quite accurate to talk of
''Gore to the fore''; he's the longest of the long shots but he has character to
match his youth and that's not a bad combination.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Crimes' by Israel Are Cited by Barbie's Lawyers

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: LYONS, France, July 1


Defense lawyers in the trial of Klaus Barbie took the floor today and provoked
an angry quarrel in the courtroom when they attacked Israel and other countries
for committing ''crimes against humanity'' that, they argued, were ''more
serious'' than those of Mr. Barbie himself.

During the roughly four hours of speeches, the team of three defense lawyers all
but ignored the charges that have been made against Mr. Barbie, the wartime
Gestapo chief of this city, in the last eight weeks. Instead, as the trial
entered its final phase today, the defense lawyers argued that a conviction of
Mr. Barbie would be unjustified because, they contended, so many atrocities -
often committed by Western countries -have taken place in the four decades since
the end of World War II.

The unorthodox defense had long been anticipated in a trial that has consisted
of often dramatic testimony by survivors and other witnesses of Mr. Barbie's
efforts to track down Jews and members of the Resistance and to have them
deported to Nazi death camps.

Mr. Barbie's main defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, known in this country for his
defenses of accused terrorists, has been expected to contend that the West has
hidden its own ''colonialist'' crimes from itself, even though, Mr. Verges has
argued, they represent atrocities comparable to those committed by the Nazis.

The anticipation of this defense by Mr. Verges had for weeks caused disquiet
among many in France, who have voiced fears that it would amount to what has
been called a ''falsification of history'' and a ''trivialization'' of the Nazi
genocide against the Jews.

Joining Mr. Verges on the defense bench in the last few days have been two other
lawyers, Jean-Martin M'Bemba, a Congolese, and Nabil Bouaita, an Algerian. The
presence of a black lawyer and an Arab lawyer on the defense team of Mr. Barbie
has been seen here as highly curious, in view of Nazi notions of racial
supremacy, and also symbolic of the strategy that Mr. Verges's has employed.

Mr. M'Bemba, who was not in the courtroom during the prosecution's presentation
of witnesses, argued that the concept of crimes against humanity should be
enlarged to include what he defined as colonialist crimes.

He gave two examples in support of his contention.

One was the building in colonial-era French Congo of the 300-mile
Brazzaville-Pointe Noire Railroad, which, he argued, resulted in the deaths of
thousands of forced African laborers. The other example was the French
repression of a 1947 anti-colonialist uprising in Madagascar, during which, he
claimed, 89,000 Africans were killed. French historians have put the number
closer to 10,000.

Mr. M'Bemba also called apartheid ''the ultimate crime against humanity,''
arguing that the West, in bringing Mr. Barbie to trial, should also make efforts
to prosecute South Africa's white political leaders.

Mr. Bouaita, 36 years old, included in this definition of ''crimes against
humanity'' the United States' combat role in Vietnam, the Turkish killing of
Armenians in 1915, and French policy in Algeria during that country's war of
independence.

Mr. Bouaita provoked angry protests from lawyers representing civil plaintiffs
in the case when he invoked what he called the Nazification of Jews in Israel.
Mr. Bouiata called Israel ''a monster'' that had arisen from the ashes of the
Holocaust and contended that what he called Israeli crimes against the
Palestinians ''canceled out'' the Nazi crimes against the Jews.

At the end of the statement, Michel Zaoui, a lawyer representing civil
plaintiffs, demanded that the session be suspended so prosecution lawyers could
prepare a refutation of Mr. Bouaita's ''intolerable remarks.''

After a brief recess, the president of the court, Andre Cerdini, rejected the
demand, but said the prosecution could speak after the defense had finished its
presentation, Thursday.

The statements by defense lawyers produced outrage among many court observers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

IN NICARAGUA: WHAT TO DO TO THE POTATO

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, July 1


Several thousand Nicaraguans spent part of Saturday doing something that
Nicaraguans don't often do. They ate potatoes.

At Managua's first-ever potato festival, culinary imagination ran wild. Older
people suspiciously nibbled at potato tortillas, while young men lined up to buy
potatoes steamed in beer. Children piled their plates with diced potatoes
drenched in rich red fruit sauce.

A European diplomat, perhaps seeking insights into the process of social change
in Nicaragua, ate several potato-cheese fritters. ''They are actually quite
good,'' he said with a trace of surprise.

Under normal circumstances, Nicaraguans prefer to base their diet on rice and
beans. If rice and beans are in short supply, plantains or yucca are common
substitutes.

Shipment From East Germany

But these are not normal times for Nicaragua, and favorite foods are not always
available. Last month the Government, in its biggest food purchase ever, bought
8,000 tons of potatoes on credit from East Germany. The festival Saturday was
part of a national campaign to persuade people to eat them.

The potato shipment has, at least temporarily, changed the eating habits of
people all over the country. Its impact reflects the crucial importance of
foreign aid in modern Nicaragua, and especially the value of the aid from
Communist countries.

The United States provides no aid to Nicaragua, and American officials have
actively sought to discourage allied countries from doing so.

For the last month, Nicaragua has been caught up in a potato orgy. Officials say
more potatoes have been consumed here over the last four weeks than in any
comparable period in Nicaraguan history.

Rice From Vietnam

Keeping Nicaragua supplied with food has been a continuing challenge to the
Sandinista leaders. At difficult moments, they have sought help from friends
abroad, even receiving donated rice from impoverished Vietnam.

In a recent speech, Agriculture Minister Jaime Wheelock Roman said food
shortages were a result of the continuing war against United States-backed
rebels, which has made some fertile parts of the country too dangerous to
cultivate. He also blamed the trade embargo imposed on Nicaragua by the Reagan
Administration, and said that the inefficiency of Government planners and
workers had aggravated the problem.

''This year, we are going to have less production,'' Mr. Wheelock told a
Sandinista audience in Managua. ''The general situation of malnutrition in
Nicaragua is deplorable.''

But Nicaraguans who like potatoes, or who can learn to like them, will not go
hungry anytime soon.

Two giant freighters brought the East German potatoes into the Nicaraguan port
of Corinto, the first landing May 17 and the second 10 days later. Prison
inmates helped unload the cargo and pack it into more than 100 trucks, including
15 from the Sandinista Army. #5 Cents a Pound Following an elaborate plan, truck
caravans delivered enormous quantities of potatoes to each provincial capital.
The potatoes were distributed through the countryside, and by the end of May
they were on sale in all but the most remote villages.

To encourage people to use the East German potatoes quickly, the Government
fixed a low price, equivalent to about 5 cents a pound, and permitted consumers
to buy all they wanted. Domestic potatoes are sold at about three times that
price, and often in limited quantities.

Nicaragua had never tried a food distribution effort of this magnitude, and the
operation was not completely smooth. Many potatoes were rotten by the time they
reached stores, in part because they were left too long under the blazing sun at
Corinto or elsewhere.

At some markets, vendors joke about ''Chernobyl potatoes'' and suggest that they
might have been contaminated by radioactivity from the nuclear accident in the
Soviet Ukraine in April 1986. But the 8,000 tons of potatoes are now all but
gone.

According to Norman Jiron, an official of the Government agency that oversees
distribution of perishable goods, East Germany gave Nicaragua a long-term credit
worth $1 million to buy the two shiploads of potatoes.

'Trying to Show Them'

''The Nicaraguan food market has never been flooded with so much of one product
at once,'' Mr. Jiron said. ''Most people here are used to eating rice all the
time, because potatoes were only served at a certain social level. We're trying
to show them how much can be done with potatoes.''

Some Nicaraguan restaurants have been offering unusual potato dishes in recent
weeks. At one Government-run fast-food outlet, two bags of french fries are
being sold for the price of one. Television commercials praising the potato are
broadcast daily.

The potato festival in Managua Saturday was the climax of the national campaign.
It was supervised by Celinda Soza Reyes, who runs the cafeteria at the
Association of Cultural Workers.

Mrs. Reyes's job is not simply to cook, but also to preserve that part of
Nicaraguan culture that is expressed in the culinary arts. To prepare for the
festival, she interviewed experienced Nicaraguan cooks and took down all the
unusual potato recipes she could find.

''A brother country made a donation, and we are hoping for more shipments of
potatoes in the future,'' she said. ''The idea is to take full advantage of what
we have available.''

Asked why potatoes have never been widely popular in Nicaragua, Mrs. Reyes
paused to think, then shrugged and gave up.

''I suppose it's something cultural, but I couldn't say exactly,'' she said.
Potato Meatballs?  Some of the dishes at the festival Saturday, like scalloped
potatoes and potato croquets, were familiar to foreigners. Others, such as
potato pudding and potato meatballs, were more unusual.

Several regional Nicaraguan specialties were especially popular. A thick chowder
from Matagalpa Province, spicier than most Nicaraguan food, attracted much
curious comment.

The busiest table was the one selling nacatamales, a classic Nicaraguan dish.
But the meat and vegetables inside these nacatamales were held together not by
cornmeal, but by mashed potatoes.

''I am a Nicaraguan, which means I like my rice and beans,'' said Julio
Carcache, a Government administrator who brought his wife and two young
daughters to the festival. ''Now it seems that we're going to be eating more
potatoes, and I'd say that's fine with me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

20 YEARS AFTER A 'SUMMER OF LOVE,' HAIGHT-ASHBURY LOOKS BACK

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, July 1


It lasted but a moment, the ''Summer of Love'' that drew tens of thousands of
young people to the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco in 1967.

But for some who remember it, this summer two decades later is a time to
celebrate that moment and to assess what it ultimately meant, to them, to the
city and to the society.

''It changed my life forever,'' said Alison Elizabeth, who used to charge
tourists $5 for letting them take her photograph as a hippie, with long hair and
beads.

''It was like Camelot,'' said Philip DeAndrade, who moved here that year. ''I
picked up attitudes I'll always have - antiwar feelings, an attitude of sharing
property, and that human beings, not accumulation of property, are what are
important in life.''

But the memories are not all happy ones. In less than a year, Mr. DeAndrade
recalled in a recent interview, ''the 'Summer of Love' had become the 'Autumn of
Abuse' and then the 'Winter of Disrespect.' '' He and others recall
acquaintances who never recovered from the psychedelic drugs and other excesses
of the summer of 1967.

Anniversary Events Planned

It was a time when Haight-Ashbury was briefly transformed from an obscure,
ethnically diverse middle-class neighborhood into the center of the universe for
what was soon called the ''counterculture.''

Many of the nation's young people were challenging values and institutions
bequeathed to them by their parents. The easy availability of birth control
pills and illegal drugs permitted them a life style that had been off-limits to
their parents. New terms, like ''bad trip'' and ''rip off,'' were entering the
mainstream American vocabulary.

These days, a few young pilgrims from around the country still come each week to
''the Haight,'' curious about the past, and a parade last week began a summer of
intermittent anniversary festivities, to conclude with a concert and rally on
Sept. 21.

But today Haight-Ashbury is, in the words of one former hippie, Stewart Brand,
''just another San Francisco neighborhood.'' Instead of casual sex, flowers on
the street and LSD on every corner, visitors find pricey boutiques, video rental
shops, and notices advising them to practice ''safe sex'' to prevent AIDS.

The old Victorian houses where the young found ''crash pads'' in which to break
society's taboos now rent for $1,000 a month to students and business-suited
members of a new generation trying to make a different kind of mark on life.

Many Have Joined the System

A few old-timers, their hair turning gray, can be found panhandling on Haight
Street. But most left long ago, joining a diaspora to rural areas of Colorado,
Oregon, New Mexico, Arizona, the woods of Northern California.

Others went back to college, enrolled in law school or otherwise joined the
economic system they once spurned. Still others went into business for
themselves here, continuing to seek a measure of independence. Mr. DeAndrade
helped start a pizza parlor; he now works on the staff of Nancy Pelosi, the
Democrat recently elected to represent San Francisco in Congress.

Today the former hippies, many of them, look back warmly on the summer of 1967.
It is remembered as an exciting, if brief, moment of ferment in rock music and,
to a lesser degree, the arts, as well as social experimentation.

''Most of the music and art that was going on in the 60's, it's never been at
that level since then,'' said Bill Ham, who staged flashing laser-beam ''light
shows'' at many rock concerts then.

A few said they believed they had accomplished at least part of what they had
set out to do: changing the world, starting by helping to bring to an end the
Vietnam War.

It Wasn't All Fun

But the veterans of that ''Summer of Love'' also recalled that at midsummer
their anything-goes idyll began to turn dangerous, as bloody turf battles
erupted among rival drug dealers, there was an upsurge of thefts and burglaries,
newcomers contracted venereal diseases, and several young people, after taking
LSD, fell or jumped to their death from buildings or walked through picture
windows.

And some knew of friends whose minds had been permanently ruined by drugs, or
for other reasons had never emerged from the poverty that seemed stylish in
1967. A few wondered, in retrospect, if their generation had been overly
self-indulgent and preoccupied with its importance because of the intensive
scrutiny it was accorded by the press.

''At first it was really very happy,'' Ms. Elizabeth, who is now an office
manager here, said of the summer of 1967. ''There were so many 'be-ins,' and
marches and free music.''

''At first,'' she said, ''the drug scene was mild; then organized crime got the
Hell's Angels involved,'' and there was an influx of young runaways, many from
well-to-do families.

The Beatniks Came First

''They were expecting a city of love and found a city like any other city, and a
lot of them ended up being prostitutes,'' she said.

Mr. Brand, now a freelance educational consultant, noted that the hippies were
not the first social rebels here. By 1967, thanks to the more cerebral
''beatniks'' a decade earlier, ''the idea of marching to a different drum was a
popular idea,'' he said, but ''a whole lot of people ended up marching to the
same different drum, which was not the point.''

Still, he said that when the hippies allied with political activists from the
New Left that had emerged from the Free Speech movement at the University of
California in 1964, they were, for a time, a social force to be reckoned with.

''The hippie movement was about reconnecting with nature and ourselves,
non-polluting, future-oriented values,'' said Ed Buryn, whose book ''Vagabonding
in America'' became a kind of Michelin Guide for itinerent young people who took
to the road 20 years ago. ''Most people I know have gone on to straight jobs,
straight and yuppie. Hopefully, the 60's left a residue of memories and
humanistic values that have enriched their lives.''

Maturity Alters Some Attitudes

Some who joined the migration to San Francisco say that maturity, along with the
realities of having to make a living, has caused them to revise some of their
attitudes about society - that running a business, for example, has helped them
sympathize with small business owners complaining of being overburdened with red
tape.

Nevertheless, many predicted they would retain permanently many of the values
they embraced in the 1960's.

''I have too many responsibilities now to be the free hippie I once was,'' said
Tom Crane, who operates an art supplies store here. But ''I'm every bit as
cynical; the 60's changed my carte blanche belief in the American way.''

Joan Morgenstern Simms, a hippie-turned-interior designer, observed that
children of many old friends were ''determined to be yuppies, business-oriented,
and their parents are asking, 'Where did I go wrong?' ''

Still, 20 years after the ''Summer of Love,'' not everything has changed. On one
building, attracting the glance of young tourists making a pilgrimage to the
past, a sign reads: ''Opening Soon: Center for Self Realignment, Cosmic Unity
and Self-Liberation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 4, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch from San Francisco on Thursday, about the 20th anniversary of the
''Summer of Love'' in the Haight-Ashbury district, misstated the date of a
concert and rally at Golden Gate Park that will conclude summerlong festivities.
It is Sept. 12, not Sept. 21.

GRAPHIC: Photos of Haight-Ashbury, in 1967 and 1987 (Black Star/Eugene Anthony;
NYT/Terrnece McCarthy); Map shows are of Haight-Ashbury where hippies are still
found (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCOUTING;
TOUGH STUFF

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 383 words


It has nothing to do with dollar signs, yet its mandatory use is called for in
Herschel Walker's contract, Joe Montana would not consider a return to the
football field without it and Dave Poulin of the Philadelphia Flyers needed a
lot of it leading his team into the Stanley Cup finals against Edmonton.

The product in question is PRO-TECH-ION, a state-of-the-art padding that has
become exceedingly popular among professional athletes for its ability to reduce
the impact of a severe blow more efficiently than previous types of protection.

According to officials at Easton Sports Inc., which developed the product over
the past nine years, the key to PRO-TECH-ION is the patented Donzis Air
Management System, which disperses impact from a blow outward rather than
downward into the body. The triple-layer foam in the padding is enclosed in a
bag. Blows are deflected outward because the air forced out of the foam has
nowhere to go but through holes located on the sides of the pad. The padding can
withstand a blow of over 800 pounds per square inch, with no damage to the body.

''Our padding costs about three times as much money as the average padding
already on the market,'' said Rick Gavzano, a group marketing manager for
Easton. ''However, teams are not hesitating to spend extra money because they
realize no price is too high when it comes to preventing injury.''

Easton representatives said that 80 percent of National Football League
quarterbacks will wear PRO-TECH-ION this year. They also said that Michigan,
U.C.L.A., Georgia Tech, Indiana, North Carolina State and Texas A&M are among
200 schools that have invested in the product.

''It's the best pad on the market in that it truly cushions the blow and absorbs
the shock of physical contact,'' said Jack Elway, the coach at Stanford, whose
son John plays quarterback for the Denver Broncos. ''Most of my players will
wear it this year.''

According to Gavzano, 40 percent of the players in the N.F.L. and 20 to 25
percent of National Hockey League players are using PRO-TECH-ION padding.

PRO-TECH-ION was the brainchild of Byron Donzis, an inventor who worked on
creating flak jackets for helicopter pilots during the Vietnam War. In 1978, Dan
Pastorini became the first N.F.L. quarterback to wear the foam padding.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN CAMBODIA, THE PRINCESS SERVES THE PROLETARIAT

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 2


In the rundown capital of this threadbare country, fought over by opposing
Communist armies, a radiant royal princess continues to hold court.

She sits in the faded splendor of what was once the salon of the Foreign
Minister, her hair elaborately coifed, her lips gleaming with violet lipstick.
Many silver rings glisten on her fingers, and a finely made silver bracelet
snakes from her wrist halfway up her forearm.

She lost her husband and four young daughters to the reign of terror of Pol Pot.
But Princess Sisowath Sovethvong, 42-year-old granddaughter of the late King
Monivong and first cousin of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, feels she has achieved ''a
great victory'' in gaining the acceptance of the current Vietnamese-backed
rulers and receiving distinctions from them.

''For me, a princess, to have become a daughter of the people makes me very
happy,'' she said with vivacious gestures and determined gaiety. ''A member of
the former ruling classes, I had to pass over many moral obstacles. How can a
princess be trusted as a revolutionary?''

'I'm Only a Patriot'

Her smile and tone of voice took much of the cutting edge from the word. Is the
princess a Communist?

''Not yet,'' she replied. ''I'm not yet qualified. I'm only a patriot. I'm too
rebellious a woman. I have always been a progressive liberal. I was the rebel of
the royal family. At the palace they called me the Black Panther.''

Quick to realize the propaganda value of a royal princess to a regime ruling
over a nation to which Communism has not come easily, the Government has given
her a seat in Parliament and visible positions in six national organizations.

''I told this regime, if you have confidence in me, O.K., but don't try to make
me a puppet like Sihanouk,'' she said.

Before he stepped down for a year from its nominal presidency, Prince Sihanouk
was in coalition with Mr. Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge, who killed many of his children
and other close family members, and the group led by former Prime Minister Son
Sann. The groups oppose the regime installed by Vietnam after its 1979 invasion.


Husband and Children Executed

While the Khmer Rouge ruled from 1975 until 1979, the princess, known to her old
friends as Lola, shared the fate of Cambodia's people. With her husband, a
physician, and their five children, she was driven out of Phnom Penh during the
great forced exodus from the cities and made to labor in the fields.

On Aug. 8, 1976 - ''Oh, I remember dates,'' the princess said in a hollow voice
- her husband and three of their daughters were taken away to be executed. A
fourth daughter disappeared without trace; a son, now 15, survived.

''You wouldn't have recognized me when I arrived in Phnom Penh on March 23,
1979, after the liberation,'' she said, laughing at herself. ''I was black, not
like a princess.''

Dark skin in Cambodia is often associated with rural people, who spend their
lives under the cruel sun.

'I Paid a High Price'

''I thought life no longer interested me,'' she went on. ''I wanted to stay in a
pagoda. We were liberated, but the flag was still red.

''But I saw the people coming back -crippled, blind, haggard. I said to myself,
I come from the same regime as they, but I have a richness that Pol Pot couldn't
take from me - my culture. I had paid a high price to become like them.

''I know the suffering of women who have lost their husbands and children. That
is what made me decide to stay. My presence is more important here than abroad.

''Like a princess, I loved to have a good time, wear miniskirts. But if a cousin
of Sihanouk, and also a relative of Son Sann, can live here, the others know the
regime can be trusted.''

Helped by Her Religion

Her French is colloquial, its slang somewhat dated. Her frame and features are
small and fine, but her presence is strongly self-assured, and her smile,
spontaneous or imposed by act of will, illuminates her delicate face.

The princess - who has made a concession to the revolution by dropping for daily
use her regal name and calling herself Linda, a combination of the two
''revolutionary'' names she had to adopt during the Pol Pot days - reflected on
how her religion had helped her continue living after her tragedy.

''I am a Buddhist, even if I don't go all the time to the pagoda because I'm
lazy,'' she said, suggesting a pagoda by joining her palms and bowing her head
as in prayer.

''The desperate experience hardened me and made me determined to look at its
most rosy. I made up my mind to turn this black thing into white. What good is
it to remain in this world crying?''

'Inside Us, Anguish Remains'

Often the princess's smile is joined by a quivering in the face that suggests
how much it costs her. ''I like to bury suffering inside me and show a smile,''
she said. ''The Khmer is like me. He has the warmth of life, he seizes life. But
deep inside us, anguish remains profound. Still, you will never see a Cambodian
cry; his smile will always greet you.''

The princess has remarried, again to a physician, and they have a 5-year-old
son. ''We have a small villa and small car,'' she said. ''Not sumptuous like
before, but compared to what the others have still a small palace. Once I
traveled in the capitalist countries, now I'm seen in all the Socialist
countries.''

''I know the Vietnamese won't eat me or the Cambodian people, so I prefer to
stay here,'' she said, as if in self-justification. ''And even if I have to die,
I have the consolation of dying under the sugar palms of Cambodia.''

In 1981, when her first mother-in-law, who owns three restaurants in Paris, came
to meet the two sole survivors of her family in Ho Chi Minh City, once Saigon,
the princess said she resisted her entreaties to leave for Paris.

''But I said, 'Take my son.' He is the only grandchild who survived. I did it
for his sake. Now perhaps he thinks I have deserted him, but he will thank me
later.'' She has not seen the boy since. ''It is anguish for a mother,'' she
said, without the Cambodian smile. ''But I think of his future. What can I offer
my son? I don't want him to grow up in ignorance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEKONG TOWN STRUGGLES TO RECOVER

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: NEAK LUONG, Cambodia, June 28


A monument has risen a few steps from the ferry landing, where 17 years ago the
trussed-up bodies of thousands of Vietnamese residents in Phnom Penh floated
down the Mekong, shot by forces of the American-backed Lon Nol Government.

The monument, which depicts fraternal Vietnamese and Cambodian soldiers
advancing against a common foe, commemorates Vietnam's invasion in 1979, which
ousted the murderous Cambodian Government of Pol Pot.

''May friendship, solidarity and cooperation between Cambodia and Vietnam last
for 10,000 years,'' it proclaims.

A little further down the river, past the ferry landing, stands the Second
Provincial Hospital of Prey Veng, a neat and functional low structure. It was
built with the help of the Mennonite Central Committee, an American church
organization dedicated to helping underdeveloped countries.

U.S. Bombs Destroyed Hospital

Until 1973, the site was occupied by an even simpler hospital dating to French
colonial days. It was destroyed when a United States Air Force B-52 dropped its
deadly load on the ''friendly'' site by mistake.

No stone remains of the Roman Catholic mission church, which stood beside the
river past the hospital. Nothing recalls the French priest who stood at the
ferry landing from down to dusk during those grim days in 1970, crying as he
counted the bodies that were the river's grisly flotsam so he could at least
record a number, if no names.

He died, his throat cut - presumably by anti-Government forces - before he could
share his findings.

Today, the history of this small river town, which owes its existence to the
Phnom Penh-Saigon road by which the French rulers linked the colonial capitals
of Cambodia and Cochin-China, is irrelevant to its inhabitants.

New Settlement Springs Up

After standing ruined and empty for nearly four years during the Pol Pot reign
like Cambodia's other towns, a seedy new settlement has sprung up. Its residents
are too preoccupied with eking out a living to attach any interest to the dreary
alternation of occupiers - Cambodians or Vietnamese, Communists of varied sorts
or anti-Communists - who have struggled and bled here, then yielded to the next.

The poorly dressed inhabitants, sellers or buyers, treat with smiling equanimity
the Vietnamese soldiers who stroll among them and an American onlooker. The
American and the Vietnamese, each recognizing the other as outsiders, smile at
one other.

Once a Bountiful Region

Before 1970, the peacetime market of Neak Luong burst with the farm produce of a
bountiful tropical country. There were fish, hens and ducks. Its vendors hawked
bargain clothing and the endless trivia of Southeast Asia's markets. Expensive
electronic gadgets and varied toiletries from the American post exchange in
Saigon - now Ho Chi Minh City - were fed into the black market for Phnom Penh's
elite.

Service was so sophisticated that some members of Phnom Penh's upper classes
used to come here on a weekend to order a Japanese camera or tape recorder and
then pick it up the following weekend. The dealer would arrange through his
Saigon associate to commission an American, Thai or South Korean soldier, who
had privileges at the post exchange, to buy and deliver the merchandise.

Frills Are Gone in Cambodia

The frills long ago disappeared from Cambodian life, and today's market, still
vast and bustling, reflects the offerings of an economy of the barest
subsistence. An exhausted nation -struggling for recovery with a diminished
population, short of men in the prime of life, still fighting a guerrilla war
with the help of a large foreign army on its soil - offers less of everything.

With Government employees now earning less than $2 a month at the free-market
rate, the purchasing power of most Cambodians meshes with the poverty of the
market's choices. Imported goods seem limited to smuggled Thai cigarettes and
toiletries and cheap eyeglass frames from Vietnam.

Poor as Vietnam is, Cambodia is so much poorer that comparative luxury items
like soap powder all come from the big neighbor.

Knowing the appeal of goods from capitalist countries, the merchants have
labeled plastic sacks of the best detergents in French and stamped them as
coming from Thailand. But they gave their ruse away by spelling it ''Thailan,''
as only the Vietnamese do.

With motor fuel scarce, horsecarts have become important for transporting goods
and people.

The small, pony-like horses trot on a road that teems with civilian and military
traffic between Neak Luong and Phnom Penh. Some passengers on overloaded buses
hold on to anything that protrudes from the sides.

Prewar Vehicles Reappear

Old French station wagons, which served as taxis before the war, have reappeared
after being rebuilt from cannibalized parts. The drivers sell seats even on the
roofs and jam more passengers on the inside than would seem possible.

As many as three people can be seen riding one bicycle and even more than three
on small motorcycles.

Convoys of the new, Vietnamese-organized Cambodian Army, as short of transport
as its predecessors, is barely distinguishable from civilian traffic on the
road. And the paramilitary village-defense militia can be told apart from
ordinary civilians only by the rifles that, as before, are left unattended on
their trucks as they await the ferry.

With money scarce, complex and time-wasting barter has become the custom. A
farming couple who pushed a sack of paddy rice onto the ferry on their bicycle
said they got the rice on the east bank in a trade for tobacco leaves. The
tobacco, the woman added, had been obtained on the west bank in exchange for
dried fish. She had bought the fish on the opposite side.

A young Vietnamese soldier boarded the ferry alone, looking very much a big-city
boy in a rustic setting. His hair was long, his wristwatch smartly Japanese.
''Saigon?'' he was asked. He nodded vigorously and repeated the name of his
city.

Two young Cambodians turned an American's watch on his wrist.

''Soviet?'' they asked and chose to react as if his ''no'' had disappointed
them. Then one bent toward the American and asked through an interpreter, ''Can
you get me to America?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a truck piled with passengers and their belongings near Phnom
Penh, Cambodia (NYT/Henry Kamm); Map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Reportedly Agrees To Meeting With U.S. Envoy

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 4


A Vietnamese official said his Government had agreed to a meeting in Hanoi with
John W. Vessey Jr., President Reagan's special envoy, to end an impasse in talks
over the fate of missing American sevicemen, The Washington Post reported in its
Sunday editions.

The unnamed Vietnamese Government official said Hanoi had sent American
negotiators a letter accepting the proposal of a meeting with General Vessey, a
former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to discuss ''humanitarian''
issues.

The letter dropped the earlier insistence by the Vietnamese on preconditions for
the talks, including that the discussions include such topics as the
normalization of relations between the two countries if Vietnam helped account
for the missing servicemen, The Post said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
INSIDE THE 'JACKET': ALL KUBRICK

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1235 words


STANLEY KUBRICK'S ''FULL METAL JACKET'' establishes its grip on the viewer's
attention instantaneously, with an opening scene in which young recruits are
shorn by an off-screen Marine Corps barber, while a corny, lulling song is heard
in the background (''Kiss me goodbye and write me when I'm gone/Goodbye
sweetheart, hello Vietnam''). The scene would be ordinary, even a cliche, were
it not for the look on the young men's faces. In their eyes we see absolutely
nothing: no apprehension, no bravado, not even blind obedience, only the
emptiness of clay ready to be molded.

The sense of sheer animal helplessness, conveyed with the seeping white light,
uncluttered frames and daunting angles of which Mr. Kubrick is a master, is a
shock. It's also a challenge to the audience to remain mindful of these men's
humanity, despite the brutal and dehumanizing ordeal to which they will be
subjected.

                                      *  *  *

This opening scene is something else as well: It's an announcement of the cool,
merciless perspective of Stanley Kubrick, whose directorial distance from the
inner workings of his characters has always been extraordinary. In ''Full Metal
Jacket,'' that distance allows Mr. Kubrick to take a frighteningly clinical view
of the process by which fighting men are molded. He presents the gradual and
deliberate assault on individuality and privacy that is basic training; the
connections between sex and aggression; the combat soldier's ultimate and even
stirring realization that he has left his better nature far behind him. Mr.
Kubrick's vision of this process is infinitely more troubling and singular than
the one set forth in Oliver Stone's ''Platoon.''

Comparisons between these two films are as specious as they are inevitable, for
their directors appear to have aimed for very different effects. But
''Platoon,'' as the film that has most definitively brought the Vietnam
experience home for moviegoing America, stands as a kind of box-office landmark,
and ''Full Metal Jacket'' appears at least superficially to cover similar
terrain. Harrowing as both of these films are, their effects are very different.
''Platoon'' conveys the day-to-day physical experience of men at war with
exceptional realism, while ''Full Metal Jacket'' has a more abstract and
typically (for Mr. Kubrick) elliptical style. While ''Platoon'' develops a
relatively conventional narrative, ''Full Metal Jacket'' has a separate prologue
(as ''2001'' did) and a less linear structure in which storytelling is less
central than the distinct, indelible images Mr. Kubrick has created.

If ''Platoon'' accompanies its brutal realism with the ennobling sounds of
Samuel Barber's ''Adagio for Strings,'' ''Full Metal Jacket'' takes the opposite
tack. It scores the sharply poetic imagery to be found here with the most
soulless and banal American popular songs imaginable, from ''These Boots Are
Made for Walking'' to ''Surfin' Bird'' (Mr. Kubrick, with his use of a
children's song in the film's last scene, even manages the kind of heavy irony
that would sink anyone else, and that in his hands becomes bone-chilling.)
Perhaps most important, ''Platoon'' is a film that anticipates and manipulates
every response that its audience has. ''Full Metal Jacket,'' while no less
wrenching, allows no easy catharsis, no comfortable understanding. In that, it
has more in common with Mr. Kubrick's own work than it does with any other film
about the Vietnam War.

                                      *  *  *

It's a mistake to look to Mr. Kubrick's films for easily encapsulated attitudes;
even his earlier war film ''Paths of Glory'' (1957) was strikingly anomalous for
its time. ''The Shining'' is no ordinary horror film, any more than ''2001'' is
a simple, reductive vision of life in space. Mr. Kubrick, in adapting material
as varied as Anthony Burgess's ''Clockwork Orange,'' Stephen King's ''Shining,''
Thackeray's ''Barry Lyndon,'' Nabokov's ''Lolita,'' Terry Southern's ''Dr.
Strangelove'' and now Gustav Hasford's ''Short-Timers,'' the novel on which his
new film is based, has always extracted and shaped elements from these books
into films that are never slavishly faithful to their sources. What finally
matters, in his films, is less their identifiable ideas than their vast and
genuine staying power. The pure mystery of his monolith (in ''2001''), the
stark, empty corridors of his haunted hotel (in ''The Shining,''), the exquisite
and ironic perfection of his 18th-century landscapes (in ''Barry Lyndon'') are
as elusive as they are unforgettable.

The basic training episode in ''Full Metal Jacket'' will have that same
long-lasting impact, as will the extended combat sequence, near the film's end,
that culminates in a transcendent image of war and its horror. In between,
briefly, the film (co-written by Michael Herr, Mr. Hasford and Mr. Kubrick)
takes a journalistic tone that only underscores how much more haunting Mr.
Kubrick's work is when he avoids the verbal and the literal. When American
soldiers try to explain their feelings about the Vietnamese people, the war
itself, even the landscape (it's a land without horses, the Texan nicknamed
Cowboy complains), they are only echoing what we already know. But when Mr.
Kubrick films a group of soldiers gathered around a writhing prisoner, in the
ruins of a structure that's as much like a temple as a military headquarters,
with the full import of their role made clear to all of them, he creates a
visual epiphany that no viewer could forget, and no combat journalist could
easily equal.

Even more involving, in its way, is the basic training episode that serves as a
prelude to the events in Vietnam. Basic training, with its grueling workouts and
its colorfully obscene invective, is as basic a convention as the war film has;
we've all seen this before. But we haven't seen it done as it's done here. Mr.
Kubrick devotes about 45 relentless minutes to a process that is as overwhelming
for the audience as it must be for the recruits. And in doing that, he also
takes care to maintain the viewer's critical distance.

So the audience can experience what is being done to these men and think about
it, too: about the way the drill sergeant (played by Lee Ermey, himself a former
Marine sergeant and a man with extraordinary lungs) deliberately violates every
racial, sexual and personal taboo as he hectors his men, infantilizing them (he
makes them sleep holding their rifles, march holding their genitals) so as to
reconstruct them along different lines. The title refers to a shell casing, a
kind of model for the tough, hollow fighter who will emerge from this ordeal;
it's also a reference to the misfit in the group (a figure of astonishingly real
anguish, as played by Vincent D'Onofrio) for whom this training most
conspicuously backfires.

No one who sees ''Full Metal Jacket'' will easily put the film's last glimpse of
Mr. D'Onofrio, or a great many other things about Mr. Kubrick's latest and most
sobering vision, out of mind.

A caller has pointed out that Eliot Ness was not, as I inadvertently suggested
two weeks ago, actually approached for help by the woman struggling with her
baby carriage in that film's train station scene. As he so neatly put it, ''A
true hero doesn't have to be asked.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Adam Baldwin and Matthew Modine in scene from''Full Metal
Jacket''

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VALOR COULDN'T SAVE THEM

BYLINE: By STEPHEN W. SEARS; Stephen W. Sears is the author of ''Landscape
Turned Red: The Battle of Antietam'' and a forthcoming biography of Gen. George
B. McClellan.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1331 words



EMBATTLED COURAGE
The Experience of Combat in the American Civil War. By Gerald F. Linderman.
Illustrated. 357 pp. New York: The Free Press. $22.50.

CONSIDERING how long man has been making war, the question of what makes
soldiers fight has received surprisingly little attention. To be sure, we have
been treated to why generals and governments and propagandists think they fight,
but glimpses of their own inner views on the matter are less common. In 1976, in
''The Face of Battle,'' John Keegan wrote a pioneering study of the matter,
ranging widely through history. Now, in ''Embattled Courage: The Experience of
Combat in the American Civil War,'' Gerald F. Linderman has gone deeply into the
subject by narrowing the focus to a single war.

Mr. Linderman, a professor of history at the University of Michigan and the
author of ''Mirror of War,'' probes Civil War combat through the letters,
diaries and memoirs of the men who made up the core of both the Northern and
Southern armies, the volunteers of 1861-62. Later groups - conscripts, bounty
men and black soldiers - are not a part of this story except as they were seen
by the original volunteers. The result is a work fully as original as Mr.
Keegan's, one that comes a good deal closer to a true understanding of the Civil
War soldier than we have had before.

From what Mr. Linderman has found, it appears that these men were unique in
American military history. For one thing, they were astonishingly innocent of
war. There was only the conflict with Mexico to call on for experience, and that
had hardly been testing. In 1856 Joseph E. Johnston, the future Confederate
general, remarked of the Mexican War to his friend George B. McClellan, the
future Union general, ''there is no comfort like that of going into battle with
the certainty of winning.'' The common image of what war was like was pictorial.
In 1862, after his first experience of combat, a young private wrote home that
in pictures of battles he had seen ''- they would all be in line, all standing
in a nice level field fighting, a number of ladies taking care of the wounded,
&c &c but it isent so.''

In their innocence they went to war confident that courage alone would see them
through. It was a matter of duty and of honor to demonstrate courage; God
protected those who were courageous and rewarded them with victory. ''Put as
simply as it appears to have been understood in 1861,'' Mr. Linderman writes,
''the brave would live and the cowardly would die.''

Courage was the cement binding these ill-disciplined armies together. This
became a fact of life to line officers. Many an officer felt (and his men
agreed) that the only way to gain respect and obedience was to exhibit courage
on the battlefield. Their displays of bravery seem almost theatrical, yet by all
accounts they happened just that way. An Ohio colonel recorded that in the
Battle of Perryville he ordered his men to lie down while he deliberately
remained standing amidst shot and shell and canister ''thick as hail.'' His
regiment was won over, he wrote; ''now they are, without exception, my fast
friends.''

Army life is never conducive to innocent illusions, but the illusions about the
benefits of courage ran hard up against an especially brutal reality in the
Civil War. Men went into battle according to the tactical doctrines of the last
war and encountered weapons virtually of the next one. Civil War muskets look
old-fashioned but they were rifled - their barrels grooved to extend their range
- and exceedingly deadly, and all that prevented far greater slaughter was the
fact that they were muzzle-loaders and could only be fired about three times a
minute. At places like Shiloh and Malvern Hill men marched elbow to elbow toward
an enemy armed with weapons that began to kill them when they were still a
quarter of a mile away.

It was soon apparent, as many a failed charge demonstrated, that courage was not
invariably rewarded by victory. God did not seem to protect the courageous.
Indeed, it seemed that the bravest were killed first and most easily. One of
Sherman's men wondered if God even knew who among the dead were courageous and
who were cowardly. The bravest, too, were most often wounded or were captured in
gallant exploits, and their fate then was as bad as it might be. Medical
practice of the day was no less primitive than the tactics that sent so many men
to the military hospitals (which, but for the ''screams and groans of the poor
fellows undergoing amputation,'' resembled ''the dim caverns of the
Catacombs''), and a common theme in soldiers' letters was the dread of falling
into the hands of an army doctor. As for prisoners of war, it is one of the
grimmer statistics of the Civil War that as many Americans died in prison camps,
North and South, as died (for example) in the Vietnam War.

Disillusion came in time, of course, and it was so total that it also set Civil
War soldiers apart from those of our other wars. Vietnam veterans might dispute
this, but Mr. Linderman makes a strong case that at least the fall was greater
for the men of the 1860's. Just when the change came can be argued. For at least
the first two years of the war, as a Confederate soldier and writer, John Esten
Cooke, phrased it, there were ''pitched battles once or twice a year,'' in which
the two sides spent all day killing each other, ''and then relapsed into
gentlemanly repose and amity.'' Cooke exaggerated only somewhat. The Army of the
Potomac, during the two years from Bull Run to Gettysburg, spent only a total of
perhaps a month in pitched battle, however bad those days may have been.

By 1864 warfare was virtually continuous. In Grant's final yearlong campaign
against Richmond, his army and Lee's were hardly ever out of killing range of
one another. Sherman's Atlanta campaign was shorter but also without letup. As
one of Grant's men wrote, it was a case of ''living night and day within the
'valley of the shadow of death.' '' Values were greatly altered, Mr. Linderman
writes. ''The changing nature of combat weakened drastically the original
soldier conviction that at the center of war stood the confident individual.''
Survival became paramount. Troops dug in automatically. A man wrote that in
1864, ''We . . . learned more and more to protect ourselves as we advanced,
keeping behind trees and displaying ourselves as little as possible.''
Confederate Gen. John Bell Hood was deprecated as ''simply a brave, hard
fighter'' who thought only of attack, and his men called him Wooden Head.

Yet in the midst of this revolution no less than 140,000 Union soldiers signed
up again on the expiration of their three-year terms. That would seem to
contradict Mr. Linderman's thesis. What has not been understood about this
process, however, is the importance of the furloughs granted as rewards for
re-enlisting. As the author points out, many men saw no hope of surviving the
fighting they would face in 1864 before their terms were up, and they balanced
off the added risk of staying on against the chance to see home and family one
last time before they were killed. As one of them wrote, he was willing to risk
''three years more of hell'' in exchange for ''thirty days of heaven - home.''

The paradox in all this - and Mr. Linderman is at his best here - is that in the
postwar years there was a complete reversal of convictions. Perhaps it was a
process of healing or of benign forgetfulness or simply a search for
justification, but the final irony was the nation's enthusiasm for the
Spanish-American War in 1898. ''The picture of war that the sons carried to Cuba
was false because their fathers' memories had become false to the war of
1864-65,'' Mr. Linderman writes. By the turn of the century Civil War veterans
had come to symbolize the changelessness of values, ''but only by obliterating
or amending an experience of combat so convulsive of their values that it had
for a time cut the cord of experience.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INTIMACY WASN'T PART OF THE DEAL

BYLINE: By SUSAN BOLOTIN; Susan Bolotin is the associate features editor of
Vogue.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 969 words



HIGH COTTON
Love and Death on Wall Street. By Sherri Daley. 304 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &
Company. $18.95.

''I SLEPT with Rock Hudson.'' ''I slept with Jack Kennedy.'' ''My mother slept
with Elvis Presley.'' Having had sex with a (now) dead celebrity is such an
acceptable route to fame, why should anyone begrudge Sherri Daley her claim to
glory? ''I slept with Philip Hehmeyer''?

The problem, of course, is that, outside the narrow boundaries of his Southern,
high-rolling, fast-living crowd of commodities traders, very few people will
remember the 37-year-old chairman of the New York Cotton Exchange, who killed
himself with a shotgun in his Upper East Side apartment after a bad day on the
market five years ago. But Hehmeyer's relative anonymity would have posed no
problem for a skeptical observer, since the young man's life and death could
arguably serve as a metaphor for all that has made Wall Street simultaneously
the hot glamour industry and the junkyard of white-collar crime. Ms. Daley is
not quite that writer. (At one point she remembers, ''And the red sun flattened
out over the dull little meadow while I said Yes yes yes into his mouth and my
world crashed into beautiful thrilling pieces.'') Even here, Ms. Daley's
soap-opera sensibility could have worked, if only she had remembered to play by
the rules of glitz familiar to any casual reader of People magazine: the
celebrity must remain firmly at the center of the tale, with the
loved-one-left-behind never forgetting that she is only a vehicle for bringing
the reader a millimeter closer to fame, to money, to death.

Ms. Daley refuses to take a back seat. She admits that she started her book
thinking that it was about Hehmeyer, but soon discovered that the protagonist
was Sherri Daley - a ''big blonde'' from Michigan: ''naive, gullible, and
eager.'' When ''High Cotton'' opens, she is 28, in a low-paying secretarial job
that her former lover, a married man, arranged for her. Her hobby is
needlepoint; she quotes T. S. Eliot and Anais Nin when she's feeling
philosophical.

She is a woman ready for action - love, sex, attention, money. Philip Hehmeyer,
an exotic fellow, fits the bill. The son of the manager of the Memphis Symphony
Orchestra and a direct descendant of Francis Scott Key, he came to New York in
1971, having served in Vietnam, worked as a journalist in Memphis and managed a
bar in St. Thomas. A man who made late-night phone calls to Nelson Bunker Hunt,
he had, in less than two years, made a million trading cotton. He drank and
wooed to excess, drove a Jaguar and - hold on -played the mandolin. Hehmeyer and
his friends ''were sexist and romantic,'' Ms. Daley tells us. ''I loved it.''

Fair enough, but how are we to understand this love? These are men who would get
falling-down drunk and then sneak up on people and pull down their bathing
suits. They would aim a fire hose into a friend's apartment as a joke. Or how
about the hilarious fellow who kissed Ms. Daley's hand and then tried to shove
it down the front of his trousers?

It is true that the men paid for dinner, drinks, trips and taxis. In return,
their ''girls'' kept quiet. And if they were anything like Ms. Daley, they also
opened the men's mail and paid their bills, did their grocery shopping, answered
their phones and accepted social engagements for them, did their laundry, washed
their windows and ironed their clothes. When Hehmeyer and Ms. Daley have a
confrontation about his two-timing her, she says, ''I'm not a part of your life
or your family anymore. I can't cook your dinners or pick up your shirts or
clean your apartment. What you get from me now, you can get from your other
women.''

Whatever Hehmeyer got from Ms. Daley - and vice versa - intimacy wasn't part of
it. She admits that they rarely spoke about anything personal, even after sex:
''We were uncomfortable with the intensity of our lovemaking and our feelings.
So we didn't talk about love; we talked about money.'' Their entire sexual
relationship was likewise peculiar. She would offer herself as a kind of home
remedy for migraines and anxiety, but she would stop short of orgasm so she
could ''keep conscious of his smell and his touch and the sound of his voice.''
AFTER a while, these people, this story, take on an air of surrealism, which is
exacerbated by Ms. Daley's memory for exactly who drank what, when. This is a
remarkable feat, considering that these are people who drank all the time
-martinis and dry vodka martinis; vintage champagne, cheap champagne, Moet and
Dom Perignon; beer, specifically Rolling Rock; Bloody Marys and Bloody Bulls;
tequila, brandy, cognac and wine; Pimm's Cups, mint juleps, Southsiders and
Surfsiders; rum and cokes; whisky and sodas. They took ''roadies'' in the car,
kept bottles in their glove compartments and in a pinch, while traveling, turned
to airport drinks.

It is perfectly clear that if Hehmeyer hadn't killed himself, he would have
killed himself, if you know what I mean. As he once said upon being handed a
drink: ''I feel life after death.''

''High Cotton'' also provides intimate access to a masochistic relationship -
which is why, perhaps, Ms. Daley was smart to shortchange Hehmeyer in favor of
herself: her story is, sadly, as emblematic of life in the 1980's as his is of
the life of fast money. She is a woman who found herself in unsatisfactory
relationships with men too many times, who couldn't climb out of stifling jobs,
who drank too much, who turned to jogging for emotional solace, who had an
abortion she didn't want and who finally decided to have a baby (with Hehmeyer's
best friend, to the surprise of both men) to replace the lovers she couldn't
keep. What is shocking is that Ms. Daley can make her life only through others.
What is brave is that she admits it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Philip Hehmeyer, former chairman of N.Y. Cotton Exchange
(Susan Carr)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WIN ONE FOR THE BUDDHA

BYLINE: By A. BARLETT GIAMATTI; A. Bartlett Giamatti, the former president of
Yale University, is the president of baseball's National League.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 2, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words



THE CURIOUS CASE OF SIDD FINCH
By George Plimpton. 275 pp. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $14.95.

GEORGE PLIMPTON, patrician pyrotechnician, brilliant editor of The Paris Review,
author of numerous volumes of what is called new journalism, has written a
funny, knowing and poignant first novel that, like the split-fingered fastball,
moves in ways finally astonishing to behold. Indeed, ''The Curious Case of Sidd
Finch'' has precisely the properties of any superbly effective pitch - it
describes a trajectory at once elegant and duplicitous, lulling the reader,
dug-in and alert, into trusting what he thinks he sees, until the predictable
turns mysterious, and suddenly what seemed simple is revealed as multilayered,
oblique, unique, a pattern complete. It is called a strike.

Ostensibly, this is the story of an English orphan, French-horn player and
world-class mimic, Sidd Finch, who in the course of searching unsuccessfully for
his father's remains in the Himalayas becomes a ''trapa, or aspirant Buddhist
monk.'' As a disciple of the Tibetan lama Milarepa, he becomes a lung-gom-pa:
''someone who has learned the dynamic nature of the physical self and is able to
exert a direct influence upon any part of the body'' - in his case, the arm and
wrist. He enjoys throwing rocks at the snow leopards that harass yaks in their
pens. ''It became,'' Sidd reports, ''a distinct pleasure to make a connection
between myself and a distant object over an expanse of space, what in Zen is
called the ma.'' The result is that he can throw a baseball 168 miles per hour.
He is assisted by the repetition of certain mantras or incantations called
ngags.

In-gags, indeed. First published by Mr. Plimpton in a short version in Sports
Illustrated in 1985, the story of Sidd Finch is extended to novel length by
fleshing out his world: there is Debbie Sue, a blond Florida surfer, Duke
dropout, faithful muse and paramour; there are characters drawn from the
real-life New York Mets (ably represented by Nelson Doubleday, an owner; Jay
Horwitz, the team's public relations director; the manager, Davey Johnson; and,
above all, the ruminative general manager, Frank Cashen); there are the
ubiquitous fans, the press in all its remorseless splendor, the presence of the
commissioner and the rest of major-league baseball - its smells and sounds, its
anecdotes, lore and history, its pressure and intrigues. This culture is
splendidly rendered with an experienced insider's knowledge, and the whole saga
of Finch's brief, astonishing passage through big-league baseball is at once a
parody of every player's as-told-to biography, a satire on professional sports,
an extended (and intriguing) meditation on our national pastime and a touching
variant on the novel of education as Sidd learns of the world. The tale
effortlessly weaves Buddhism and baseball, yak pens and Shea Stadium, the mythic
Finch and Debbie Sue and the actual Frank Cashen and Davey Johnson. We even
glimpse, through the filter of another's memory, George Plimpton, at night in
the Time-Life Building, walking ''wearily down the long corridors, as if taking
a constitutional in a prison.''

The writer (or artist) imprisoned is not, however, a momentary image; it is the
novel's true subject. For the whimsical tale of Sidd Finch is told by a
narrator, Robert Temple, a one-time successful freelance writer who, since
coming back from Vietnam, cannot write or indeed function at all, except at a
minimal level. Debbie Sue calls Temple ''Owl,'' and his exhausted, wise eyes see
the gorgeous tale of Finch unfold, from the writer's dank cottage in Florida
(where the Mets hide Sidd from the press) to the harsh lights of New York. The
narrator's revival, his reconnection to language and life, occurs gradually as
the horror scorched into Temple by Vietnam is effaced by the buoyancy of Finch's
Tibetan-taught serenity. An Eastern-induced void is redeemed by Eastern-derived
values for living - a homeopathy that is subtle and serious and persuasive.

The novel's parallel lines slowly converge. As Temple is healed by Finch, the
reader watches the distinctive attributes of baseball and Buddhism - the absence
of clock time, boundaries stretching to infinity, rituals based on
nonmilitaristic or nonterritorial visions of life - gently become figures for
one another. By the end, writing, baseball and Buddhism are revealed as discrete
rituals about the art of connecting us each to each, rituals that may strike the
uninitiated as inane or merely esoteric but that, for the adept, carry the
significance of the sacred, that is, the force of life itself. In a novel
haunted by images of incarceration, East and West, baseball, Buddhism and
writing become figures for the capacity to make fictions, or Games, those artful
creations of the human spirit whose various forms of order offer the way to
choice and, thus, to freedom.

Over such serious, off-speed stuff, Mr. Plimpton's control is masterly.

FASTER THAN A SPEEDING BULLET

Sometimes in a stadium, if it is tense, and the place has a good crowd, enough
people identify with the actual flight of the pitched ball to react audibly - an
exhalation of breath - so that the pitch is accompanied by a slight whoomph.
With the first ball Finch threw there was no time for any kind of reaction: we
heard the slam of the ball driving the air out of the catcher's mitt with a high
pop! - audible, I suspect, out in the parking lot beyond the center-field fence.
This was followed by a high exclamation from Reynolds, a kind of squeak, as he
stood up from his stance, reached into his glove, and began pulling the ball
free. A gasp and then a prolonged murmur went up from the stands. The batter,
Vince Coleman, had no idea how to react. His jaw dropped slightly. He looked
down at the plate. The umpire raised his right hand slowly to indicate a strike
- so slowly that he gave the impression of someone wondering exactly what
evidence he himself was working on.

From ''The Curious Case of Sidd Finch.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JULY 5, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1459 words




$


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   5    MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
                 Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
                 psychotic fan.

 2      2   8    THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
                 (Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
                 Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.

 3      4   4    EMPIRE, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.50.)
                 Turn-of-the-century Washington, seen from the
                 point of view of a young woman newspaper
                 publisher.

 4     10   2    PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
                 creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and
                 lawyers.

 5      6   4    PALE KINGS AND PRINCES, by Robert B.
                 Parker. (Delacorte, $15.95.) Spenser on the trail of
                 a major cocaine ring based in a small New England
                 town.

 6      5   4    THE TIMOTHY FILES, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran turned
                 detective checks out dubious entrepreneurs for
                 Wall Street firms.

 7     11   49   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
                 World War III.

 8      7   22   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                 (Morrow, $18.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall
                 a woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 9      3   16   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                 $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                 way to the 80's.

10      9   4    MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow.
                 (Morrow, $17.95.) The many-faceted relationship of
                 the 35-year-old narrator and his uncle, a famous
                 botanist.

11      8   8    HEIRESS, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                 Sisters vie for their father's affection and fortune.

12     14   3    SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                 Four scientists explore the mysteries of an alien
                 spaceship found on the floor of the South Pacific.

13            1  WEEP NO MORE, MY LADY, by Mary Higgins
                 Clark. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Love and
                 murder at a swank California health spa.

14     13   2    DIRK GENTLY'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE
                 AGENCY, by Douglas Adams. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $14.95.) A private eye's search for a missing cat
                 takes him on a trip through space and time.

15     12   23   THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                 (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                 king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   10   THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by
                 Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
                 of liberal arts education during the past 25 years.

 2      5   31   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                 Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                 recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 3      2   8    HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon.
                 (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the
                 octogenarian industrialist and philanthropist.

 4     12   54   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                 Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                 from the television star and father of five.

 5      4   3    EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Jimmy and Rosalynn
                 Carter. (Random House, $16.95.) The former first
                 couple tell what they're doing to make the most of
                 the rest of their lives.

 6      3   5    CULTURAL LITERACY, by E. D. Hirsch Jr.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) The information -
                 geography, history, literature, politics - that you
                 need to read with.

 7      6   19   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                 Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                 visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his home.

 8     11   13   HOLD ON, MR. PRESIDENT! by Sam Donaldson.
                 (Random House, $17.95.) A White House television
                 correspondent comments on his assignment.

 9      8   13   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
                 Siegel. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A surgeon stresses
                 the importance of the patient's mind and emotions
                 in treating serious illness.

10      7   5    THE DIFFERENT DRUM, by M. Scott Peck.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A psychiatrist's
                 prescription for personal and communal peace.

11     15   12   THIS 'N THAT, by Bette Davis with Michael
                 Herskowitz. (Putnam, $17.95.) The actress's
                 memories and opinions.

12 *   14   2    LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien
                 Cheng. (Grove, $19.95.) China's Cultural Revolution
                 as experienced by a wealthy woman accused of
                 spying for the West.

13           25  A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                 (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                 spent with the Indiana University basketball team.

14            1  THE SPY WORE RED, by Aline, Countess of
                 Romanones. (Random House, $18.95.)
                 Recollections of a woman from upstate New York
                 who served as an undercover agent in Europe
                 during World War II.

15     13   21   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Australia, from penal colony to its gradual
                 emergence as a flourishing nation.


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   95   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                 standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 2      2   5    WOMEN MEN LOVE, WOMEN MEN LEAVE, by
                 Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson N.
                 Potter/Crown, $18.95.) Why men are drawn to
                 some women and desert others.

 3      4   36   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                 by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                 prepared at moderate cost.

 4      5   3    SIBLINGS WITHOUT RIVALRY, by Adele Faber
                 and Elaine Mazlish. (Norton, $14.95.) Ways to cope
                 with bickering between one's children.

 5   Y 14
          WEBST
          ER'S
          NEW
          WORLD
          DICTI
          ONARY
          .
                 (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The Second College
                 Edition of a standard work, updated in 1982.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

GEORGE C. MARSHALL: Statesman 1945-1959, by Forrest C. Pogue. (Viking, $29.95.)
The fourth and final volume of the five-star general's biography is, like its
subject, thoughtful, mature, balanced and full of humanity and intelligence.

THE TIDEWATER TALES, by John Barth. (Putnam, $21.95.) One of our most ingenious
practitioners of the literature of self-parody has written a love story -
marital, filial, domestic - that is also about love of a place and a country.

WHO GOES FIRST? The Story of Self-Experimentation in Medicine, by Lawrence K.
Altman. (Random House, $22.50.) A fascinating and original exploration of
scientific self-experimentation, by a medical reporter for The New York Times.

THE BLACK CLOTH: A Collection of African Folktales, by Bernard Binlin Dadie.
(University of Massachusetts, Cloth, $20; Paper, $8.95.) These 16 stories, an
exquisite fusion of entertainment and ethics, demonstrate the sophisticated
taste for song, epic, pun, riddle and satire of African peoples south of the
Sahara.

MOTHER LOVE, by Candace Flynt. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) An alcoholic
mother and her three daughters are the center of this exhilarating,
psychologically penetrating novel about first finding and then living one's own
life.

JAPANESE TALES, edited and translated by Royall Tyler. (Pantheon, $19.95.)
Classics without English portfolio until now, these 220 short stories date from
the 13th century or earlier.

''DEMOCRACY IS IN THE STREETS'': From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago, by
James Miller. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Deprived of an institutional memory,
S.D.S. lives again in this account, which emphasizes the intellectual
foundations of the Port Huron Statement, the charter document of S.D.S.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KOREAN WAR: MEMORIES, BUT ...

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: MARLBORO


NEARLY 34 years have elapsed since the end of the Korean War, but for Eli S.
Belil, memories still linger.

''We were all kids back then, called upon to serve our country and protect
another country and its people from the threat of Communism,'' said Mr. Belil,
now 55 years old and the Deputy Mayor of this Monmouth County community.

''To many in this country today, it is 'the forgotten war,' and I think that
those of us who served back then are particularly to blame for that.''

For the last 10 years, Mr. Belil, a research director for Penthouse and Omni
magazines in Manhattan, has tried to stir interest in erecting a Korean War
memorial in Washington, similar to the one on Vietnam.

But his efforts, he said, have been frustrated by ''official roadblocks,
ignorance and apathy when it comes to recognizing the sacrifices of those of us
who so long ago fought and paid the ultimate price for freedom in a faraway
land.''

Mr. Belil's efforts have included numerous correspondence with state and Federal
agencies, veterans' groups and the Washington-based American Battle Monuments
Commission, which is charged with planning and directing war memorials in the
nation's capital.

Past efforts by private citizens and veterans' groups to erect a Korean War
memorial were unavailing until the dedication of the Vietnam monument, which is
inscribed with the names of 58,022 service men and women.

''I'm not knocking the Vietnam veteran and the fact that their memorial is
finally a reality,'' said Mr. Belil, ''but like Vietnam, Korea was a
battleground in which almost as many men lost their lives over a shorter period
of time. All they have to show for it are a few fading pictures amongst
themselves and scars that neither time nor the Government's apathy will heal.''

Mr. Belil feels that the monument is all the more necessary since, he said,
8,177 servicemen in the Korean War are listed as missing in action, compared
with 2,459 in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Last October, President Reagan signed a measure authorizing the American Battle
Monuments Commission to erect a Korean War memorial, but its design and
completion, said Mr. Belil and officials of veterans' groups, are still years
away.

''They have been dragging their feet for 34 years,'' he said, ''and now that
there is an authorization, we'll still see the same foot-dragging because
everyone involved is afraid to make a decision.''

The measure - it was proposed by Representative James J. Florio, Democrat of
Pine Hill and himself a Korean War veteran - will provide nearly $1 million in
Federal funds to design the memorial, identify a permanent site and begin
construction.

An additional $5 million to complete the project will be raised through private
and corporate donations. The commission and an advisory panel - its members have
yet to be named - have until 1991 to break ground for the memorial.

To wait nearly three decades for any type of permanent recognition is ''a
disgrace when weighed against all of the sacrifices made by those who had as
much to live for as the rest of us,'' Mr. Belil said.

Government involvement means unwarranted delays, he asserted, adding that he
believes that the monument should be designed, built and paid for by private
sources.

Mr. Belil faults the Government for improperly managing existing funds earmarked
for the memorial.

In response to a letter that he sent to Vice President George Bush in March, the
Vice President indicated that a $1 million memorial donation from the Hyundai
Motor Corporation of South Korea was already in Federal hands.

However, according to Mr. Belil, the funds are in a noninterest-bearing account
''that each day is losing money that could be put toward the project.''

For some Korean War veterans living in New Jersey, the lack of a national
memorial is not surprising.

''The Korean veteran, for all intents and purposes, is the quietest,
most-forgotten veteran,'' said William L. Caubet, 55, an official in the Newark
office of the Veterans Administration.

A Korean veteran himself, Mr. Caubet was responsible in part for the Vietnam
memorial scheduled to be unveiled at the Garden State Arts Center in Holmdel
next year.

He and Mr. Belil attributed the years of waiting for a memorial to Korean War
veterans' unwillingness to ''make waves.''

''Time passes, and those of us who served in Korea picked up our lives and went
on to do other things,'' Mr. Caubet said.

''There wasn't the same stigma attached to our years of service as that for
those in Vietnam, and while it took 10 years to acknowledge the Vietnam veteran,
the Korean veteran got lost in the shuffle.''

Edward Fenton of Sicklerville, Camden County, who spent 28 months as a prisoner
of war in Korea, feels that, even though plans for a memorial are under way,
those veterans who have died between the war's end and the memorial's dedication
will never have known that ''their Government never thought enough about them to
remember them in such a way.''

''What most people don't realize is that we lost nearly 58,000 men in Vietnam
during the course of 10 years,'' said Mr. Fenton, 60, a Conrail
telecommunications supervisor. ''In Korea, the figure was 54,000 over three
years. On those grounds alone, the memorial is long overdue.''

According to the V.A. office in Newark, 782 New Jersey residents died during the
Korean conflict, compared with 1,480 in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PROFILE - NORTH'S ATTORNEY;
'Workaholic Is Really Too Bland'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1312 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 5


They circled each other for weeks, like sumo wrestlers straining for leverage.

Congress insisted that Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North could not testify in public
without first being grilled in private on all aspects of the Iran-contra affair.
But Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., Colonel North's attorney, wouldn't budge on his
insistence that Colonel North undergo only limited advance questioning.

In the end, despite angry ruminations about contempt citations and worse,
Congress blinked. And when he takes the stand for public testimony on Tuesday,
Colonel North will be the only witness to appear before the special House and
Senate committees whose remarks were not extensively previewed by lawyers and
members of the panels.

That was no surprise to veteran Washington lawyers and prosecutors who have seen
Mr. Sullivan in action.

Endless Work Hours

Like Colonel North, Mr. Sullivan is a Vietnam veteran and is known for his
endless work hours and penchant for relentless attack.

Colleagues and opponents say that his hallmarks as a lawyer are exhaustive
research followed by a barrage of assaults on all fronts. Typically, one of Mr.
Sullivan's first moves as Colonel North's attorney was to challenge the law
under which a special prosecutor was appointed to investigate the Iran-contra
affair.

Robert B. Barnett, who, like Mr. Sullivan, is a senior partner at the Washington
law firm of Williams and Connolly, says Mr. Sullivan spends hours going over the
documents himself for each case. ''He believes that the way you defend people is
by knowing all the facts,'' Mr. Barnett said. ''Before North testifies, Sullivan
will know as much about his life as North does.''

At a law firm known for demanding long hours, Mr. Sullivan stands out. A former
colleague said he was often at his desk before the eager young associates
arrived in the morning and was still there when they left at night. ''The word
workaholic,'' this colleague said, ''is really too bland.''

Another former associate, mixing metaphors, described the frequent
collaborations of Mr. Sullivan and Barry Simon, a younger partner at the firm,
this way:

''First they go over the ground with a fine-tooth comb. Then they scorch it.''

Indeed, Mr. Sullivan has a reputation for making prosecution cases unravel.

The Omni International Case

Mr. Sullivan and Mr. Simon recently won dismissal of income tax evasion charges
against the Omni International Corporation, a Maryland company, by convincing
the trial judge that Federal agents had backdated key documents.

In another case, which is still pending, Mr. Sullivan and Mr. Simon persuaded a
Federal judge to admit into evidence reams of classified information to defend
GTE Corporation executives and a company consultant on charges of illegally
obtaining classified Pentagon planning documents.

Government prosecutors were so disturbed by Mr. Sullivan's success in making the
classified information an integral part of his defense that they appealed the
rulings and said privately that they might drop the case if they lost. Both
prosecutors and other defense lawyers in the case said Mr. Sullivan showed great
skill in manipulating a relatively new law passed specifically to limit the
disclosure of classified data in national security cases.

That law, the Classified Information Procedures Act, is likely to play an
important part in any possible defense of Colonel North against broad conspiracy
charges being prepared by Lawrence Walsh, the special prosecutor. Colonel North
used much classified information in his role as a National Security Council
aide.

Mr. Sullivan, a 45-year-old native of Providence, R.I., enthusiastically follows
his law firm's rule against commenting to the press on pending cases. He
declined to be interviewed for this article, just as he has refused to discuss
any of the many allegations swirling around his client in the past several
months.

Lawyers who have worked with him, and against him, say Mr. Sullivan is well
regarded by both colleagues and courtroom opponents.

''He always puts the Government to the test - that's what Williams and Connolly
is known for,'' said William Pendergast, a former deputy chief of the Justice
Department's Defense Procurement Fraud Unit who is a Sullivan opponent in the
GTE case. ''Still, he's got a very genteel style for the hard positions he
takes.''

After graduating from Georgetown University's law school in 1967, Mr. Sullivan
joined the Army, eventually rising to the rank of captain.

In 1969, the same year Colonel North was winning combat medals in Vietnam,
Captain Sullivan was assigned to defend two of 24 soldiers on trial for a
protest at a California military stockade that included a sit-down strike and a
group singing of ''We Shall Overcome.''

Charges of Mutiny

The case was brought at the height of the anti-war protest movement, and the
Army accused the soldiers of mutiny, a charge that carries a maximum sentence of
death. Although Mr. Sullivan was a member of the Transportation Corps and was
not an Army legal officer, one of the accused asked for his help.

Mr. Sullivan first moved for a change of venue. Then he challenged the integrity
of the investigating officer for failing to include in his report a
recommendation that soldiers not be charged with mutiny.

Shortly after his clients were convicted, he gave a highly critical interview to
The New York Times.

''We have in the courts in this country the principle that we have the adversary
system, with one lawyer fighting against each other, using every tool within his
possession, bounded only by ethical considerations, to help his client. Do we
have that in the military?'' he told a reporter. ''I say we do not because the
defense attorneys do not have the power, or the will, or the freedom to go ahead
and use every legitimate tool on behalf of their client. You're a captain, not a
lawyer there.''

His courtroom performance so aggravated the Army brass that he was ordered to
spend the last six months of his tour in Vietnam, a transfer that was blocked
after several members of Congress objected.

His work also caught the attention of Edward Bennett Williams, head of the
Williams and Connolly law firm, and Mr. Sullivan went to work there soon after
leaving the military.

Since then, Mr. Sullivan has handled a number of high-profile cases. Colleagues
say that one of his most impressive was the Omni International case.

Prosecutors and investigators had been seeking to indict the company on tax
charges, but the company was successfully withholding documents by citing the
attorney-client privilege. To get around this problem, agents for the Internal
Revenue Service interviewed a former secretary to the company's lawyer.

On the basis of her purported statements, indictments were returned. Mr.
Sullivan quickly moved to dismiss the indictments, citing a breach of
attorney-client privilege. He also asked for original copies of the agents'
summaries of their interviews with the secretary and others in the case.

When these were turned over after a long delay, the defense lawyers noticed that
on key points the I.R.S. agents quoted themselves as making what seemed to be
remarkably prescient, sensitive comments about attorney-client privilege. The
defense called in a retired F.B.I. agent to examine the documents, and he proved
that the paper they were typed on had watermarks dating from 1984. The
Government said most of the summaries had been prepared in 1983, and they bore
that date.

The Government eventually acknowledged having edited the documents, saying the
changes were only minor. But Judge Walter E. Black saw it much differently.

In dismissing all of the charges, the judge wrote: ''The Government's conduct
was patently egregious and cannot be tolerated or condoned. Its manner of
proceeding shocks the court's conscience.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North with attorney Brendan V. Sullivan
Jr. (NYT/Greg Mathieson)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: A FAMILY REUNION;
Romney, Recalling 1968, Explains It All

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 4


Having gathered more than three dozen family members in a White House reception
room, the white-haired patriarch seemed suddenly to sense that this was the
perfect occasion to explain why he did not become President.

Not that he had any regrets, it should be understood, but popular history has it
wrong, insisted George W. Romney, the three-time Governor of Michigan whose run
for the 1968 Republican Presidential nomination is widely believed to have been
destroyed by his assertion that he had been misled or ''brainwashed'' by
American generals and diplomats on a 1965 trip to Vietnam.

''That wasn't true,'' said Mr. Romney, who celebrated a nostalgic 80th birthday
over the weekend by treating his four-generation clan to a fling in Washington.
''I didn't drop out of the race because of the 'brainwash' statement.''

Rockefeller Walked Away

What actually happened, he added Friday on their insiders' tour of the White
House, was that Nelson A. Rockefeller retreated from a commitment to support him
and decided to woo for himself the elements of the Republican Party not
supporting Richard M. Nixon, who went on to win the nomination and the election.
.

''When Rockefeller said he'd accept a draft, that meant he was a candidate,''
Mr. Romney told his progeny, ''and I knew it was all up.''

Soon after, Mr. Romney continued, he and his wife, Lenore, encountered the New
York Governor at a White House reception.

Rockefeller ''threw his arms around Lenore and said, 'Why did you let him pull
out?' '' Mr. Romney remembered. ''And she pushed him back and she said, 'Well,
Nelson, there couldn't be two candidates -and he turned red in the face and
walked away.' ''

In his recolleciton of the incident, Mr. Romney waved with some relish toward
the nearby room where he said the fateful encounter had occurred.

And so it went for the better part of two days, with Mr. Romney wearing blue
slacks and a polo shirt and playing raconteur and authoritarian tour-guide -
''How'd you like that?'' ''Jane, get your kids and let's go'' -for four
children, 22 camera-toting grandchildren, four spouses of grandchildren, three
sons- and daughters-in-law, two fiances and two great-grandchildren, most of
them from Michigan, California, Massachusetts and New York.

From the White House, their chartered bus rolled slowly up Pennsylvania Avenue
with the Governor (politicians are properly addressed by the highest title they
ever held) commanding the microphone.

After being delayed a bit while President Reagan's motorcade returned him to the
White House after a speech at the Jefferson Memorial, Mr. Romney recalled
long-ago discussions with Andrew Mellon at the Treasury building. And, on the
other side of the street from the Treasury, he recalled how, as a lobbyist for
the aluminum industry, he had fought the copper lobby and helped get aluminum
windows installed in the Commerce Department building then under construction.

After a stop at the National Gallery of Art to see ''The Sacrament of the Last
Supper,'' a Salvador Dali painting that in reproduction graces the Romney
homestead in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., the old politico pointed out the Robert A.
Taft carillon at the foot of Capitol Hill and expressed his dismay over how Mr.
Taft had ''chickened out'' over elements of what might have become a tougher
Taft-Hartley labor law.

Then it was on past the Russell Senate Office Building, where Mr. Romney got his
first Government job - he responded to an advertisement in The Washington Post -
as an aide to Senator David I. Walsh, a Massachusetts Democrat with whom he
eventually sat on the floor for nine months during passage of the Smoot-Hawley
tariff legislation.

Despite some grumbling in the back of the bus that the impromptu picnic lunch on
the Mall might have been more substantial - did they know that this
party-cum-civics lesson was costing perhaps $25,000 and that they would dine at
the posh new restaurant Potomac that night? -the family tried gamely to keep up
as they made for the old 10th-floor office that Mr. Romney occupied when he
headed the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the Nixon
Administration.

''You were just a secretary, huh?'' joked one of the younger set, pretending to
imagine his grandfather taking dictation.

Sanctums on Capitol Hill

The day's final assault was on the Capitol, where a Romney chum, former
Representative Fred Schwengel of Iowa, showed them such hard-to-visit sanctums
as the Speaker's Gallery, featuring a portrait of ''Tallulah Bankhead's Daddy''
(William B. Bankhead was a Representative from Alabama in the late 1930's), the
unmarked Prayer Room and the Republican cloakroom, with its new steel-reinforced
anti-terrorist door.

Mount Vernon and various other shrines were still to come the next day; blue,
yellow, green and maroon T-shirts color-coded by family were handed out for a
group Fourth of July photograph at the Lincoln Memorial. And Mr. Romney couldn't
resist a bit of political summing up.

His main theme, which has evolved since he left public office in the early
1970's, is that Americans have become overly inclined to look to government to
solve problems, and this clash of narrow interests has undermined social and
political cohesiveness.

And he says he has discovered the severe limits of even Presidential power -
that is why 1968 doesn't haunt him - and how such seemingly unchallengeable
institutions as the American automobile industry in which he was once a chief
executive can be humbled, as he said he predicted it would be, by foreign
competitors.

With what appeared to be some immodesty about his own political career - he was
one of the first to warn of the serious inflation of the late 1970's and he
opposed the Vietnam War for foreign policy and military, but not moral, reasons
- Mr. Romney added, ''You can't be too right too soon and win elections.''

When it was over, Ronna Romney, a daughter-in-law, said she wasn't sure the
younger members of the family ''really understood'' all that happened this
weekend.

''But they knew it was momentous,'' she said. ''I think it was that he was
passing the mantle.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George W. Romney (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TRUMP FEUD: BARBS SHOW DEEPER SPLIT

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2655 words


The feud between Mayor Koch and Donald J. Trump, viewed primarily as a personal
spat between two powerful public figures, is more importantly a rupture in one
of New York City's key economic-development partnerships, experts say.

It also has raised issues that go beyond the two antagonists to the nature of
the public-private coalition that helped bring the city's economy from its
precarious condition of the 1970's - caused in large part by the 1975 fiscal
crisis and the cutbacks it necessitated - to the boom of the 1980's.

The two men virtually personified that fusion of public and private forces - Mr.
Koch, who enticed private development with tax abatements, and Mr. Trump, the
most visible of the takers. Only hours before beginning their exchange of
insults in May, the two amiably shared the dais at a benefit dinner for the
Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company, continuing to foster the image of
common cause.

Dispute Raises Key Issues

However much vitriol each man has brought to the dispute since then, many
observers maintain that beyond all the nasty adjectives exist major
disagreements over genuine issues. The most immediate of these concerns the
separate efforts by Mayor Koch and Mr. Trump to keep NBC from moving its
corporate headquarters to New Jersey - this at a time when such major corporate
residents as Trans World Airlines, the Mobil Corporation and the J. C. Penney
Company have announced plans to relocate outside of the city.

The issue of retaining large businesses, in turn, leads to even larger
questions, questions without easy answers: Are public officials or private
business executives better equipped to shepherd the city to continuing
prosperity? And is the recovery from the economic malaise of the 1970's more
fragile than it appears?

It is unclear how other major developers feel about these questions being raised
and debated so publicly, for virtually all of the large builders contacted for
this article refused to comment. Most of them, however, expressed the opinion
that little good could come of the Koch-Trump discord. Many scholars, business
leaders and present and former city officials agree that the argument can
severely damage the public-private partnership.

''I think there is no question that the fiscal crisis created a climate where
the private sector and the city worked more willingly together,'' said Robert F.
Wagner Jr., a former Deputy Mayor who is now the president of the city's Board
of Education. ''It was in everybody's interest to save the city. And now that
era of good feeling is coming to an end.''

Kathryn Wylde, vice president of the New York City Partnership, a private
nonprofit group that develops housing, businesses and jobs, said: ''The issue
is: How do we pursue private development within the public interest? And the
Trump dispute has personalized that question.''

Fiscal Crisis And a Coalition

The rise of Mr. Trump and a number of other, less publicized developers in the
12 years since the fiscal crisis, experts say, indicates how extensively New
York City government has relied on private capital and expertise to resuscitate
the city's economy from the shock of near-bankruptcy in 1975. The Koch
administration, as well as the administration of Mr. Koch's predecessor, Abraham
D. Beame, offered tax abatements and zoning concessions as bait for private
developers to construct not only major residential and commercial buildings, but
even to complete what ordinarily are considered public-works projects: parks,
pedestrian plazas, subway improvements, low-income housing and, in the most
well-known instance, the Wollman Memorial Rink renovations that the city itself
had bungled.

At the same time, the experts continue, the discord between the Mayor and Mr.
Trump shows the major strains that afflict the alliance between city government
and big business, strains that are exacerbated by the let's-make-a-deal nature
of large construction in a Manhattan with virtually no undeveloped land.

Filling a Breach

Many scholars depict this time of coalition as one of the three distinct phases
of city history in this century. It was preceded by an era of largely unfettered
private building - curtailed by the passage of the city's first zoning law in
1916 and halted by the stock market crash of 1929 - and then by a half-century
of public building executed by Robert Moses.

This period ended, in some respects, when Mr. Moses left the last of his several
public offices in 1968, and in other respects when the city went to the brink of
bankruptcy. Whether or not the city wanted to undertake any major construction
projects, it had no money to pay for them. And with the election of President
Reagan in 1980, Federal funds for housing dried up, too.

Into the breach stepped Mayor Koch, who was first elected in 1977, and several
private developers, including Mr. Trump, George Klein, Harry Helmsley, William
Zeckendorf Jr., Jeffrey Glick, Jack Rudin and William Kaufman.

Mayor Koch reprised his policy in a recent City Hall interview. ''In the
economic area, government's best approach is to get out of the way,'' he said.
''The private sector knows best how to build and how to make money.'' He went
on, ''If at all possible, what we should do is get out of the way.''

A report issued last week by the city's Commission on the Year 2000 made the
same point in strikingly similar words: ''There are real limits to what the city
government can do to shape the economy. Often, the city's most constructive role
is to stay out of the way...''

This general policy translated into specific moves by the city to grant tax
abatements and increases in square-footage to private developers - the theory
being that what the city lost in property taxes it would more than make up in
sales and income taxes from the residents or employees that a major new building
would attract.

One of the first major abatements was granted to Mr. Trump in the waning days of
the Beame administration. Having bought an option on the defunct Commodore Hotel
on East 42d Street for the bargain price of $500,000, Mr. Trump gained a 40-year
taxabatement on the property. This allowed him to renovate the Commodore into
the lavish Grand Hyatt Hotel, which many city officials credit with reversing
the deterioration of East 42d Street.

On the whole, Mayor Koch said, the private projects that have received a total
of $1.3 billion in taxabatements are expected over the next 20 years to produce
$23 billion in taxes. The figure includes sales and income taxes as well as
property taxes, which in many cases are gradually restored during the period of
the abatement.

Builders Move To Fill Vacuum

Almost from the outset, however, the Koch administration was criticized for
giving abatements to projects in what opponents said were tony neighborhoods
where developers would have built without financial incentives. The city, as
these critics saw it, was abdicating control over the quality-of-life to private
interests.

''There was a vacuum - an almost absolute vacuum - in planning and executing
large-scale projects after the fiscal crisis,'' said Robert A. Caro, who won a
Pulitzer Prize for his biography of Robert Moses. ''I'd have hoped that the gap
would've been filled by public officials, and hopefully by a Mayor. It has not.
And into the vacuum have moved these private developers with their values. Their
values are valid for them, but they shouldn't be the values of the city
government.''

Making Deals

What further complicated the situation was the dearth of vacant land in
Manhattan. To replace an existing structure with a new and larger one often
meant exceeding the size for the site under the city's zoning law.

A private developer would often end up dickering with the city government,
community boards and neighborhood groups, trading the commitment to construct
public works for the right to raise a larger building. In the case of Mr.
Zeckendorf's project on the site of the old Madison Square Garden, on Eighth
Avenue at 49th Street, the developer negotiated to make subway improvements in
exchange for a 20 percent increase in the square footage of his new commercial
building.

''You got into a situation in New York where everything was a deal,'' said Dr.
George Sternlieb, director of the Urban Policy Research Center at Rutgers
University in New Brunswick, N.J. ''You buy a piece of land and what you put on
it is only a function of how good a lawyer you've got, how well you can seduce
the community. And in that context, the kind of argument that Trump and Koch are
now having was just waiting to happen.''

The Commission on the Year 2000 echoed this criticism, saying: ''While zoning
should be a relatively straightforward matter - telling the developer what
clearly what he cannot do - it has become very complex and, in many instances,
ambiguous.''

Trump Rescues Wollman Rink

Another key element in New York's growing use of private developers is the
concession by public officials that the city cannot build as quickly or as
inexpensively as outside contractors. Put simply, the city is required to adhere
to laws that private companies are not - from seeking bids and then selecting
the lowest bidder to using at least four different contractors on a given job.

''It's a result not of bad guys or incompetent guys in the public sector, but a
lot of good guys having put in a lot of rules to accomplish useful things,''
said Richard Ravitch, former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority and now chairman of the Bowery Savings Bank.

A number of private builders, however, also believed that New York City agencies
were incompetent. And Mr. Trump, more than anyone, expressed these sentiments
and exploited them, positioning himself not merely as a partner with government
but almost as a replacement for it.

Offer Accepted

''I never knock the public sector in general,'' Mr. Trump said in a recent
interview. Then he added pointedly: ''Because I can tell you Tom Kean has done a
fabulous job in New Jersey creating an environment for business. That's public
sector and that's great.'' His attitude about New York City and New York State
is less admiring.

After Mr. Trump brokered the sale of the Penn Central rail yards to the state
for construction of a new convention center, for example, he offered to waive
his fee and build it for $200 million - provided he could name the structure for
his family. The state turned him down, and the Jacob K. Javits Convention
Center, as it was named, was completed by the State Urban Development
Corporation two years behind schedule and at a cost of $486 million.

An even more striking incident involved the Wollman Rink in Central Park. The
city had spent five years and $12 million by June 1986 trying to renovate the
popular skating rink, and still the job was unfinished.

''There it was in the middle of Central Park - an incredible symbol of
incompetence,'' Mr. Trump said. He sent a letter to Mayor Koch offering to
complete the job with $2 million in city monies, and promising to do so within
six months, nine less than Parks Department officials were estimating it would
take them.

The city accepted Mr. Trump's offer. The developer rebuilt the rink under cost
and within schedule. And suddenly a number of setbacks for Mr. Trump on other
fronts - a dashed attempt to build a sports stadium in Queens, a failed suit by
the United States Football League, in which he was a key figure as owner of the
New Jersey Generals - were replaced in the public mind by Mr. Trump's success
with a highly visible and well-loved landmark.

''It was brilliant public relations on his part,'' Mayor Koch conceded in the
recent interview in City Hall.

Line is Drawn On Tax Breaks

The Wollman Rink, then, represented one obvious root of Mr. Trump's
disenchantment with Mayor Koch, whom he had given campaign contributions of
$25,300 in the preceding five years.

But it was not the only root. Other tensions, related to changes in the city's
development policy, also contributed to the split between the two men.

It is often assumed that Mr. Trump received a tax-abatement on Trump Tower, his
Fifth Avenue showpiece, from the city. But the city actually turned down the
request. So did the State Supreme Court when Mr. Trump sued to overturn the
decision. He won the $50 million abatement in the State Court of Appeals.

Further, the city attempted to diminish the deal-making in Manhattan development
by rezoning the entire borough in 1982. The new zoning lowered the densities on
the East Side and raised them on the West Side, where the city wanted to
encourage new construction. The city also formalized the issuance of
taxabatements by giving them according to a project's location in certain
geographical areas, not on a case-by-case basis. After November 1986, the city
cut off all abatements for residential projects in Manhattan south of 96th
Street, unless the structure incorporated low-income housing.

The abatement policy in general was becoming the subject of increasing debate.
One side of the argument held that with a $700 million budget surplus the city
was healthy enough not to make any giveaways and needed to begin restoring the
social services decimated by the fiscal crisis. The other side contended that
the city needed to continue providing incentives because the 10- and 15-year
leases written for many corporate tenants during the fiscal crisis - at about
one-third of market rate - were beginning to come due. Faced with new leases at
far higher prices, this argument went, many of tenants would chase cheap rents
across the Hudson.

Not many developers have been pleased with the tightened policy on abatements,
but developers in New York have traditionally kept their grievances with the
city to themselves, or have channeled them through their lawyers. As Howard J.
Rubenstein, a prominent public relations man, advised several major builders
during a 1983 dispute about Times Square redevelopment: ''You have a long life
in this city. Don't be a warrior.''

The NBC Question

Mr. Trump, in contrast, protested that city inaction and incompetence would
drive large companies to New Jersey. And to halt at least part of what he saw as
an imminent exodus, he asked for the largest taxabatement in the city's history
for his Television City project. He wanted to pay no property taxes for 20 years
on the entire 100-acre site near the Hudson River, between 59th and 72d Street;
the abatement covering not only NBC's offices and studios but 7,600 luxury
apartments and a shopping mall.

Ms. Wylde of the New York City Partnership said: ''He essentially said to the
city, 'I am representing the public interest. And you need me more than I need
you.' ''

The city has responded by offering abatements only for the NBC facilities, and
offering them whether NBC remains in its Rockefeller Center headquarters, moves
to Television City or chooses any other site.

For city officials and many scholars, the Television City situation offers the
most public forum yet for debating just what city policy should be, and just who
should be setting it.

''You have to ask yourself with a case like this, 'What is the precedent you are
setting?' '' Mr. Ravitch of the Bowery Savings Bank said. ''What are you going
to say to everybody else. The rules have got to be uniformly applied.''

Meanwhile, by making his disdain for Mayor Koch so public, Mr. Trump has broken
ranks with many other developers, who still abide by the traditional low
profile. Asked his opinion of the NBC dispute, Steven Spinola, the president of
the Real Estate Board, an association of private property owners, said: ''I
haven't figured out what we're going to be gaining by the public debate we've
been having. I would hope something constructive would come out of it, but I
haven't seen it yet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Donald Trump (NYT) (page 34); photo of Mayor Koch (NYT/Neal
Boenzi) (page 34)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR CAMBODIA, STILL MISERY AND WAR

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2233 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 2


More than eight years after the Vietnamese invasion that freed Cambodia from
destructive tyranny, the country has recovered enough only to live a drastically
impoverished life under a less draconian but still oppressive regime.

Prime Minister Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge revolution, which took the lives of untold
hundreds of thousands of Cambodians and eradicated the structure and roots of a
traditional Buddhist, rural society, has been succeeded by a more conventional
Communist regime of Vietnamese inspiration. About 140,000 Vietnamese troops
maintain it in place.

Barely Adequate Nutrition

This fertile country has passed from the near-famine of the Pol Pot years and
widespread starvation after his overthrow to a state of barely adequate
nutrition.

The capital, once one of the trimmest and best cared-for in Asia, has become a
run-down city in which pigs scavenge for food, cows sit in the shade of main
boulevards and chickens scurry under a stroller's feet. The litter of years lies
ungathered, breeding rats and flies.

''No one dies of starvation'' is the hopeful way in which members of the small,
isolated group of Western relief workers describe the situation in a land where
they have sparse access to the multitude of nearly roadless villages.

But in Cambodia's only modern children's hospital - a donation of World Vision,
an American Protestant missionary group - the corridors are lined with a chronic
overflow of children suffering from acute malnutrition and parasitic diarrhea.

Such conditions in the most developed and accessible part of the country
indicate greater suffering in areas hidden from outside view in this nation of
seven million.

The United Nations Children's Fund reported this year that in Cambodia, where an
enduring ''baby boom'' has followed the separation of men from women in the
Khmer Rouge years, 216 of each 1,000 children die before reaching the age of 5.

Life expectancy is 46 years. In neighboring Vietnam, child mortality is 98 per
1,000 and life expectancy 60 years.

Deprivation Is Reality

The dominant reality confronting a visitor who has known Cambodia for more than
17 years and last visited here seven years ago is pervasive economic
deprivation. Eight years after the overthrow of the regime that turned the
entire country into a forced-labor camp, Cambodia lives markedly below the
levels that prevailed before all-out war began in 1970.

Few countries not under strong Soviet influence have recognized the Government,
which headed by President Heng Samrin and Prime Minister Hun Sen.

Most of the rest of the world, including the United States, recognizes an exile
coalition, the dominant force in which is Mr. Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge. China's
material and diplomatic support is the coalition's main source of support.

Phnom Penh, a city where the population has climbed back to about 600,000 after
standing nearly deserted in the Khmer Rouge reign from 1975 until 1979,
languishes in near-isolation. It is reachable from the outside only from Vietnam
or the Soviet Union.

New Arrivals From Countryside

After the selective killing of city dwellers by the Khmer Rouge, the population
of the capital consists largely of country folk who came in search of relief
food immediately after the Vietnamese invasion.

''The streets are still dirty,'' said Chhey Kanha, Deputy Health Minister.
''Most people here are new to the city. Life is hard for them. We are trying to
educate them, especially in sanitation, but we are short of trained people. The
culture and education of the people are limited.''

Mrs. Chhey Kanha said she did not know how many people had access to
uncontaminated water. She said the Government was urging people to boil it but
few did. Some relief officials say they believe that not more than 1 percent of
the population has safe water.

''We don't have enough money to repair the city,'' said Kong Som Ol, the
American-educated former Agriculture Minister who serves as a minister assisting
the Prime Minister. ''The city is dirty. The sewage system overflows during the
rainy season.''

Wages Are Low

Poverty appears to afflict all Cambodians. The standard wage is less than $7 a
month at the official rate of exchange, less than $2 at the more realistic
black-market rate. In addition, the Government sells rice to its employees at
below-market prices, as well as granting occasional issues of clothing and other
necessities at reduced rates.

Second jobs are the rule. A low-ranking official said his wife bought fruit in
suburban markets and sold it at slight profit in the city, as well as taking in
sewing at night. The markets offer tempting fruits and vegetables but at prices
so high that a month's wages would not fill a shopping basket.

The high cost may explain why medical relief workers find Cambodians eating and
feeding their children an unbalanced diet consisting largely of rice, in which
the country is nearly self-sufficient. Mrs. Chhey Kanha said the cause was the
ignorance of mothers. In the past, however, vegetables and fruit were staples of
everybody's diet.

Dr. Sophie Biacabe, a French doctor with a relief medical team for children,
said malnutrition was the main health problem. She said surveys in the capital
showed that 20 percent of children up to 5 years old suffered malnutrition
severe enough to affect their growth and that 4.7 percent of children under 3
years suffered acute malnutrition.

Health Care a Low Priority

A European relief official said the health system was grossly inadequate because
of the low priority assigned to it by a Government that he said is above all
concerned about organizing and indoctrinating the population, and about military
and security matters.

The Vietnamese troops, and the Cambodian Army that is growing under their
tutelage, conducted an offensive in 1985 that eradicated 16 camps on the
Cambodian side of the border with Thailand, from which the Khmer Rouge and
smaller forces loyal to a former Prime Minister, Son Sann, or the former chief
of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, had been fighting.

The war has changed into what a senior Communist official familiar with
Vietnam's assessment described as ''the battle for the villages.'' The Khmer
Rouge, which once fought from the border bases with support from the Thai
military and supplies from China, now operates in small guerrilla groups farther
inside Cambodia.

They also mount occasional terrorist attacks in cities. Last month, according to
an ambassador from a non-Communist country, seven or eight small Chinese mines,
hidden in booby-traps, exploded in the streets of Phnom Penh, maiming children
and other civilians.

'Four or Five Hot Spots'

The senior official said Vietnam had entrusted protection of the border almost
fully to the new Cambodian Army, the troop strength of which has not officially
disclosed. ''Except, of course, four or five hot spots,'' he added. Vietnam's
forces, he said, are massed nearby and rush to help the cambodians when needed.

Gen. Trang Cong Man, editor of the Vietnamese Army newspaper Quan Doi Nhan Dan,
said last may in an interview with a French reporter that the Pol Pot forces in
the interior were supplied by two main infiltration routes. One runs south
through the mountains of the northern border, where Cambodia, Laos and Thailand
meet. The other, from the south, stretches north from the Thai port of Trat into
southwestern Cambodia.

The main routes linking Phnom Penh to Western Cambodia are in a permanent state
of insecurity. Traffic to and from the main seaport, Kompong Som, moves in
escorted convoys.

In the northeast, according to the senior official, Chinese supplies reach not
only Khmer Rouge units but are also taken to rebellious Vietnamese mountain
tribes who cooperate with the Khmer Rouge.

Security 'Better' in Cambodia

Cambodian ministers and senior officials asserted that the war had essentially
been won. ''Security in Cambodia is better than elsewhere in the world,'' said
Foreign Minister Kong Korm in an interview, citing acts of terrorism in Western
capitals.

More critical Communist diplomats and other foreign officials here said that the
rebels do not threaten the regime, as long as Vietnames troops remain, but
seriously weakened its efforts to raise to its feet a country that has been
gravely damaged by its afflictions since it went from comparative peace to total
war in 1970.

The consensus of foreigners, including Communist ambassadors, is that the Heng
Samrin-Hun Sen Government is woefully outmatched by the tasks confronting it,
extremely short of qualified manpower, badly organized in setting priorities and
hesitant in making decisions.

The senior official familiar with the thinking of Vietnam, which continues to
hold the keys to the Government's actions, described Hanoi as lacking confidence
in Cambodia's capacity to stand on its own for a long time.

'Energy Is Low'

''There is too much passivity,'' the official said, presenting the Vietnamese
view. ''Energy is low. They have hospitals but no personnel, schools but not the
right teachers. They cannot yet live by their own hands.

''They are fatalist. The fear of a return of Pol Pot remains very strong, but
they don't do enough to transform that into an attitude of resolution. Vietnam
cannot do that for them.'' Western relief workers said that because of the low
standard of living the regime was fearful of alienating the population further
by demanding discipline at work. ''You can let standards drop, but here there's
no bottom,'' a technician said.

Communist diplomats speak slightingly of the Government's attempts to instill
Communist ideology.

'The Laws of Nature'

''They talk too much of Marxism, but the party is just beginning to seek a
popular base,'' an ambassador said. ''There are only leaders now. To start from
the top like this is a little against the laws of nature.''

Despite the barrage of propaganda - through posters, slogans and a stream of
lectures at all workplaces, which take such priority that a Western official
said they even caused surgeons to be called from the operating table -
Cambodians in private conversation betrayed indifference. Marxist arguments
during interviews often appeared to be repeated as if by rote.

Without inspiring faith in Communism among the majority of the people, the
regime has succeeded in creating an atmosphere heavy with fear of police
surveillance. While seven years ago, a reporter held many conversations in which
Cambodians made clear their skepticism of the regime and the Vietnamese
occupation, such talks now are limited to casual contacts on the street, in
which strangers give brief vent to their feelings, only to disappear furtively.

Angered by a recent report by Amnesty International charging imprisonment of
political critics, torture and intolerable prison conditions, the Government
declined to arrange an interview with a justice official to discuss specific
charges.

Instead, Foreign Minister Kong Korm criticized the organization, saying it had
failed to protest violations by the Pol Pot regime or in the rebel groups'
camps. In fact, the report covered those issues.

He also defended the Government's refusal to allow representatives of the
organization to visit Cambodia. ''We are wise not to allow them to come to
vilify us,'' he said.

The Government has been cautious in introducing measures that disrupt
traditional agricultural systems and?patterns of religious observance.
Nevertheless, there have been changes in both areas that could have
substantial?long-term effects.

The Government has introduced ''solidarity production groups'' of 10 to 15
families as the basic?units of agriculture, and according to Deputy Agriculture
Minister Chea Song, the authorities intend to offer farmers more tools in return
for accepting more collectivization.?

Despite a constitutional guarantee of religious freedom, the Government in 1985
instituted a measure that has put the long-term future of Buddhism in doubt.
Apparently to conserve manpower for military service and agricultural work, it
forbade men under 50 to join the monkhood. In Buddhism, monks are the essential
continuers of the faith because of their traditional role as teachers and
arbiters of much of daily life.

Westerners are severely restricted in their movements and contacts. The 17
United Nations and private relief organizations represented here are
concentrated in two hotels to which Cambodians with no official business have no
access. They are not allowed to employ Cambodians.

Foreigners are not allowed to leave Phnom Penh, even to visit aid projects run
by their organizations, without permission, which takes a long time to obtain.
Many requests remain unanswered. Seven years ago, a reporter was allowed to
travel widely by road throughout the country, but on this visit he was
restricted to two short road trips and a visit to the temples at Angkor for a
few hours by plane.

Mr. Kong Som Ol, the American-educated minister, agreed with a reporter who said
he found morale lower than in period shortly after the overthrow of the Pol Pot
regime.

''This is a result of the terrible Lon Nol regime during the American
imperialist aggression and the Pol Pot regime,'' he said. ''The younger
generation, now in school, is okay. But the rest of the population is a little
exhausted.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows area of Phnom Penh, Cambodia, where hunger and poverty
flourish (NYT); Photo of malnourished child being comforted by mother and sister
(AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NORTH: FROM 'NATIONAL HERO' TO RELUCTANT WITNESS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1453 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 6


At a hearing of the House Foreign Affairs Committee last December, Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North proclaimed, ''I don't think there is another person in America
that wants to tell the story as much as I do.''

In public Congressional testimony beginning Tuesday, Colonel North will finally
get his chance.

But it comes only after the 43-year-old marine, who served as the central figure
in both the arms sales to Iran and the covert operation to supply the Nicaraguan
rebels, has thrown up the most hostile legal strategy of any of the
participants, trying to delay and limit his appearance, even though he was
granted limited immunity from prosecution based on his testimony.

In his December appearance and since, he has declined to answer questions on the
matter, citing his Fifth Amendment right not to incriminate himself.

Evidence Shows North Lied

The reason may be that the public's perception of the man President Reagan once
called a ''national hero'' has undergone a profound change. As evidence of that,
in a national poll published by U.S. News and World Report this week, 59 percent
of those interviewed said they believed the Congressional committees conducting
the Iran-contra hearings ''won't get the truth'' from Colonel North.

In the last two months of Congressional hearings, new evidence has showed that
Colonel North lied about helping the contras when Congress banned such aid by
the Government.

Testimony by other witnesses has indicated that he tried to cover up the facts
about American involvement in the arms-for-hostages deal with Iran even from
Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d. And the hearings have indicated he may have
benefited financially in the Iran and contra affairs.

The last witness to testify, Charles J. Cooper, an Assistant Attorney General,
reluctantly said he would not believe Colonel North, even under oath.

John W. Nields Jr., chief counsel for the House committee, is scheduled to
question Colonel North all day Tuesday. Judging from the way the committees have
questioned previous witnesses, Mr. Nields's approach is likely to be low-key and
nonconfrontational. Arthur L. Liman, the chief counsel for the Senate committee,
is to question Colonel North Wednesday in what is expected to be tough
cross-examination.

On Thursday, four committee members will question him. On Friday, probably his
last day of testimony, other members get their chance.

The parade of witnesses so far has depicted Colonel North as an extraordinary
character with unusual power -''second only to the President,'' said Daniel K.
Inouye, the chairman of the Senate Iran-contra committee.

Colonel North commanded the private military and intelligence network called
Project Democracy that used code names like ''Steelhammer'' or ''Blood and
Guts.'' He negotiated foreign policy with other governments that ran counter to
longstanding American goals. He was chief fund-raiser and speechmaker for the
contras. And he even gave White House tours to Iranian officials.

Notebooks of Records

According to one friend, spiral notebooks Colonel North gave to the committees
last week contain records showing that he met privately with President Reagan,
contrary to White House assertions. The notebooks also show that Colonel North
had many more meetings with William J. Casey, the Director of Central
Intelligence, than known, the friend said.

The friend's claims have not been independently verified and it is not clear
whether the committees would believe notebook entries. But the books could shed
light on a major question: Where did Colonel North get the authority to conduct
secret operations that ran counter to official foreign policy?

President Reagan has denied knowing about the diversion of funds from the Iran
arms sales to the contras. But some investigators believe Mr. Reagan may have
privately encouraged Colonel North in a general sense.

At a news conference today, Senator George J. Mitchell, the Maine Democrat who
will be one of Colonel North's principal questioners, cautioned against
overemphasizing the question of whether the President knew of the diversion of
money to the contras.

'Broader' Questions

Senator Mitchell was one of the members who questioned Colonel North in private
on this last week. Several committee members have said they are not sure Colonel
North would know how much Mr. Reagan knew about the diversion.

Today, Senator Mitchell said: ''I think the White House has, in a skillful
political way, narrowed it down to that, as though if the answer to that is
'No,' that's all there is to it. The signficant questions are much broader, and
they go to the rule of law.''

Some witnesses, notably Robert C. McFarlane, the former national security
adviser, have suggested that Colonel North had a close relationship with Mr.
Casey and that Mr. Casey may have used him to evade Congress's ban on contra
aid.

Virtually all the witnesses have described Colonel North, who was deputy
director of political-military affairs on the National Security Council, as a
devoted officer who would not have acted without orders.

Poindexter Is Next Witness

But if Colonel North cannot answer who gave him authority or whether President
Reagan knew about the diversion, the committees will have to await the next
scheduled witness, Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter, who resigned as national
security adviser when Colonel North was dismissed.

Some investigators say Colonel North thrust himself into the Iran and contra
operations by his energy, single-mindedness and his devotion to building
American power abroad. His work on the National Security Council, where he was
assigned in 1981, involved Central America and counterterrorism, which merged in
the Iran-contra affair.

Fawn Hall, his secretary, said: ''I think they turned to him because he was a
person that, when there was a crisis, he wouldn't say he was too tired or
wouldn't say, 'I'll handle it in the morning.' He said, 'I'll deal with it right
now.' ''

America's failure in Vietnam weighed heavily on Colonel North, Mr. McFarlane
testified, and in his zeal to stop Communism in Nicaragua the colonel would
occasionally ''go beyond'' the guidance given him. His work with the contras
''was something that was not just an assignment for him - it was something in
which he had a conviction,'' Mr. McFarlane said.

Worked on Grenada Invasion

Colonel North's intensity and long hours, however, sometimes worried his
colleagues. In June 1986, Mr. McFarlane wrote a note to Admiral Poindexter on
the White House computer system suggesting that ''in Ollie's interest I would
get him transferred or sent to Bethesda,'' the naval hospital.

Colonel North had also worked on planning for the invasion of Grenada, and then
helped handle the White House response to the hijacking of a Trans World
Airlines jet to Beirut in 1985. He has also said it was his idea to force down
the Egyptian jet carrying the terrorists who hijacked the Achille Lauro cruise
ship.

The chief of the C.I.A.'s Near East division told the Tower Commission that
Colonel North, more than any other United States official, was responsible for
the arms-for-hostages deal and ''essentially kept it alive.''

Born in San Antonio and raised in Philmont, N.Y., in a strict Roman Catholic
family, the young Oliver North seemed to be in competition with everybody, a
high school teacher recalled. After suffering a knee injury in a car accident
while attending the Naval Academy at Annapolis, he was forced to drop out and go
home to recuperate. A neighbor said he got back into shape by jumping off the
garage.

As a marine officer in Vietnam in 1969, he won the Silver Star for leading
repeated charges against a North Vietnamese unit on a hill, driving them off
despite heavy casualties in his platoon. Serving as 'Fall Guy'? Later, in
Washington, he seemed cynical about Congress. In 1985, Colonel North prepared a
letter for Mr. McFarlane to send to Congress denying that the colonel had
provided military help for the contras, though he had been in almost daily
contact with contra leaders, giving military advice and raising money for them.

The investigators may also want to ask whether Colonel North is still serving
the Administration by appearing to be the ''fall guy.'' Robert W. Owen, who
served as his intermediary with the contras, testified that Colonel North often
said that would be his role.

On the day before Colonel North was dismissed, his lawyer at the time, Thomas C.
Green, called a senior Justice Department official to try to head off the
inquiry. ''Colonel North is, you know, your ultimate marine,'' Mr. Green said.
''He wants to step forward and take the spears in his own chest.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: THE IRAN-CONTRA AFFAIR;
5 YOUNG LAWYERS WHO WOULD BE HEROS... AND A MARINE WHO WEARS A HERO'S RIBBONS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 6


For talented young prosecutors, it is the best assignment since the fall of
Richard M. Nixon.

The five deputies to Lawrence E. Walsh, the special prosecutor in the
Iran-contra affair, have the chance to make legal history, and to make legal
celebrities of themselves as well.

Watergate, as they well know, offered legal stardom to a group of elite but
largely unknown prosecutors. Archibald Cox, the first Watergate prosecutor,
became a household name, and his deputies, including Richard Ben-Veniste and
Philip A. Lacovara, found themselves described as national heroes.

''My theory of modern history is that things run in 15-year cycles,'' said John
W. Keker of San Francisco, one of the deputies in the Iran-contra investigation.
''And it's been close to 15 years since Watergate.''

Since his appointment last December, Mr. Walsh, whose formal title is
independent counsel, has hired 25 lawyers. Known as associate counsel, many were
chosen from the nation's most prominent law firms; others were veteran Federal
prosecutors in New York and Washington.

Mr. Walsh, a New York lawyer, quickly divided the lawyers into teams focusing on
different aspects of the arms affair. To run the day-to-day investigation, he
named these five key lieutenants:

* Mr. Keker, 43 years old, founder of his own law firm in San Francisco, is in
charge of a team investigating the Central Intelligence Agency and private
United States support for the Nicaraguan contras.

* Paul L. Friedman, also 43, a partner in the New York firm of White & Case, has
overseen much of the litigation designed to enforce subpoenas and court orders.

* Robert N. Shwartz, 37, resigned his partnership at the New York firm of
Debevoise & Plimpton to lead a team of prosecutors studying the flow of money
from the Iran arms sale.

* Guy Miller Struve, 44, a partner at Mr. Walsh's old firm, Davis Polk &
Wardwell in New York, runs the investigation's Manhattan office and works with
Mr. Friedman to ward off constitutional challenges.

* Chris Todd, 40, former chief of the General Crimes Unit at the United States
Attorney's office in Manhattan, heads a team reviewing activities at the White
House and the National Security Council.

Collectively the five are slightly older and more experienced than the rest of
the staff. Defense lawyers say that the deputies are bright and, and according
to one, ''frighteningly tenacious.''

''They go a bit overboard in their thoroughness,'' the lawyer said. ''But I
don't think you'll find a brighter group of attorneys. These guys are all quiet
but crafty. They're honorable sharks, if there is such a thing.''

Mr. Friedman and Mr. Todd have been around long enough that they played a role
in the Watergate investigation. Back then Mr. Friedman worked at the United
States Attorney's Office in Washington, which handled the Watergate cases until
a special prosecutor was appointed.

''John Ehrlichman and H. R. Haldeman used to wait outside my office'' before
appearing before the grand jury, Mr. Friedman recalled.

In 1976 Mr. Todd oversaw the prosecution of Anthony T. Ulasewicz, a retired New
York City police officer convicted of evading income taxes on money he earned by
being a conduit between the White House and the Watergate burglars.

Analogies Do Crop Up

Watergate analogies crop up repeatedly in office conversations. As happened with
the Watergate special prosecutor, Mr. Walsh and his staff are making decisions
that could shape the nation's future.

Mr. Todd has overseen several large prosecutions, most recently the tax-evasion
case against Victor Posner, the Florida financier. But he said the importance of
the Iran-contra investigation was ''something that gives you pause - unlike a
garden-variety case of bank robbery, you have to give real serious consideration
before making any decision.''

Mr. Shwartz said: ''But in the end, this criminal investigation is not different
from any other criminal investigation. You have to deal with the nuts and bolts
of witnesses and documents, to see if theieieces fit together.''

Of theivive lawyers, M S Suvuve is rhrhaps closest to Mr. Walsh; they worked
together for nearly 15 years at Davis Polk, and Mr. Struve notes proudly that he
keeps on his wall a framed photograph of Mr. Walsh.

The two men worked on cases that, in their complexity, might rival the
Iran-contra affair. In the 1970's, Mr. Struve and, for a time, Mr. Walsh
defended American Telephone & Telegraph Company in a class-action suit that
involved hundreds of thousands of documents and scores of witness interviews;
pre-trial proceedings lasted nearly five years.

Mr. Walsh has tried to match his prosecutors with the part of the investigtion
that best suited their resumes.

Mr. Shwartz was a natural to lead the so-called flow-of-funds squad because of
his extensive experience in financial investigations. Before entering private
practice in 1983, he was an assistant United States Attorney in Manhattan and
specialized in complicated white-collar crimes. In the early 1980's, he
prosecuted 11 brokers of the New York Cotton Exchange for trying to evade income
taxes by rigging their trades. As in the Iran-contra affair, money was funneled
through Switzerland.

The riddles of the Iran-contra scandals, Mr. Shwartz said, will probably be
solved through an understanding of the money trail. ''That was my view coming
into the investigation,'' he said. ''I think we've got a pretty good handle, or
are in the process of getting a pretty good handle, on just where the money
moved, and how it moved, and for what purpose.''

The Response to North

Because of his background in cases involving constitutional law, Mr. Struve has
overseen the response to legal attacks posed by Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the
former White House aide who is at the center of the investigation. The colonel's
lawyers say that under the Constitution, the investigation should be handled by
the Justice Department, not by a court-appointed special prosecutor.

Mr. Friedman, a Washington lawyer known in the office as the ''Minister Without
Portfolio,'' has been assisting the investigation through his extensive
connections in the Washington legal community. Mr. Walsh has often dispatched
Mr. Friedman to court hearings in the case, for he knows that a judge may be
more responsive when arguments are made by a familiar face.

Of the five, Mr. Keker is the only one from outside New York or Washington and
the only one without extensive experience in a large law firm or prosecutor's
office.

A native of North Carolina, he moved in 1973 to San Francisco, where he
established a small, now prosperous law firm that handles several well-known
clients, including George Lucas, the moviemaker who created ''Star Wars.''

The Iran-contra case may hold special fascination for Mr. Keker. Like several of
the suspects under investigation, Mr. Keker has a distinguished military record,
having served as a Marine platoon leader in Vietnam.

He said his experience with the Marines would not alter his judgment of Colonel
North, another marine who served in Vietnam, or other military officers now
under scrutiny. ''It does not change the way I think about this one way or
another,'' he said.

Mr. Walsh's deputies made sacrifices to join the investigation. Mr. Todd has
seen too little of his 7-week-old daughter, Alexssa, who remains in New York.
Mr. Struve has a 2-week-old son, also named Guy.

Mr. Friedman signed on despite crushing duties as president of the District of
Columbia Bar, a job that requires scores of hours a month.

By joining Mr. Walsh, he also passed up any chance to be hired on as counsel to
any of the key defendants in the Iran-contra affair, a plum assignment for any
defense lawyer.

''From a historical perspective, I think I'd rather be on this side of the case
when the final chapter is written,'' he said. ''God knows what that final
chapter will be.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lawrence E. Walsh, special prosecutor in Iran-contra affair
(NYT/Sara Krulwich); Photo of Mr. Walsh's deputies (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
5 YOUNG LAWYERS WHO WOULD BE HEROS... AND A MARINE WHO WEARS A HERO'S RIBBONS

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 6


As Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North's uniform declares his military service, its
decorations encapsulate his career. Assuming he appears in uniform, they are
certain to be on full display Tuesday when he raises his right hand and, for the
first time, publicly answers questions about the Iran-contra affair.

Some of these decorations emblazoned with six rows of ribbons attest to Colonel
North's heroism in combat; others to his administrative achievements. Some show
his skills at soldiering. Others, routinely awarded, show his presence in a unit
that operated at sea or in Vietnam.

Civilians sometimes marvel at the flashy arrays worn by military men, and
without a doubt some members of the House and Senate committees investigating
the colonel's deeds at the White House will, at least unconsciously, note the
aura lent to the marine by the display.

Somebody might take time to mention how, 17 years ago, near the Vietnamese
demilitarized zone, Second Lieut. Oliver North won a Silver Star by relentlessly
exposing himself to enemy fire, leading his platoon in four successive attacks
against what the medal citation calls North Vietnamese Army forces.

But with the exception of those medals earned by his personal valor under fire
in Vietnam, Colonel North's decorations by and large are no more distinguished
than what might be seen on the chest of many other lieutenant colonels.

Above the Left Breast Pocket

On his right breast pocket he sometimes wears a large replica of the
Presidential Seal; he earned it at the White House for his service on the
National Security Staff.

But for those who view Oliver North as a hero, the evidence is to be found above
his left pocket.

The appearance that some ribbons are covered by his broad lapel is deceptive. In
fact, each is at least partly showing. Each is about an inch wide and about a
quarter inch tall; they are arranged in ranks, six deep.

In a full dress uniform, the colonel would appear even more resplendent; some of
his awards would be represented by full-fledged medals hanging from colorful
ribbons. But when ribbons are worn in lieu of medals, the awards are hard for
the layman to identify.

The top row of ribbons above the colonel's pocket shows that he won the Silver
Star and the Bronze Star. The first, the Silver Star (partly hidden by his
lapel) is the nation's third-highest award for bravery in combat. The Bronze
Star can be won off the field of battle; but because Colonel North won his in
combat, his ribbon is marked with a ''V'' for valor.

The colonel was wounded twice in Vietnam, and for this he wears the Purple
Heart. The ribbon appears in the third row from the top, with a star
representing the second award.

The bottom row of ribbons, just above his pocket, carries three awards granted
by the Government of South Vietnam: one for Colonel North's own actions, one
awarded to every member of his unit and one to everyone who served in the war.

Some of the other ribbons, like his Navy Achievement Medal and one of his Navy
Commendation Medals, were earned for proficiency in planning and carrying out
training of various Marine units.

Dangling below the block of ribbons are a pendant with crossed rifles,
indicating his expertise at shooting with a rifle, and another pendant, slightly
smaller, with crossed pistols, another sign of his marksmanship. And just
visible above the top row of ribbons are his parachute wings.

Some have criticized Colonel North for wearing his uniform at all while
appearing before the Congressional investigating panels. But although he might
have been allowed to appear out of uniform while he worked at the White House,
regulations call for him to wear it now that he is assigned to Marine Corps
headquarters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of medals worn by Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BEAM, DEVELOPMENT FOR BATTLEFIELD, DETECTS ON SET OF HEART ATTACKS

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


SCIENTISTS at the Georgia Institute of Technology say they have developed a
radar device so sensitive it can detect irregularities in the beating of a heart
up to 300 feet away.

Dr. Steven Sharpe, who led the group that developed the device, said the Remote
Vital Signs Monitor began five years ago as a military project. Under a Navy
contract, the Georgia Tech group set to work on an instrument intended to search
for buried battlefield casualties. But it soon became apparent that the
instrument could be more readily adapted for use in hospitals than in combat, he
said.

''We see it as particularly useful in the clinical monitoring of burn victims,
who cannot tolerate the pain of skin contact with the electrodes of conventional
electrocardiogram machines,'' Dr. Sharpe said.

The device, which is aimed with the help of a telescopic gunsight, projects a
narrow microwave beam at its target and measures the beam's electronic echo. The
instrument is so sensitive that it can detect the tiny differences in distance
between the source of the beam and the chest of a patient caused by the
patient's respiration and heartbeat. Properly aimed and adjusted, it can discern
a heartbeat at a range of 300 feet and can detect respiration from 400 feet
away.

Alarm for Cardiac Arrest

The frequency of the microwave beam, a few thousand megahertz, is carefully
adjusted for each application, Dr. Sharpe said. The frequency must be low enough
that the beam can penetrate sheets, clothing and bandages, but high enough to be
sensitive to the slight motion of the patient's skin caused by the beating of
the heart. When optimally adjusted, he said, the device can not only sound an
alarm if it detects cardiac arrest, but it can signal the onset of irregular
beating and other dangerous symptoms.

The major drawback of the Remote Vital Signs Monitor, according to its inventor,
is that it is easily overwhelmed by extraneous ''noise'' -slight movements that
have nothing to do with heartbeat or respiration.

''When it's used outdoors,'' he said, ''grass is a particular problem. A blade
of grass oscillates in a wind, and its pattern and rate of oscillation are not
really random. The movement is sufficiently similar to the movement of a chest
over a beating heart that the instrument can mistake a blade of grass for a
heart.''

This fact, he said, weighs heavily against battlefield application of the Remote
Vital Signs Monitor, either for locating casualties concealed by debris or for
spotting ambushes.

The system also appears to be unsuitable for searching for survivors under
earthquake debris, he added, partly because the microwave beam would have great
difficulty in penetrating more than a thin layer of debris, and partly because
of the interference of ground vibration caused by rescue machinery and other
sources. Although the Navy program is continuing, he said, hospital use looks so
promising that the Georgia Tech group has applied for several patents.

In the Vietnam war, the Defense Department experimented with many systems for
detecting concealed guerrillas. Some of these systems later found important
civilian applications. Besides those based on radar, such systems made use of
the infrared radiation of the living body, the faint ground vibrations induced
by footsteps, and even the detection of human body odors.

To detect the odor of guerrillas, military researchers experimented in the late
1960's with a device whose sensor incorporated live bedbugs, whose activity was
supposed to increase in the presence of human odors. Later, portable mass
spectrographs capable of analyzing trace odors associated with human beings were
tried.

Although chemical detectors registered too many false alarms in combat to prove
practical, some have been adapted to sniffing out explosives in the luggage that
passes through some airport security checks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dr. Steven Sharpe with radar device (Georgia Institute of
Technology/Gary W. Meek)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Portrait in Prose

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 452 words


ROBERT LOWELL: Collected Prose.

Edited and introduced by Robert Giroux. 377 pages. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.

ROBERT LOWELL'S collected prose, including important unfinished writing, happily
adds up to an informal autobiography. Without ameliorative second thoughts,
self-revelations appear here about his life force and failings. The personal
anguish of the poet is submerged; what surfaces are his ideas. So it should be,
for any major artist in any field would prefer to be judged by his creativity
instead of by his personality.

Another value of the book is that it serves to link many of the trans-Atlantic
voices of the 20th century. His criticism is immaculate; he writes as a teacher
as well as a fellow-poet. Guided by Lowell, the reader meets Ford Madox Ford,
Robert Frost, Wallace Stevens, T. S. Eliot, W. H. Auden, Stanley Kunitz, Dylan
Thomas, Ezra Pound.

Even if some of his judgments can be challenged, they are never less than
generous about other writers. He says that William Carlos Williams's
''Paterson'' is our modern ''Leaves of Grass.'' He calls Robert Frost ''the best
strictly metered poet in our history.'' He finds T. S. Eliot lovable, never
condescending, the most brilliant person he ever met. And then Lowell displays
his own brilliance as an elegant writer and observer: ''In America almost all
our gods coarsen into giants or shrivel into hollow men.''

Robert Giroux, his friend and editor, has organized the book logically and
readably. The first part covers Lowell's criticism of the major poets; the
second provides essays on the classics, New England and America - including this
astute comment on the Gettysburg Address: :''Without his best speeches, Lincoln
would have been less great as a man of action; had he not been a great
statesman, he could not have written his speeches.'' The final part includes two
interviews with Lowell in which he reveals his working style.

Not to be overlooked is an appendix that quotes from letters Lowell wrote to
President Roosevelt, explaining why he was a conscientous objector during World
War II, and to President Johnson, deploring our foreign policy during the
Vietnam War. Lowell proves less than prescient about American political aims in
the war against Japan and Germany; two decades later, he seems more in the
artistic mainstream in opposing the Vietnam involvement.

A telling introduction by Mr. Giroux recounts his long friendship with Lowell,
which began in 1941, his introduction of Lowell and Eliot in 1947, and his
signing of Lowell to write his autobiography in 1955. It was never written; but
this book comes very close. Inevitably, Lowell's collected prose should make
more readers turn to his poetry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOME COLONEL NAMED NORTH

BYLINE: By Tom Brokaw; Tom Brokaw is anchor of the NBC Nightly News.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 892 words


Whenever I see the now familiar face of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, I am
reminded of the time I first encountered him -before he was a household name and
a pivotal figure in the dizzying construct of the Iran arms sales and the
diversion of profits to the contras.

I had made arrangements to spend a few days first with the contras at one of
their camps along the Honduras-Nicaragua border and then with the Sandinistas
inside Nicaragua. I mentioned these plans to Robert C. McFarlane, President
Reagan's national security adviser, and he invited me to a background briefing
on the Administration's assessment of Soviet influence in Nicaragua.

The briefing took place in the old Executive Office Building, next door to the
White House, in a darkened room impressively furnished with comfortable chairs
and an elevated desk facing large screens on what appeared to be soundproof
walls. An electronic console a few feet behind the chairs was manned by a
technician who controlled a slide projector and the lighting.

Mr. McFarlane had an appointment with the Turkish ambassador, so he turned me
over to a boyish looking aide sitting quietly by his side: Oliver North. I
looked at him in his civilian suit, with that closely cropped haircut, confident
manner and the name Oliver, and thought, ''Preppie, probably Yale.'' When he
told me he was a marine colonel, I was thrown a bit, but then the National
Security Council is good duty for ambitious young military men.

Colonel North asked that I not identify him by rank or name since his
involvement with this operation, as he described it, would put him at some risk.
A request for anonymity is not unusual for a White House official, but I was
puzzled by his reference to personal risk. As the briefing went along, I decided
it was a byproduct of his flair for the melodramatic. He was given to lines such
as: ''Not so long ago, I fought in a far-off war we were not allowed to win; I
vowed it would never happen again.''

The briefing was in two parts, the first half featuring grainy black and white
aerial photographs of what Colonel North described as military facilities in
Nicaragua. In a low-key conversational style, he described Nicaragua as a
''major asset of the Soviet bloc,'' calling up photos that to my untrained eyes
seemed to be clusters of conventional buildings, maybe a runway, possibly
training facilities.

I couldn't be sure because the photographs lacked sharp definition, and not one
of them showed troops or people of any kind. Colonel North, on the other hand,
saw ''barracks built like Cuban or Soviet military garrisons,'' or ''mobile
medical headquarters . . . principally supported by East German equipment, but
there have been Soviet doctors.''

He was especially concerned about Bluefields, a port on the Caribbean coast.
Colonel North said Bulgarians and Cubans were ''turning it into a major military
garrison.'' He went on: ''This thing will rival Cam Ranh Bay [the big American
military port in Vietnam] when it's done.'' He then looked directly at me and
said: ''You'll recall some problems we identified prior to October of 1983 on an
island called Grenada? This is a parallel situation.''

Colonel North was also eager for me to see what appeared to be a major military
camp in northwestern Nicaragua. As it flashed onto the screen, Colonel North
said: ''We believe this facility is run by Cubans, probably with Soviet advisers
- and is used principally to train El Salvador guerrillas.''

He showed me a familiar outline, and said: ''The interesting thing here is the
baseball diamond. Nicaraguans don't play baseball. Cubans play baseball.'' I
looked to see if he were kidding. He was not. His declaration, I thought, will
come as a surprise to the Nicaraguans who have made it to the major leagues.
Dennis Martinez of the Montreal Expos is the only Nicaraguan-born player
currently in the majors, but when I arrived in Nicaragua baseball diamonds were
everywhere, and the players were natives.

Colonel North called for some color slides of people he had photographed during
personal trips to contra camps. One showed a group of youngsters, including a
somber little girl. He said: ''I talked to her for two days and I just couldn't
get her to smile. Later, I heard Sandinistas invaded her home and killed her
mother, father and uncle.''

Colonel North plainly believed the contras would prevail if they received enough
help. He called them ''some of the bravest people I ever saw.'' In retrospect,
he seemed to be most animated when describing the contra operations, almost as
if he missed the combat experience in jungle terrain. He obviously believed the
Soviet Union represented a major threat in Nicaragua. But was he also driven by
a personal zeal to settle old scores, to achieve through the contras in
Nicaragua what the United States failed to do in Vietnam? Perhaps.

That day, however, he seemed mostly a young gung-ho marine colonel, an energetic
worker in the N.S.C. vineyard. As we parted, I made a note of his name, thinking
that later he might be a useful source.

That was in April 1985. We have since learned that Colonel North's role in
Central American involved a lot more than briefing me. Within two months of the
interview, he was allegedly deep in discussions about the Iran arms sales. Oh,
the questions I should have asked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Commission of Fine Arts;
Arbiters of Monumental Taste

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 7


One cannot, it is said, legislate taste. But for most of this century, a
little-known Federal agency has been at least regulating taste by judging the
esthetic values of proposals for monuments, memorials and statues that seem
forever to be springing up here.

The agency is the seven-member Commission of Fine Arts and, although it cannot
order design changes, its recommendations are almost always followed.

Most recently, the commission succeeded in getting the United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum now under construction near the Mall reduced in size and
presence. It is a reflection of the power and authority of the commission that
its views on even so emotionally charged an issue as this were quickly and
calmly accepted.

''We reviewed their comments and the conclusion was that there was some merit in
them,'' said Arthur Rosenblatt, director of the museum.

What the commission found, in the words of its executive secretary, Charles H.
Atherton, was that the proposed design conveyed ''a sense of
overassertiveness.''

'Just a Little Too Big'

The design, by the architect James Ingo Freed of I. M. Pei & Partners in
association with Notter, Finegold & Alexander, called for a blocklong building
between 14th and 15th Streets that would have stuck out 40 feet beyond the
building next to it, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing. ''And it was just a
little too big,'' Mr. Atherton said.

The commission suggested that the memorial be shrunk and moved 35 feet back. The
plan was quickly accepted by the architects and by the Holocaust Memorial
Council, the agency set up to oversee the project, and the way was virtually
cleared for construction to begin.

The fine arts commission was formed in 1910, after a similar panel had been
established in New York City 25 years earlier. Mr. Rosenblatt said he knew of
similar commissions in Chicago, Boston and San Francisco, but none of them have
put their marks on their cities quite like the one that has set the tone here.

It has actually acted on two designs for the holocaust memorial, which is being
built with private funds.

''There was an earlier design a couple of years ago with even greater
problems,'' Mr. Atherton said. ''The character of the building itself had an
almost unintended link to fascist architecture. It was almost brutal. You could
not escape identifying it with the architecture favored by Hitler. It seemed to
be more a memorial to the perpetrators of the crime, not the victims.''

Asked if it was appropriate for a board to be passing on matters of taste, Mr.
Atherton said: ''You just have to strike what you feel in a common ground. There
is a great deal to the concept of beauty being in the eye of the beholder.''

One of the commission's main roles, he said, is to maintain the design integrity
of the Mall. ''If a project starts to upstage the Mall, we have to ask why. We
consider the scale, the size - things that are not entirely subjective. There
are measures of how things go together.''

He said it was unlikely, for example, that something like the futuristic
Pompidou Center in Paris would be approved here. ''We tend to discourage
spectacular aberration,'' he added.

The commission has shown that it can compromise. When critics objected to the
starkness of Maya Ying Lin's design for a memorial to the war in Vietnam, two
large walls bearing the names of those killed or lost in the war, the commission
permitted the addition of a realistic sculpture of three American fighting men
in battle. The piece was executed by Frederick Hart, now a member of the
commission. When some complained that Mr. Hart's sculpture detracted from Miss
Lin's design, the commission decreed that the Hart piece be placed by a wooden
glen, off to the side. As a result, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial maintains the
integrity of Miss Lin's honor to the dead while paying homage through Mr. Hart's
work to those who survived.

The chairman of the fine arts commission is J. Carter Brown. Between that post
and his directorship of the National Gallery of Art, he comes as close as anyone
to being Washington's arbiter of taste.

Whatever else the commission may do, he said, ''Our major role is to protect the
nation's capital from real bloopers.'' He gave as an example the wish of former
President Nixon to construct an amusement park on the Mall modeled after the
Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen.

''Obviously, no one has perfect sight on this,'' Mr. Brown said. ''But since the
decision is not made by one single person, there is no real risk of a totally
subjective opinion. It doesn't happen when you have seven members.''

The members, in addition to Mr. Brown and Mr. Hart, are Diane Wolf of New York
City; State Senator Roy M. Goodman of New York City; Pascal Regan of Beverly
Hills, Calif., a sculptor; Neil H. Porterfield, chairman of the landscape
architecture department of Pennsylvania State University, and Carolyn Deaver of
Washington, a public relations executive who is married to Michael K. Deaver,
former White House deputy chief of staff.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles H. Atherton, executive secretary of Commission of Fine
Arts. (The New York Times/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Film: Vietnamese Side Of the War in 'Karma'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 459 words


UNLIKE the Western-made films that have regarded Vietnam as a hellish,
bewildering landscape, a terra incognita in which American soldiers are set
adrift, Ho Quang Minh's ''Karma'' regards it as home. The Hanoi-born Mr. Minh,
now a naturalized Swiss citizen, made his film in and around Ho Chi Minh City,
as Saigon is now named, working with a Vietnamese cast and crew. Deserts and
beaches are seen here more frequently than the predictable jungle scenery, and
the film's psychic landscape is as unconventional, at least by Western
standards, as its physical one.

The war is remote in this drama set between 1968 and 1972 (and based on a
Vietnamese short story entitled ''The Wounded Beast'' by Nguy Ngu, who co-wrote
the screenplay). But its effects are inescapable, and they can be seen
everywhere, particularly in the embittered face of Binh (Tran Quang), the
story's hero. Binh, once missing in action and presumed dead, has returned to
find that his beautiful young wife, Nga, has betrayed him and has become a bar
girl who befriends visiting soldiers. Nga and the other bar girls seen in the
film seem bored, aristocratic and coolly contemptuous of their companions, again
in opposition to the usual cliches.

At Film Forum I, where ''Karma'' opens today, it has been described as ''
'Platoon' turned inside out,'' but there's a touch of television soap opera to
it, too. As Nga, Phuong Dung is glamorous but amateurish, and she seems to be
summoning thoughts of dead puppies when the screenplay requires her to grieve
for Binh's lost love. The dashing Tran Quang is better, but it's difficult to
make this small, melodramatic love story support the entire weight of the war.
The film's incidental scenes, like those showing life at the bar or the process
by which Binh's genteel family is forced from its home in the name of
relocation, are much more successful than those concentrating on Binh's rage and
Nga's regret.

If an American influence manifests itself in the soap-opera aspects of
''Karma,'' there are also attempts at Japanese delicacy, particularly in the
final symbolic representations of Nga's remorse. More impressive than the
occasional artiness of ''Karma'' (it begins with a dream sequence set in the
dunes) is the velvety black and white photography, which is exceptionally fine.

Love Story

KARMA, directed and produced by Ho Quang Minh; screenplay (Vietnamese with
English subitles) by Mr. Minh and Nguy Ngu, based on a story by Nguy Ngu;
photography by Tran Dinh Muu and Tran Ngoc Huynh; music by Trinh Cong Son. At
Film Forum 1, 57 Watts Street. Running time: 100 minutes. This film has no
rating.

Binh...Tran Quang
Nga....Phuong Dung
Tri....Le Cung Bac
Binh's mother...Ba Nam Sa Dec
Van....Thuy An

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JULY 9, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words



International    A3-12



William J. Casey helped run the secret program to aid the Nicaraguan rebels and
many other senior Government officials were fully aware of the program
''although they may deny it,'' Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North testified.    Page A1



News analysis: Colonel North portrayed himself as a key member of a little band
of patriots in an ideological battle while much of the rest of official
Washington was thoroughly untrustworthy.    A1



Colonel North has challenged many present and former Government offcials
directly in testifying they were aware of the Iran-contra affair long before
they acknowledge having learned about it.    A1

Reporter's notebook: A sure North

    A12



Israel's Parliament rejected narrowly three bills aimed at redefining the
official Israeli position of who is a Jew, posing a threat to the Government of
Yitzhak Shamir.    A1



Ferdinand E. Marcos sought to instigate an armed revolt in the Philippines this
Friday in hopes of returning to power there, according to data uncovered by the
United States, officials in Washington said.    A5



150 more shipments to the Russians by a state-owned company in Norway that
illegally sold sensitive technology to the Soviet Union are being investigated,
the prosecutor handling the case said.    D1

The Indian Army was called out to halt Hindu reprisals against Sikhs in Haryana
after Sikh terrorists killed at least 72 people in attacks on Hindu bus
passengers, officials said.    A6



The U.S., upholding the contras, has begun an intensive drive in Congress for
new aid even though the Nicaraguan rebels still suffer from serious
organizational problems and uncertain discipline.    A9



A plan to fly American flags on Kuwaiti oil tankers and to provide the ships
with a United States Navy escort would be delayed for 90 days under a measure
approved in the House by a vote of 222 to 184.    A3



The U.S. is downgrading its representation at a major conference of rich and
poor countries in an apparent further demonstration of displeasure with the
United Nations system and third-world demands.    A6



Vietnam youth unrest said to rise

    A3



Huge rally in Seoul

    A3



Newcastle journal

    A4



U.S. eases an immigration rule

    A8



National    A14-25



Joseph R. Biden Jr. vowed to lead the fight against confirmation of Robert H.
Bork to the Supreme Court in contrast to his previous nonpartisan approach to
judicial nominations.    A1



Kitty Dukakis conceded dependency on amphetamines prescribed by doctors for 26
years, but she said she recovered from her addiction in 1982 and has been
drug-free since then.

    A14



The doses of diet pills containing amphetamines that Killy Dukakis says she took
for 26 years, until she became drug free in 1982, may not have caused any
permanent damage, according to some experts.    A14



Corporal punishment in schools is legal in 41 states and popular among teachers
and many parents, especially in the rural South and Middle West, but is being
challenged by an increasing number of parents.    A1



Errors by flight controllers rose 50 percent in June over June of last year and
seriously concern Federal officials, the chairman of the National Transportation
Safety Board told a Senate subcommittee.    A15

Employers must give 60 days' notice of plant closings or mass layoffs under a
plan tentatively adopted by the Senate. Opponents pledged a major effort today
to defeat the measure.    D1



The first motel, designed by Arthur S. Heineman, and still operates in its
original location - off the Monterey exit of U.S. 101, midway between Los
Angeles and San Francisco.    C12



Illegal aliens freed from trailer

    A14



Poneering brain surgery at N.Y.U.

    A14



Close call for 2 airliners over the Atlantic

    A15



U.S. hails its Spanish history

    A19



California asks aid on crime

    A20



Jackson says record sets him apart from field

    A23



Washinton Talk    A24

In no time, foes and supporters of Bork are ready for battle

Regional    B1-4



An ambitious court speedup plan by postponing judge's vacations in New York City
is falling short of its goal, judges and lawyers agree. They say this summer is
marked as usual by long vacations, trial delays and crowded jail cells.    A1



The future cost of the AIDS epidemic is being underestimated by half by New York
City officials and they are financially unprepared for the ''terrible
consequences,'' State Comptroller Edward V. Regan said.    A21



A report on organized-crime influence in New York City construction, set to be
released today, was delayed by Governor Cuomo after defense lawyers in a
racketeering trial said the report could taint the trial.    B1



1,000 new police officers graduated after five and a half grueling months. They
filed into the Felt Forum to the tune of ''New York, New York'' before a
cheering, standing-room-only crowd.    B1

Jersey's Supreme Court lifted a ban on the state's plan to move 5,000 barrels of
radium-tainted soil from the yards of four Montclair homes to a wildlife
preserve in Jackson Townshipp, Ocean County.    B2



A Bronx woman shot a judge in a dispute over less than $200 tied up in an
estate. The gun misfired, and the judge, Abraham D. Levy, who is 82 years old,
was not hurt.    B1



The Knicks' new vice president and general manager will be Al Bianchi, a native
of Long Island City and a 31-year veteran of professional basketball, Dick
Evans, the team's president, announced.    B5



TV scouting teams scour New York City for locations that will give their shows a
real-life, often gritty, look -what one producer called ''the feel of age.''
C1



Town torn by teachers' penalty

    B1



Study cites incidence of cancer near power lines

    B2



Albany accord on prison measure

    B2



Backing expected in Bronx race

    B3



City agrees to close landfill in Queens by 1991

    B3



Biaggi's lawyer may be removed

    B4



2d police officer acquitted in Brooklyn corruption case

    B4


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

UNREST IS SAID TO RISE AMONG THE YOUTH OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 8


Hanoi's official press has begun to lend credence to recent assertions by young
boat people that alienation and protest among Vietnam's youth are on the rise.

Young Vietnamese are not likely to attempt public demonstrations, as their
counterparts in South Korea or China have been doing recently. In the decade
after the unification of the nation under Hanoi's rule, Vietnam has been one of
Asia's most repressive countries. For many, the only avenue of protest is
escape.

But recently there have been reports, for example, that a power plant was
sabotaged by its young employees. Also there have been reports of a youth
magazine's campaign to free a contributor who was arrested after he called
living conditions for rural teachers ''deplorable.''

On Tuesday, the Vietnamese press agency reported that thousands of young
criminals who had fallen under the influence of ''peer pressure'' or adult
lawbreakers were being rehabilitated in schools for juvenile delinquents. The
report said 8,000 youths had already been sent from these vocational schools to
jobs in agriculture or construction industries.

Internal Criticism Urged

Under a pragmatic new Communist Party leader, Nguyen Van Linh, the Vietnamese
are being urged to expose faults and shortcomings - an echo of the Soviet
campaign for ''openness.''

Mr. Linh is assumed to be the author of a column titled ''Things to Be Done
Immediately'' and signed ''N. V. L.'' that appears in the main Communist Party
newspaper, Nhan Dan. The column advocates a vigorous restructuring of the
economy, within the confines of Marxism-Leninism, and calls for full disclosure
of failures.

There is resistance to this policy, Vietnam publications and radio broadcasts
say, just as in the Soviet Union.

Nevertheless, frank airings of grievances and revelations of corruption have
become daily fare. In the process, concerns about what official press
organizations call ''juvenile delinquency'' or ''negative phenomenon among
youth'' are beginning to appear more often - or be reported more fully.

According to exiles - many of them young people who say they are disillusioned
with the country's bleak economic prospects despite more than a year of promises
of reform - the young people engage mostly in passive resistance to directives.
There is draft evasion and occasional sabotage.

Hanoi's domestic radio network reported in detail on one case of willful
destruction on June 29.

Widespread Theft at Plant

The report, translated by the British Broadcasting Corporation's monitoring
service, said that Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union at the Pha Lai power plant
in Ho Chi Minh City, or Saigon, had looked at recent sabotage and made the
following discovery:

''Thefts of materials, equipment and coal; the removal of insulating tubes, and
especially the stealing of accesories to starters on electrical equipment have
occurred in the plant. More dangerously, thieves have replaced stolen electrical
accessories with fake ones. Nearly all the 22 arrested persons are Youth Union
members and workers in the plant.''

Young people fleeing Vietnam by boat say they fear forced farm labor in what are
called new economic zones because of the harsh conditions. Young men also say
they do not want to fight in Cambodia or on the Chinese border, both
high-casualty areas where, they say, ''troublemakers'' are sent.

On June 28, Hanoi's radio service reported that ''assault youth security teams''
have been formed along Vietnam's northern border. The broadcast said that about
1,250 young people ''have volunteered to join in carrying out patrol duty,
setting up ambushes and setting up special action cells.''

These cells, the radio said, are designed ''to popularize state policies and the
law.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CALIFORNIAN SEES RISE IN ASIAN GANGS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, July 8


The Attorney General of California said today that the state needed Federal
assistance to combat what he said was a growing law-enforcement problem posed by
gangs of Asian immigrants.

The official, John Van de Kamp, said that as the state's Asian population
continues to soar, immigrants from Hong Kong, Taiwan, Vietnam, Korea and Japan
are becoming increasingly involved in prostitution, illegal gambling, drug
trafficking, extortion, burglary, robbery, and other crimes. State and local
police agencies are unable to cope with the problem alone, he said.

''We need help from Federal agencies with international expertise and authority
to mount an effective counterattack,'' Mr. Van de Kamp said in releasing a
report on the status of organized crime in the nation's most populous state.

''The traditional organizations of the Mafia, or La Cosa Nostra, control a
relatively small and unimportant part of criminal activity here,'' he said.
''The biggest and fastest-growing threats to public safety in California come
from newer forms of organized crime.'' He especially mentioned Asian gangs that
he said ''prey almost exclusively on California's millions of law-abiding Asian
citizens and, even more frequently, on the hundreds of thousands of new
immigrants who have settled here.''

Gangs Based in Hong Kong

The report said that in the past year California police agencies encountred
increased criminal enterprises by Hong Kong-based Triad gangs and the Wah Ching
and United Bamboo gangs, all made up of ethnic Chinese; the Yakuza, a large
criminal organization from Japan; prostitution rings run by South Korean crime
groups, and many gangs made up of young Vietnamese people.

The report said thousands of Korean and Taiwanese women worked as prostitutes
for Asian gangs in 1986 in California and elsewhere. Although many emigrated
legally, others were imported by brokers who paid returning American servicemen
$2,000 to $10,000 to enter into sham marriages with the women, it added. Once
here, the women are divorced and work as prostitutes for the Asian criminal
organizations because they ''are desperate to immigrate to the United States,''
the report said.

Mr. Van de Kamp said police officials were especially fearful of an upsurge of
migration to the United States by members of Hong Kong's ''large, well-organized
and notoriously violent'' Triad gangs when the British colony reverts to Chinese
control in 1997.

''The Triad's favorite destination is the West Coast of the United States,
especially California, and most especially San Francisco, with Los Angeles, too,
a preferred destination,'' he said.

''There hasn't been a mass exodus of criminals on this scale since 1980, when
Fidel Castro opened up his prisons and flushed the worst elements of Cuban
society, the 'Marielitos,' into Florida, and Miami is still struggling to
recover from that catastrophe. Unless we send word across the Pacific that this
is a dangerous and inhospitable place for gangs to do business, the stage could
be set for our own 'Marielito'-style disaster in California.''

Complaints Believed Likely

The report is likely to stir complaints from some leaders of California's
rapidly growing Asian population, who have protested that focusing on crime
within their communities could have the indirect effect of producing bigotry and
racism among non-Asians.

Henry Der, executive director of Chinese for Affirmative Action, a San Francisco
organization established to oppose defamation of the Chinese, said in an
interview that he agreed that Asian criminal gangs were a problem in this
country.

''The Asian community is vulnerable because of the language problem,'' he said.
''Without the fluent use of English, one is vulnerable to criminal activity and
it's very difficult for that person to have sufficient confidence to communicate
with police and other officials.''

But Mr. Der contended that many of the charges in Mr. Van de Kamp's report,
including the contention that Triad gangs from Hong Kong were becoming more
active in this country, were ''hyperbole,'' with little evidence to support
them. ''They probably extrapolated from what they know to what they think may be
out there,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN-CONTRA HEARINGS;
THE COLONEL PRESENTS HIS CASE: HIS BELIEFS, HIS WORK AND HIS GRIEVANCES

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2690 words


The committee allowed Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North to present an opening
statement, after a two-day delay, and he set forth his views on his White House
service and the Congressional inquiries.

SENATOR DANIEL K. INOUYE, chairman of Senate committee. This morning, the panel
will resume the questioning of Lieutenant Colonel North. May the record indicate
that on 8:15 A.M. on July 7, 1987, the select committees of the House and Senate
received a statement, the opening statement, of Colonel North. This statement,
pursuant to the rules, has been examined and determined that there are no
inadvertent disclosures of classified material; further, that we are satisfied
that the statement does not exceed the bounds set forth by the court in the
grant of immunity, and although the statement obviously exceeds 10 minutes, we
will not insist upon a summary of it. And if the colonel wishes to present his
opening statement at this time, he may do so in total.

COLONEL NORTH. As you all know by now, my name is Oliver North, lieutenant
colonel, Marine Corps. My best friend is my wife Betsy, to whom I have been
married for 19 years and with whom I have had four wonderful children, aged 18,
16, 11 and 6.

I came to the National Security Council six years ago to work in the
Administration of a great President. As a staff member, I came to understand his
goals and his desires. I admired his policies, his strength and his ability to
bring our country together. I observed the President to be a leader who cared
deeply about people and who believed that the interests of our country were
advanced by recognizing that ours is a nation at risk in a dangerous world, and
acting accordingly. He tried, and in my opinion succeeded, in advancing the
cause of world peace by strengthening our country, by acting to restore and
sustain democracy throughout the world and by having the courage to take
decisive action when needed.

I also believed that we must guard against a rather perverse side of American
life, and that is the tendency to launch vicious attacks and criticism against
our elected officials. President Reagan has made enormous contributions, and he
deserves our respect and admiration.

The President's Staff

The National Security Council is, in essence, the President's staff. It helps to
formulate and coordinate national security policy. Some, perhaps on this
committee, believe that the N.S.C. was devoid of experienced leadership. I
believe that is wrong. While at the N.S.C. I worked most closely with three
people - Mr. Robert C. McFarlane, Adm. John Poindexter and C.I.A. Director
William Casey. Bud McFarlane is a man who devoted nearly 30 years of his life to
public service, in a number of responsble positions. At the N.S.C. he worked
long hours, made great contributions, and I admire him for those efforts.

Admiral Poindexter is a distinguished naval officer who served in a number of
important positions of responsibility. He, too, was a tireless worker with a
similar record of public service, and I, too, admire him greatly.

William Casey was a renowned lawyer, a war veteran of heroic proportions and a
former chairman of the S.E.C. I understand that he was also a close personal
friend and adviser to President Reagan.

There is nearly a century of combined public service by these three men.

As a member of the N.S.C. staff, I knew that I held a position of
responsibility, but I knew full well what my position was. I did not engage in
fantasy that I was the President or Vice President, or a Cabinet member, or even
the director of the National Security Council. I was simply a staff member with
a demonstrated ability to get the job done. Over time, I was made responsible
for managing a number of complex and sensitive covert operations that we have
discussed here to date. I reported directly to Mr. McFarlane and to Admiral
Poindexter. I coordinated directly with others, including Director Casey.

My authority to act always flowed, I believed, from my superiors. My military
training inculcated me - in me a strong belief in the chain of commnd. Insofar
as I can recall, I always acted on major matters with specific approval, after
informing my superiors of the facts as I knew them, the risks and the potential
benefits. I readily admit that I was action-oriented, that I took pride in the
fact that I was counted upon as a man who got the job done. And I don't mean
this by way of criticism, but there were occasions when my superiors, confronted
with accomplishing goals or difficult tasks, would simply say, ''Fix it,
Ollie,'' or ''Take care of it.''

Vietnam and After

Since graduating from the Naval Academy in 1968, I have strived to be the best
Marine officer that one can be. In combat my goal was always to understand the
objective, follow orders, accomplish the mission and to keep alive the men who
served under me. One of the few good things that has come from the last seven
months of worldwide notoriety has been the renewed contact that I've had with
some of the finest people in the world - those with whom I served in Vietnam.
Among the 50,000 or so messages of support that have arrived since I left the
N.S.C. are many from those who recount the horrors we lived through and who now
relate stories of their families and careers.

After Vietnam, I worked with my fellow officers to train good marines to be
ready in case we were called upon elsewhere in the world, but at the same time,
to hope that we never were. I honestly believe that any soldier who has ever
been to a war truly hopes he will never see one again. My Marine Corps career
was on track in 1981 when I was detailed to the National Security Council. I was
uneasy at the beginning, but I came to believe that it was important work, and
as years passed and responsibilities grew, I got further from that which I
loved, the Marine Corps and marines.

During 1984, '85 and '86, there were periods of time when we worked two days in
every one. My guess is that the average workday lasted at least 14 hours. To
respond to various crises, the need for such was frequent, and we would often go
without a night's sleep, hoping to recoup the next night or thereafter. If I had
to estimate the number of meetings and discussions and phone calls over that
five years, it would surely be in the tens of thousands. My only real regret is
that I virtually abandoned my family for work during these years. And that work
consisted of, my first few years on the staff, as a project officer for a highly
classified and compartmented national security project which is not a part of
this inquiry.

I worked hard on the political military strategy for restoring and sustaining
democracy in Central America and in particular El Salvador. We sought to achieve
the democratic outcome in Nicaragua that this Administration still supports,
which involved keeping the contras together in both body and soul. We made
efforts to open a new relationship with Iran and recover our hostages. We worked
on the development of a concerted policy regarding terrorists and terrorism and
a capable - and a capability for dealing in a concerted manner with that threat.
We worked on various crises such as T.W.A. 47, the capture of Achille Lauro, the
rescue of American students in Grenada and the restoration of democracy on that
small island, and the U.S. raid on Libya in response to their terrorist attacks.

And as some may be willing to admit, there were efforts made to work with the
Congress on legislative programs. There were many problems. I believe that we
worked as hard as we could to solve them, and sometimes we succeeded and
sometimes we failed. But at least we tried. And I want to tell you that I for
one will never regret having tried.

A Strange Process

I believe that this is a strange process that you are putting me and others
through. Apparently the President has chosen not to assert his prerogatives, and
you have been permitted to make the rules. You call before you the officials of
the executive branch, you put them under oath for what must be collectively
thousands of hours of testimony. You dissect that testimony to find
inconsistencies and declare some to be truthful and others to be liars.

You make the rulings as to what is proper and what is not proper. You put the
testimony which you think is helpful to your goals up before the people and
leave others out. It's sort of like a baseball game in which you are both the
player and the umpire. It's a game in which you call the balls and strikes and
where you determine who is out and who is safe. And in the end you determine the
score and declare yourselves the winner. From where I sit, it is not the fairest
process.

One thing is, I think, for certain: that you will not investigate yourselves in
this matter. There is not much chance that you will conclude at the end of these
hearings that the Boland Amendments and the frequent policy changes therefore
were unwise, or that your restrictions should not have been imposed on the
executive branch. You are not likely to conclude that the Administration acted
properly by trying to sustain the freedom fighters in Nicaragua when they were
abandoned. And you are not likely to conclude by commending the President of the
United States, who tried valiantly to recover our citizens and achieve an
opening with strategically vital Iran.

Months of Vilification

I would not be frank with you if I did not admit that the last several months
have been very difficult for me and my family. It has been difficult to be on
the front pages of every newspaper in the land day after day, to be the lead
story on national television day after day, to be photographed thousands of
times by bands of photographers, who chase us around since November just because
my name arose at the hearings. It is difficult to be caught in the middle of a
constitutional struggle between the executive and legislative branches over who
will formulate and direct the foreign policy of this nation.

It is difficult to be vilified by people in and out of this body, some who have
proclaimed that I am guilty of criminal conduct even before they heard me.
Others have said that I would not tell the truth when I came here to testify,
and one member asked a person testifying before this body whether he would
believe me under oath. I asked when I got here, ''If you don't believe me, why
call me at all?''

It has been difficult to see questions raised about my character and morality,
my honesty, because only partial evidence was provided. And as I indicated
yesterday, I think it was insensitive of this committee to place before the
cameras my home address, at a time when my family and I are under 24-hour armed
guard by over a dozen government agents of the Naval Investigative Service,
because of fear the terrorists will seek revenge for my official acts and carry
out their announced intentions to kill me.

Congress Is to Blame

It is also difficult to comprehend that my work at the N.S.C., all of which was
approved and carried out in the best interests of our country, has led to two
massive parallel investigations, staffed by over 200 people. It is mind-boggling
to me that one of those investigations is criminal and that some here have
attempted to criminalize policy differences between coequal branches of
government and the executive's conduct of foreign affairs.

I believe it is inevitable that the Congress will, in the end, blame the
executive branch. But I suggest to you that it is the Congress which must accept
at least some of the blame in the Nicaraguan freedom-fighters matter.

Plain and simple, the Congress is to blame because of the fickle, vacillating,
unpredictable, on-again-off-again policy toward the Nicaraguan democratic
resistance, the so-called contras.

I do not believe that the support of the Nicaraguan freedom fighters can be
treated as the passage of a budget. I suppose if the budget doesn't get passed
on time again this year, there will be, inevitably, another extension of a month
or two. But the contras, the Nicaraguan freedom fighters, are people, living,
breathing, young men and women who have had to suffer a desperate struggle for
liberty, with sporadic and confusing support from the United States of America.

Armies need food and consistent help. They need a flow of money, of arms,
clothing and medical supplies. The Congress of the United States allowed the
executive to encourage them to do battle and then abandoned them.

The Congress of the United States left soldiers in the field unsupported and
vulnerable to their Communist enemies. When the executive branch did everything
possible, within the law, to prevent them from being wiped out by Moscow's
surrogates in Havana, in Managua, you then had this investigation to blame the
problem on the executive branch. It does not make sense to me.

In my opinion, these hearings have caused serious damage to our national
interests. Our adversaries laugh at us, and our friends recoil in horror. I
suppose it would be one thing if the intelligence committees wanted to hear all
of this in private and thereafter passed laws which, in the view of Congress,
make for better policies, for better functioning of government, but to hold them
publicly, for the whole world to see, strikes me as very harmful.

Not only does it embarrass our friends and allies, with whom we have worked,
many of whom have helped us in various programs, but it must also make them very
wary of helping us again.

I believe that these hearings, perhaps unintentionally so, have revealed matters
of great secrecy in the operation of our Government. And sources and methods of
intelligence activities have clearly been revealed, to the detriment of our
security.

Wild Rumors Abound

As a result of rumor and speculalion and innuendo, I have been accused of almost
every crime imaginable. Wild rumors have abounded. Some media reports have
suggested that I was guilty for - of espionage, for the way I handled U.S.
intelligence. Some have said I was guilty of treason and suggested, in front of
my 11-year-old daughter, that I should be given the death penalty. Some said I
stole $10 million. Some said I was second only in power to the President of the
United States. And others that I condoned drug trafficking to generate funds for
the contras, or that I personally ordered assassinations, or that I was
conducting my own foreign policy. It has even been suggested that I was the
personal confidant of the President of the United States.

These, and many other stories, are patently untrue.

I don't mind telling you that I am angry at what some have attempted to do to me
and my family. I believe that these committee hearings will show that you have
struck some blows. But I am going to walk from here with my head high and my
shoulders straight because I am proud of what we accomplished. I am proud of the
efforts that we made. And I am proud of the fight that we fought. I am proud of
serving in the Administration of a great President.

I am not ashamed of anything in my professional or personal conduct. As we go
through this process, I ask that you continue to please keep an open mind.
Please be open-minded and able to admit that perhaps your preliminary
conclusions about me were wrong. And please also do not mistake my attitude for
lack of respect. I am in awe of this great institution, just as I am in awe of
the Presidency. Both are equal branches of government, with separate areas of
responsibility, under the Constitution that I have taken an oath to support and
defend. And I have done so, as many of you have.

And although I do not agree with what you are doing, or the way that it is being
done, I do understand your interest in obtaining the facts,and I have taken an
oath to tell the truth in helping you to do so.

In closing, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for this opportunity, I would just
simply like to thank the tens of thousands of Americans who have communicated
their support, encouragement and prayers for me and my family, in this difficult
time.

Thank you, sir.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Col. Oliver North laughing with wife, Betsy (NYT/Jose
R. Lopez)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN-CONTRA HEARINGS;
Two Legal Minds at the Hearings

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 326 words



Brendan V. Sullivan Jr.
Attorney for Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North

Age 45 . . . Graduate of Georgetown University and its law school, in 1967 . . .
In 1969 while serving in the Army he defended two of 24 soldiers on trial for
mutiny as a result of an anti-war protest at a California military stockade . .
. His aggressive courtroom performance so annoyed Army officers that he was
ordered to spend the last six months of his tour in Vietnam, but the transfer
was blocked after several members of Congress objected . . . Joined the
Washington law firm of Williams & Connolly . . . A leading white-collar crime
defense lawyer known for his endless work hours and penchant for relentless
attack . . . Often is mentioned as one of the possible heirs to Edward Bennett
Williams, the firm's well-known founder . . . Far more aggressive, argumentative
- even angry and hostile - than any of the previous defense lawyers . . .
Already widely respected in legal circles and noted as a top client-getter, but
the hearings could add a new ''star'' quality.

Arthur L. Liman
Chief Counsel to the Senate Select Committee

Age 54 . . . Graduate of Harvard College and Yale Law School . . . Assistant
United States attorney in New York in early 1960's . . . Now a partner in Paul,
Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison in New York, he specializes in white-collar
crime and is one of the most prominent securities lawyers in the country . . .
Counsel to investigative panel on New rrYork State's Attica prison riot in 1971
. . . Headed inquiry into New York City medical examiner's office in 1985 . . .
Asks tough questions and can be combative and condescending . . . In a recent
profile he was described as the ''king of the mountain'' in New York law who now
has a chance to conquer Washington . . . He has called this investigation the
challenge of his career . . . In a Democratic administration could possibly be
approached for a senior appointment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Brendan V. Sullivan and Arthur L. Liman

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JULY 11, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words



International   2-8

 2,,q>Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North testified that William J. Casey, as Director
of Central Intelligence, wanted to establish a ''stand alone'' fund that could
pay for intelligence operations outside normal government control.    Page 1

 Americans believe Colonel North by an overwhelming margin. A New York Times/CBS
News Poll found that most Americans say they believe that he is telling the
truth about the Iran-contra affair and that President Reagan is lying.   1

 Legislators erupted in frustration and anger, lashing out at their own lawyers
and sniping at each other, as the popularity of Colonel North has grown and the
Congressmen have been cast as the villains.   1

 The duel between the lawyers at the Iran-contra hearings is part courtroom
drama, part theater and part genuine exposition of the facts, all of which has
attracted the interest of legal experts.   8

 The special prosecutor's authority to investigate the Iran-contra affair and to
enforce a grand jury subpoena against Colonel North was upheld by a Federal
Judge.   8

 Support and cash for Colonel North are pouring in from across the country.
Contributions to his defense fund continue to mount, and money is also flowing
to Colonel North's favorite cause: the contras in Nicaragua.    5

 Contacts between Moscow and Bonn may grow after the six-day visit to the Soviet
Union by the West German President, Richard von Weizsacker, West German
officials and Western diplomats said.   3

 Moscow has slowed arms talks and preparations for a summit meeting, the
Administration said. But officialssaid they did not believe the slowdown
threatened a new arms-control agreement on medium- and short-range missiles.   3


 Military links with Cambodia by the Vietnamese will be kept even if Vietnam
adheres to its announced intention to withdraw its troops in 1990, a Communist
diplomat in close touch with Vietnam's views suggested.   2

 South Koreans' demands have grown as they test the limits of democracy. But the
demands may be more than President Chun Doo Hwan bargained for when he accepted
a democratization package, and the military's patience may be wearing thin.   3

 A trade measure was approved by the Senate that is designed to require the
Administration to take action against countries, such as Japan, that
consistently deny access to American products.   39

 Thais say Laos turns to marijuana to aid budget    2

 U.N. group meets amid anxiety    2

 Asuncion journal    4

 Unions a nonissue in Australian vote    4

 Sagging economy affects New Zealand election    4

 A Haiti vacation ends in a plane crash    4

 National   10-12, 32

 2,4.4,q>The Producer Price Index rose two-tenths of 1 percent in June, the
Government said. It was the second small advance in as many months, and it
continued to allay fears that the inflation rate was about to jump.   1

 After two jets nearly collided over the Atlantic Ocean on Wednesday,
suggestions were made by radio to the crew of a Continental Airlines jumbo jet
that they refrain from reporting the incident, officials said.    1

 Alan Greenspan will avoid decisions that affect J.P. Morgan & Company if he is
named chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, according to a document he has
submitted to the White House and Congress.   1

 Some doctors require AIDS tests of their patients and are refusing to care for
carriers of the virus. The medical community is divided in a debate over whether
this is in keeping with the profession's ethical responsibilities.   1

 A landlord will live with vermin for 30 days in an infested apartment building
for failing to improve conditions in four buildings he owned. The Beverly Hills
neurosurgeon will begin serving his sentence on Monday.   10

 Officials violated free-speech rights of protesters at a public ceremony on the
Mall in Philadelphia honoring the Constitution's bicentennial last May 25, a
Federal judge ruled.   10

 At the Young Republican convention, the nearly 800 delegates who have gathered
make it plain that they are looking to the past with considerable wistfulness,
and facing the future with some uneasiness.   11

 The campaign for women's votes by the Democratic Presidential candidates is
markedly different from that of their counterparts in 1984, and has stirred
complaints from some women that feminism is being neglected by the party.   10

 Heart disease and physical inactivity may have a link as strong as the links
between heart disease and smoking or high blood pressure, Federal health
officials said, following a two-year analysis.   10

 3 police officers slain in Michigan    11

 U.S. restricts satellite licenses    11

 Dukakis approves AIDS testing    12

 5 workers killed in fall at San Diego shipyard    12

 Judge withdraws as candidate to head F.B.I.    32

 Regional   33-36

 2,3.2,q>People who are arrested face delays as New York City shuffles them from
one criminal justice location to another. The toll of the process, which a
Federal judge has ruled must be quicker, is paid by prisoners.   33

 A garbage barge's odyssey is ending. New York City agreed to burn its 3,100-ton
load from the barge at an incinerator in Brooklyn.     33

 News analysis: The court decision about a state statute designed to protect
journalists' sources and materials from subpoena offered a glimpse into how
judges can make new law by interpreting statutes in ways that legislators never
intended.    35

 A drug treatment center for parents allows them to live with their children
while they complete a program of counseling, group therapy and peer support. The
center, Odyssey House, is on Wards Island.   33

 Pushing to end the legislative session in Albany, state lawmakers reached
agreement on a renewal of New York City's J-51 real estate tax abatement
program, state economic development initiatives, and a range of other issues.
35

 A judge who gave teachers jail terms for defying his order to end an illegal
strike is surprised by the fuss about the sentences. Judge Paul R. Huot
sentenced 110 Lyndhurst teachers and other school workers to jail.    34

 Competing to be ''Mr. Wall Street,'' seven businessmen strutted and flexed in a
body-building contest at Pier 11 near the South Street Seaport in lower
Manhattan.   35

 The talk of the Hamptons    33

 Cyclists fault limited use of bridge    34

 Move toward milk price rise    35

 New York bills affecting citizens    35

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Is Said to Plan To Keep Cambodia Role

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


A senior Communist diplomat in close touch with Vietnam's views strongly
suggested in an interview here that Hanoi intended to keep firm military links
with Cambodia even if it adheres to its announced intention to withdraw its
troops in 1990.

''In some years, Vietnam hopes the Cambodians will need only advisers and teams
of military experts but no troops,'' the diplomat said.

The diplomat said ''Vietnam must draw lessons'' from its experience in Cambodia
in the 1970's, when it created and aided a resistance army, the Khmer Rouge,
that toppled an American-backed Government but then opened hostilities with
Vietnam. ''It cost Vietnam too much,'' he said.

Revitalizing the Economy

As a result, he said, Hanoi will withdraw in 1990, but will make certain that
close links persist. ''Vietnam cannot leave Cambodia alone,'' he continued.
''There will be lasting connections.'' The envoy emphasized Vietnam's readiness
to negotiate for an earlier withdrawal of its 140,000 troops but warned against
a belief that the new Vietnamese leadership of Nguyen Van Linh, the Communist
party chief, will be more accommodating. Hanoi's announced intention of a major
effort to revitalize its economy will not make it readier to make concessions,
he said.

The diplomat said there was only a limited parallel between Mikhail S.
Gorbachev's readiness for negotiations to withdraw Soviet troops from
Afghanistan and Vietnam's stance on Cambodia. The difference, he said, is that
Moscow does not view Afghanistan as vital for the Soviet Union. Hanoi deems
Cambodia essential to its security, he said.

Cambodia Imposed Heavy Burden

''Vietnam's new orientation is to strengthen its performance at home,'' the
envoy said. ''But if others harbor illusions that they can bleed Vietnam in
Cambodia, they are wrong. If they create new difficulties for Cambodia, Vietnam
will come to its support.''

A sharply contrasting view was put in an interview in Bangkok by a cabinet
minister from a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which
strongly condemns Vietnam's presence in Cambodia. He said Vietnam was now eager
to negotiate because of the heavy burden that Cambodia imposed.

''We achieved what we wanted,'' the minister said. ''We couldn't fight Vietnam,
so we drained them to where they are ready to talk.''

Possibility of a Settlement

The organization's official position, like that of China, is that all troops
have to leave. But the senior official, who has been active on the Cambodian
conflict since the Vietnamese invasion, said a settlement was possible based on
a partial withdrawal by Vietnam.

The minister said the six Asean nations - Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand - had come around to that view because they
believed a limited Vietnamese presence was needed to prevent a return to power
of the Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot.

The key decisions now have to come from outside this region, the minister said.
He said China would have to drop its unconditional support of Mr. Pol Pot and
the Soviet Union would have to use its influence in Hanoi to secure Vietnam's
acceptance of a compromise.

Cambodian and Vietnamese officials here emphasized their insistence on what the
Cambodian Foreign Minister, Kong Korm, called ''the dismantling of the political
and military infrastructure of Pol Pot'' as a precondition for talks on national
reconciliation.

Mr. Kong Korm provided no definition of what form the dismantling should take.
He said any individual member of the three-party resistance coalition could be
an acceptable negotiating partner if he first renounced any links with what he
called Mr. Pol Pot's infrastructure. He cited only Mr. Pol Pot and his partner
in power, Ieng Sary, as people that would have to be ''eliminated.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Thai Officials Say Laos Turns To Marijuana to Help Budget

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 445 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 10


The Government of Laos is promoting cultivation and export of marijuana as a
means to earn foreign exchange, according to Thai officials who have been
monitoring narcotics in the region.

In an interview here Thursday, Suwit Suthanukul, head of the National Security
Council, said that the marijuana, along with some opium, was being transported
across both Thailand and Vietnam to ports or coastal rendezvous points.

International narcotics agents say they believe American crime syndicates are
behind the expanding marijuana trade in the region, at least that going through
Thailand. International narcotics agents say criminals began to look toward the
poor farming areas of Thailand as Mexican and some South American sources of
marijuana were curtailed as a result of a crop destruction program.

American narcotics officials and diplomats say a new, high-quality dwarf variety
of marijuana, as well as older varieties, thrives in this region. Thai officials
say they have been destroying large crops.

Laos Exporting Marijuana

Mr. Suwit said Thai officials who had been watching Laos increase its role in
the narcotics trade in the last two years believed that the country, working
through provincial organizations, had exported at least 200 tons of marijuana in
the last four months.

He said a Laotian Government agency appeared to be organizing the marijuana
trade. This agency, Thai officials say, buys seed and fertilizer in Thailand,
distributes it in Laos and then purchases the crop from local farmers for resale
abroad.

Laotian officials have repeatedly denied involvement in the narcotics trade.

The Vietnamese press has reported at least one arrest of truck drivers smuggling
heroin out of Laos. A major smuggling route seems to be developing along Route
9, a still-unfinished road from the Laotian border to the Vietnamese port of
Danang, Thais say.

Crops Grown Close to Thailand

Mr. Suwit said the Laotian marijuana crop was concentrated in four provinces
bordering Thailand - Sayaboury, Vientiane, Khammouane and Savannakhet.

Laos, which has been under Communist rule since December 1975, when
non-Communist parties were forced out of a governing coalition, is one of the
world's poorest nations. Its 3.6 million people live mostly by subsistence
agriculture.

The landlocked country has to import many manufactured goods, mostly through
Thailand, but lacks adequate export earnings to cover the costs.

The biggest foreign income of Laos comes from its sale of hydroelectric power to
Thailand. But the Thais say they expect to renegotiate the price of
hydroelectricty soon because other sources of energy have become cheaper.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 54.

1. At the Iran-contra hearings, some committee members criticized this exhibit,
showing President Reagan's signature under a section of the Boland Amendment.
What was at issue, and were the committee members

right or wrong?

2. According to most experts, the current shortage of nurses is different from
previous such shortages and far more ominous. Why?

3. Otherwise sobersided scientists have begun to think about the possibility of
floating trains, floating furniture, floating toys, floating people - things
that used to be in the realm of science fiction. Why do they now seem almost
within reach?

4. In a controversy about who is considered a Jew, six Arabs played a critical
role. What were the circumstances and what did the Arabs do?

5. In his testimony before Congress, Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North said he had
never discussed the diversion of profits from Iranian arms sales to the
Nicaraguan rebels directly with President Reagan. What reason did he give for
his assumption that Mr. Reagan knew about the diversion?

6. Connoisseurs of the Parisian nightspot, the Folies-Bergere, can relax; there
are 13 letters in the name of its latest extravaganza, ''Folies en Folie.''
Explain.

7. For the third time in two months, the White House publicly corrected its
chief of staff, Howard H. Baker Jr. What is the subject of the recurring
dispute?

8. News executives expressed concern that a decision by the New York State Court
of Appeals might encourage prosecutors to issue more subpoenas for journalists'
notes, outtakes, photographs and similar materials. What was the decision?

9. 1. This occurence is a small but growing phenomenon in New York City. What is
it?

10. One of the Federal Government's primary objectives in breaking up the Bell
System that has been accomplished, to the benefit of many consumers, may be
nearing an end. What is it?

11. Revelers in Austin, Minn. paid tribute to the 50th anniversary of a local
product that has become a slice of Americana. What is it?

12. Parents, legislators, educators and others are challenging an American
tradition that is allowed in 41 states. What is it?

13. After two decades as a stragetic backwater, a million square miles of the
Arctic is alive once again with military activity. What Government has ordered
the buildup and what is the reason?

14. A tennis tradition that worked to Pat Cash's advantage as he upset Ivan
Lendl for the men's championship at Wimbledon will be absent from the Australian
Open next year. What is it?

15. The phrases and cadences of some Democratic Presidential candidates seem to
have a similar and a familiar ring. Why?

16. ''It is the most important decision in the area of defendants' rights in the
last 10 years,'' the head of the New York City Legal Aid Society said of a
Federal District court ruling. What was the ruling?

17. Judge Robert H. Bork, President Reagan's nominee for a Supreme Court seat,
says his political philsophy changed after exposure to economics at law school.
How did he describe the change?

18. Recalling the 1968 Republican Presidential campaign, former Gov. George W.
Romney of Michigan said that public reaction to his statement that he had been
''brainwashed'' by American generals and diplomats on a 1965 trip to Vietnam was
not the reason he dropped out of the race. What reason did he give for
withdrawing?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Quiz photos

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Arias Plan Deserves Better From Us

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 451 words


To the Editor:

President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica, at his June 18 press conference in
the National Press Building, said his talks with President Reagan of the day
before were ''frank'' - diplomatic language for strong disagreement. Not
surprising, but still disappointing. President Arias has been pushing his peace
initiative for five months, and the Reagan Administration has done its best to
ignore it.

The Arias plan may not be perfect, but it is the most positive initiative in the
tangled web of Central American politics to date. With United States support,
and even indirect participation, it could be improved if needed and moved
forward much more quickly than with Washington obstructing from behind the
scenes.

Along with the proposal by Guatemala's President Vinicio Cerezo for an elected
Central American parliament (another idea ignored as much as possible by the
White House and State Department), it could form the basis for a permanent
Central American community, in which regional monitoring of elections (an
essential element of the Arias plan) would replace elections by the whim of the
military, and regional integration could replace national disintegration.

The biggest irony of what is at best United States indifference to the
initiatives of Presidents Arias and Cerezo is that they resemble in a general
way the result of the most successful U.S. foreign policy initiative of the 20th
century: the Marshall Plan, which is celebrating its 40th anniversary.

Blind insistence on a military solution, on the other hand, resembles nothing so
much as a repeat of the greatest United States foreign policy tragedy of the
20th century: the Vietnam War. It is as if the United States Government, in
marching toward the goal of a democratic Central America, is walking with one
foot barely touching the firm ground of regional community and the other stuck
deeply in the mud of militarism. Rather than trying to pull its foot out of the
mud, the Administration is doggedly pushing it in ever deeper.

The only hope for a positive United States contribution to regional peace in
Central America at this point is the unlikely event of the Reagan
Administration's changing direction or the equally unlikely event of
Congressional leadership in the foreign policy crisis or the ultimate solution
to a failed and intransigent Presidential policy: waiting for the next United
States Administration to take office. We can only hope things can hold together
in Central America that long.

 TOM EHRENZELLER
   Washington, June 19, 1987

 The writer is program director of the Association to Unite the Democracies, a
group allied with the European federalism movement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Once Was a Time: Sharing the 60's

BYLINE: By PATRICIA LEIGH BROWN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 56, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1537 words


To everything there is a season.

It was just another night on the Upper West Side for 16-year-old Michael
McCartney. Clad in a psychedelic-colored tie-dyed T-shirt, he rented the
quintessential 60's movie, ''Alice's Restaurant,'' and watched it with friends.
Last year in his speech class at the Trinity School, Michael's topic was not the
Constitution but Jimi Hendrix. His musical heroes are not Madonna, Bon Jovi or
the Beastie Boys but Simon and Garfunkel, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, the Doors
and the Grateful Dead.

''It was an extremely interesting culture,'' Michael said of the 1960's.
''People did what they wanted to do. They had values and they went for them.
Things were so different then.''

Peace Symbols as Heirlooms

Like a loose but seemingly growing confederation of his contemporaries, he is
entranced with an era he knows, not through personal experience but through rock
radio programs, tapes and albums, television documentaries and MTV. The latest
family heirlooms are frayed record albums and hand-me-down peace symbols, passed
along like totemic objects from generation to generation. Teen-agers not old
enough to remember Kent State are discovering the culture of the 60's,
especially its music, through parents, older siblings and yes, the occasional
baby sitter.

''There's a great curiosity at school about the 60's,'' said Arnold Goldstein,
an assistant principal at Martin Van Buren High School in Queens. ''Students ask
me if I was a hippie a lot, and was my hair long.''

''They tend to see the era in images,'' he said. ''They see the period as
exciting and tumultuous, and to a great degree it was. But it's a distorted,
idealized view. They have a perception that all teen-agers were hippies and that
everybody from the 1960's was at Woodstock.''

Some parents and children are actually sharing music, albeit in a family
situation rather than a fragrant black-lighted haze.

''Hey Dad,'' Michael will say to his father. ''Listen to this Dead.''

Nouveau-Hippie Garb

When the Grateful Dead and Bob Dylan descend upon Giants Stadium in the
Meadowlands to play before a sellout crowd tomorrow evening, the fans will be
not only aging baby boomers whose hair contains a ''Touch of Gray'' (to quote
the sobering theme of a new Dead song) but also an untold number of teen-agers
with blemishes and braces.

Bypassing Benetton, the young people will bob to the music dressed in
nouveau-hippie garb: woven Guatemalan ''friendship'' bracelets, moccasins,
bandanas, peace symbols, tie-dyed T-shirts, gauzy skirts and
ripped-in-revealing-places blue jeans. Unlike the hippies of yore, some will
have Breck Girl hair and flawless fingernails. Jaxi Israel, a student at
Connecticut College in New London, identified this group as ''the kids who eat
red meat and Velveeta and have Grateful Dead bumper stickers on their BMW's and
Saabs.''

But for some teen-agers, there seems to be the beginning of a more significant
revival. Though their numbers are impossible to quantify, among an increasingly
visible number of them there is a nostalgic yearning for the passions of the
60's, fueled by a growing barrage of commercial activity. Some examples:

* In the past three years, a new radio format called classic rock has emerged on
some 50 radio stations in major cities, including WXRK-FM and WNEW-FM in New
York, according to Radio & Records, a trade publication. Though geared primarily
to people age 25 to 34, ''There is a new generation who think the Who is new
music,'' said Tom Chiusano, WXRK's vice president and general manager. ''They
will be a big bonus for us.''

* Comeback records by the Turtles, the Monkees, the Byrds and others are being
introduced by companies like Rhino Records in Santa Monica, Calif., which has
also issued a commemorative album of the Woodstock era called ''The Summer of
Love.'' Arnie Orleans, vice president of marketing, estimated that a third of
the market for reissues are teen-agers.

* MTV has introduced ''Closet Classics,'' half-hour segments featuring the
Doors, Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin and other 60's icons (in some cases long
deceased). HBO, CBS/Fox and others offer video cassettes of ''Easy Rider,''
''Woodstock'' and other 60's films. ''The visual component is turning kids onto
this stuff,'' said Jeffrey Gold, vice president of creative services at A & M
Records in Los Angeles. ''You can buy a video of the Doors and see what it was
all about.''

Young people are also a sizable portion of the audience for resurrected 60's and
early 70's rock groups, said Michael J. Shalett of Street Pulse Group Ltd., a
market-research company specializing in the music industry. On last year's
Monkees tour, for instance, 51 percent of the audience was under 18. Mr. Shalett
said a quarter of the audience for the 1985 Crosby, Stills and Nash tour was 17
or under.

In what might be a harbinger, a gallery called Psychedelic Solution opened in
Greenwich Village recently, selling the usual 60's concert posters but also new
psychedelic art by Mark Mothersbaugh, lead singer for Devo.

Fashions are following suit. ''Tie-dyes are back,'' said Colleen Weiss, national
sales manager for Winterland Productions, a major producer of merchandise sold
at concerts, record stores and T-shirt shops. Ten years ago the company got out
of tie-dyed clothing. This summer, it reintroduced tie-dyed T-shirts as part of
the ''Summer of Love'' anniversary. The company would not release sales figures
but Ms. Weiss said it ''can't keep up with the demand.''

Explanation Vary

Explanations vary on why the 60's are increasingly appealing to the young.

''The music comes out of a time when there was an attempt at positive social
change,'' said Bill Graham, a rock promoter whose concerts included Live Aid in
1985. ''Many younger people, especially in the Reagan era, are seeking to break
out of a conservative attitude.''

The interest in the 60's, in Mr. Goldstein's view, has been whetted by Vietnam
movies like ''Rambo'' and ''Platoon'' and television shows like ''Family Ties,''
with its premise of post-hippie parents with conservative children. But it
begins with the music. ''Rock-and-roll has really become part of our national
culture,'' said Ahmet Ertegun, chairman of Atlantic Records. ''The kids hear the
music and wonder about the rest of it.''

Many seem drawn especially to the lyrics of the old songs.

''They were trying to say something with music,'' said Courtney Geer, an
18-year-old York Preparatory School student who wears rings on her fingers and
an ankle bracelet with bells in honor of her favorite band, the Grateful Dead.
''Now,'' she said, referring to Madonna and the Beastie Boys, ''all the music
talks about is sex or, 'You've got to fight for the right to party.'''

''I feel kind of sorry for them,'' said Ken Barnes, 38, a senior vice president
and editor of Radio & Records in Los Angeles. ''I'd rather see them develop
their own cultural icons, even if it's the Beastie Boys.''

''The 60's was about big events,'' said Chad Dickens, 16, who carries a business
card and who wrote a 38-page paper on Woodstock at the Rippowam Cisqua School in
Bedford, N.Y. ''That's how we'd like it to be now: uninhibited and less selfish,
less upwardly mobile, with people thinking for themselves.''

Although he and his friends care about world events and about AIDS, ''they don't
affect us directly,'' he said.

'A Provocative Point of View'

''Children today are looking for answers,'' said Graham Nash, of Crosby, Stills
and Nash, when asked why teen-agers attend his concerts. ''They are looking at a
world in which the human race could be annihilated - environmental pollution on
a major scale. They see themselves coming into sexual maturity and being limited
and scared to death at a time when they should be most experimental. We have no
answers, but we do have a provocative point of view.''

A perceived sense of purpose and community seems to be a large part of the
attraction. Dr. John Munder Ross, a psychologist and psychoanalyst in Manhattan,
said a vague nostalgic wish that ''they'd been around in the 60's'' is common
among his adolescent patients.

''The 60's seemed to be a time when people were finding themselves and their
identities,'' Dr. Ross said. ''It was before the period of herpes and AIDS, when
sexuality was celebrated. It was a time of ideological commitment and a sense of
purpose, all of which are very important to adolescents.''

Suggestions of renewed campus political action are personified by Amy Carter at
Brown University and underscored by protests demanding divestiture of stocks in
South African companies. But does the interest in the 60's reflect a renewed
commitment to social and political activism, or is it simply fashion and fad?

Steven Piper, 44, the father of Ethan, 17, said he believes the interest in the
earlier era is essentially a process of self-education. ''An awful lot could be
learned from what we went through,'' he said.

At the Grateful Dead show in Rochester last week, Christine Wilcox, 17, of
Northville, N.Y., explained why she had come: ''Someday when everything from the
60's is all gone, I want to be able to say I tried to figure it out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Peace symbols abounded at last week's Grateful Dead concert in
Rochester. Sue Schonbeck with Steve Curkendall; tie-dyed shirt. In Manhattan,
Michael McCartney and Ethan Piper. Courtney Geer in peace-symbol jewelry.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia Reported Ready to Repatriate Refugees

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


A senior Government minister has declared that Cambodia is ready in principle to
take back the bulk of the 275,000 Cambodians who have sought refuge in Thailand
since the Vietnamese invasion of 1979.

The minister, Kong Sam Ol, an assistant to Prime Minister Hun Sen who deals with
international and Western relief organizations, said his Government was ready to
talk with Thailand about the border Cambodians.

Of the 275,000 Cambodians in Thailand, more than 250,000 have been denied
refugee status by Bangkok. This means they have virtually no possibility of
being accepted for resettlement elsewhere.

With their human rights not enjoying even minimal protection, the ''displaced
persons,'' a majority of whom are under 16 years old, have been victimized by
factions of the anti-Phnom Penh resistance movement, notably the Khmer Rouge of
former Prime Minister Pol Pot, as well as some Thai military.

Because any settlement of the Cambodian problem seems unlikely to resolve the
fate of the ''displaced persons,'' as well as of 24,000 other Cambodians in
Thailand who enjoy refugee status, many members of international aid and relief
organizations are increasingly looking to the possibility of negotiating with
the Phnom Penh Government of President Heng Samrin and its Vietnamese sponsors
to let these Cambodians return voluntarily.

U.S. the Principal Supporter

The United States is the principal supporter of the border population. It
contributes one-third of the budget of the United Nations border relief
operation, about $36 million a year.

Phnom Penh no longer insists that Thailand recognize it as a condition for talks
on the Cambodians' return. Kong Sam Ol said that a United Nations body such as
the High Commissioner for Refugees could be an acceptable middleman. So far, the
refugee organization has talked with Phnom Penh only on possible voluntary
repatriation of some of the 24,000 recognized refugees.

The major condition that the minister attached to the acceptance of returnees
was based on Phnom Penh's fear that a mass movement might serve as a Trojan
horse for anti-Government forces. ''We have to find out who they are,'' he said.

He said the Government rejected any step toward settlement of the Cambodian
conflict that did not include the dismantling of the Khmer Rouge as a military
or political organization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT RESISTER BEGINS A 3-YEAR TERM IN PRISON

BYLINE: By KENDALL J. WILLS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


Wearing a T-shirt bearing the words ''justice is a constant struggle,'' David
Gillam Kerley, a 26-year-old law student at the University of Wisconsin,
departed for Leavenworth Federal Penitentiary in Kansas on Friday to begin a
three-year term for refusing to register for the military draft.

His term, plus a $10,000 fine, was the harshest sentence handed down in 18 cases
chosen for prosecution under a now-abandoned Justice Department policy that
singled out only those nonregistrants who actively identified themselves as
draft resisters.

The Selective Service System estimates that 400,000 young men have not
registered since President Carter reinstituted registration in 1980 after the
Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan.

Defendants had asserted that the policy was unconstitutional, and the department
dropped it in 1984 after it was challenged, but the Supreme Court upheld the
policy in 1985, ruling that it did not amount to selective prosecution or an
infringement on free speech.

They 'Selected Themselves'

''Those prosecuted,'' Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. wrote in the majority opinion,
''in effect selected themselves for prosecution.''

The punishment meted out for failure to register has been uneven. Among the 18
men prosecuted under the abandoned policy, legal action against four was
dropped, and the others were convicted and given prison sentences or put on
probation. The sentences ranged from the three-year term and $10,000 fine for
Mr. Kerley to six months of house arrest for David Alan Wayte, whose case went
to the Supreme Court.

Two others were indicted under a replacement policy of prosecuting people who
were not vocal resisters, but the charges were dropped when they agreed to
register.

Mr. Kerley said his sentence, imposed by Federal District Judge John Shabaz,
''was designed not so much to punish me for what I was convicted of but for my
political views.''

Owner of Bookstore

Mr. Kerley, who owns a bookstore in Madison, is also regional director of the
Committee Against Registration and the Draft. At his sentencing, Judge Shabaz
criticized him as ''aiding and abetting'' registration resisters and refused his
request to remain free on bail while awaiting an appeal. Mr. Kerley, who is
appealing, said he had refused to sign up because registration would make it
easier for the United States to send troops abroad.

No one has been drafted since the United States switched to a volunteer Army in
1973, but some of the political and religious arguments that led many young men
to oppose the draft in the Vietnam War continue to be cited by those refusing to
register today.

''Some of these young men are trying to make a political statement,'' said
Wilfred L. Ebel, the departing director of the Selective Service System. ''I
don't know why they look at it as a political issue. It's not. It's a national
security issue.''

He said draft registration would shorten by six weeks the time it would take to
mobilize conscripts for military training. Of America's key allies, only Britain
and Canada do not have a draft.

Compliance by Most

Most young men do comply with the law, which requires all male citizens and
resident aliens 18 to 26 years old to register. The agency reports 97 percent
compliance among the nearly 18 million men who have been eligible since 1980.
Mr. Ebel said most of the 400,000 who failed to register did so accidentally.

However, several antidraft organizations challenge Selective Service's figures,
arguing that the noncompliance rate is higher.

The Rev. L. William Yolton, executive director of the National Interreligious
Service Board for Conscientious Objectors, estimated that about 40,000 young men
had refused to register for reasons of principle.

John Russell, a Justice Department spokesman, said the department was planning
yet another policy under which the Selective Service System would periodically
refer to the department 200 names randomly chosen from among those not
complying.

The Justice Department would get in touch with these men and ask that they
comply, according to Mr. Ebel. If they still refused, legal action would be
taken against them.

The Selective Service System matches registration lists against driver licenses
and other public records to determine who has not registered at 18. It also
sends several reminders, including a birthday card.

Besides facing possible prosecution, those who fail to register are barred from
receiving Federal student aid and assistance for job training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Going On in the Northeast

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 476 words



CRAFTS ON SOCIETY HILL

The Head House Square Crafts Fair gathers its forces in Philadelphia from noon
to midnight Saturday and from noon to 6 P.M. Sunday and each weekend through
Labor Day at Second and Pine Streets in the Society Hill section.

The open-air fair, now in its 19th year, includes crafts of 32 workers, with
displays of woodwork, photography, weaving, jewelry, Hmong needlework, graphics,
ceramics, leather and metalwork.

The Hmong, who have come to this country from Laos and Vietnam, embroider works
that fit two general categories: symbolic designs and folk art.

Guest artists are featured each weekend and workshops for children are held
Sundays from 1 to 3 P.M.

A special exhibit gives the history of the site, which was an open-air
marketplace from 1745 to 1956.

Information: (215) 769-8062.

WATERWORKS ON VIEW

Modern waterworks are the subject of an unusual display from the archives of the
South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority now on view at the Eli
Whitney Museum, Hamden, Conn. The exhibit, organized by Petr Dobkin Hall,
associate research scientist, Yale University, in cooperation with the
authority, remains on view through September.

Early construction photographs, banners and printed materials illustrate how
water has shaped the development and quality of life in the New Haven region
since Colonal times. The photographs show how land, lakes and machinery have
been linked to provide some 400,000 people with potable water. Glass negatives
show the construction of the initial treatment plant, the first in the state to
be built with reinforced concrete. Photos from the 1930's show the construction
of the Lake Gaillard reservoir, which holds 14 billion gallons.

The museum, on Whitney Avenue at Armory Street, below the Lake Whtney dam, is
open 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., Wednesday through Saturday, and noon to 5 P.M. on
Sunday. Admission is free.

Information: (203) 624-6671, extension 263.

DANCING ON A BOSTON STREET

A gala Bastille Day celebration will be held Tuesday in Boston's Back Bay. A
champagne reception at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing on a
roped-off block of Marlborough Street between Berkeley and Clarendon Streets.

Three major Boston hotels are contributing the dinner. Dancing (from 8:30 P.M.
to midnight) will be to the music of Volvo-Volvo, a Haitian-French band, and the
Back Bay Rhythm Makers, a swing band.

Admission to the reception and dinner, by reservation only, is $75. Dancing is
$15 at the gate.

The evening is to benefit Boston's French Library, a nonprofit cultural center
with a library of 40,000 books that promotes French films, concerts and other
activities enjoyed by Francophiles.

The organizers will sprinkle the street with red, white and blue balloons and
strolling mimes and musicians.

Information: (617) 266-4351.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNDAY OBSERVER;
Relevant Ignorance

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


WE ARE IN THE midst of another assault on dumbness. This one was ignited by
evidence of amazing ignorance among young people. For instance, do you know
about the recent survey of California college students? Half of them couldn't
locate Japan on a map.

It makes you glad we got World War II out of the way before this bunch was born.
Imagine a headline: ''Pilot Drops A-Bomb on Rio de Janeiro by Mistake; 'Always
Thought Japan Was Down There Someplace Below Biloxi,' He Says.''

Geography, literature, history - you name it and kids by the million go slack in
the jaw. High schools swarm with people who don't know there was a World War I.
U.C.L.A. has a student who thinks Toronto is in Italy. Two-thirds of America's
adolescents don't know the Civil War took place in the last half of the 19th
century. Half of them never heard of Stalin.

These statistics and plenty more like them are now widely cited by people who
fear that American dumbness is getting out of hand. Books saying we have become
a nation of dolts enjoy surprisingly brisk sales, and journals published for the
literate dwell with deepening melancholy on the theme that galloping ignorance
threatens to make an end of us.

The last big attack on national ignorance was set off by Sputnik, which scared
people. They thought the Russians were beating us in a vital technology
competition. The fear now is that we are losing to other countries in a
mercantile competition.

It is easy to slide away from the heart of the matter by blaming the educators,
but the awkward fact is that Americans have always been of two minds about
ignorance and recently we have rather favored it.

Note Ronald Reagan: no President since Harding has been more ignorant of his own
Government, yet his popularity polls have been consistently higher than any
President's since Eisenhower.

Eisenhower, perhaps not incidentally, was suspected of being a bit dim himself.
We now know better, but the misconception didn't hurt his popularity any. In the
1950's, Ike's decade, oafishness was widely respected by Americans while
evidence of a sound intelligence was regarded with suspicion or contempt.

Adlai Stevenson, the thinking man as politician, was an ''egghead,'' an
amusingly abusive synonym for ''intellectual.'' Thanks to the decade's brutish
Red hunters, who often seemed convinced that people of intelligence would
naturally become Communists, intellectual was not a popular thing to be in
Eisenhower's time.

The pendulum swung back in the early 1960's when John Kennedy put the lively
mind back into good repute, but dumbness was soon triumphant again as passions
created by the Vietnam War produced the victory of the know-nothings on the
campuses. Ignorance was rehabilitated as a form of sociological uplift and
gussied up under a new name, ''Relevance.''

If it wasn't ''relevant,'' why did anyone need to know it? And so we had the
turbulent heyday of the campus know-nothing triumphant, battering down the bad
old ''irrelevant'' studies which universities had been created to teach way back
in the ridiculously irrelevant past, never mind when - memorizing silly old
dates can lead to terminal irrelevance.

So we have in the American character this powerful tendency to find ignorance
fetching. You find it in the primitive blockheads like those who led the Red
hunts of the 1950's and in the newfangled, highbrow boobs who did away with
irrelevant learning in the 1960's.

It is always threatening to flare up. ''So you admit to this committee that you
know where Japan is located, eh? Did they teach you that in Moscow?''

Or: ''You stand there with your flabby, dishonest, hypocritical,
middle-class-ethos face sneering at this audience and tell us we can't get to
Japan by going south from Biloxi, and you think you're telling us something
worth telling? You're telling irrelevancy, that's what you're telling. Don't
waste our time telling us how to find Japan. Tell us how to find justice and
peace and love and spiritual fulfillment.''

Both these phases are modern variants of the primordial American oaf
congratulating himself on his ignorance by saying, ''A little learning is a
dangerous thing.'' This fellow dates from the time when American resources were
so plentiful that with a little luck and no scruple against bloodshed, even an
ignoramus could amass the wealth of the Indies.

Now, alas, the Indies are amassing the wealth of America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JULY 12, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words




$


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   6    MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
                 Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
                 psychotic fan.

 2      4   3    PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
                 creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and
                 lawyers.

 3      2   9    THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
                 (Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
                 Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.

 4      3   5    EMPIRE, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.50.)
                 Turn-of-the-century Washington, from the point of
                 view of a young woman newspaper publisher.

 5      6   5    THE TIMOTHY FILES, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran turned
                 detective checks out dubious entrepreneurs for
                 Wall Street firms.

 6     13   2    WEEP NO MORE, MY LADY, by Mary Higgins
                 Clark. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Love and
                 murder at a swank California health spa.

 7      5   5    PALE KINGS AND PRINCES, by Robert B.
                 Parker. (Delacorte, $15.95.) Spenser on the trail of
                 a major cocaine ring based in a small New England
                 town.

 8      8   23   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                 (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
                 that befall a woman and her family after her
                 appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.

 9     14   3    DIRK GENTLY'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE
                 AGENCY, by Douglas Adams. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $14.95.) A private eye's search for a missing cat
                 takes him on a trip through space and time.

10 *   10   5    MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow.
                 (Morrow, $17.95.) The many-faceted relationship of
                 the 35-year-old narrator and his uncle, a famous
                 botanist.

11      9   17   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                 $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                 way to the 80's.

12      7   50   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
                 World War III.

13     12   4    SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                 Four scientists explore the mysteries of an alien
                 spaceship found on the floor of the South Pacific.

14     11   9    HEIRESS, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                 Sisters vie for their father's affection and fortune.

15     15   24   THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                 (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                 king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   11   THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by
                 Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
                 of liberal arts education during the past 25 years.

 2      2   32   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                 Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                 recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 3      6   6    CULTURAL LITERACY, by E. D. Hirsch Jr.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) The information -
                 geography, history, literature, politics - that you
                 need to read with.

 4      3   9    HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon.
                 (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the
                 octogenarian industrialist and philanthropist.

 5      5   4    EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Jimmy and Rosalynn
                 Carter. (Random House, $16.95.) The former first
                 couple tell what they're doing to make the most of
                 the rest of their lives.

 6      9   14   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
                 Siegel. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A surgeon stresses
                 the importance of the patient's mind and emotions.

 7      7   20   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                 Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                 visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his home.

 8     12   3    LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien
                 Cheng. (Grove, $19.95.) China's Cultural Revolution
                 as experienced by a wealthy woman accused of
                 spying for the West.

 9     10   6    THE DIFFERENT DRUM, by M. Scott Peck.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A psychiatrist's
                 prescription for personal and communal peace.

10      4   55   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                 Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                 from the television star and father of five.

11     11   13   THIS 'N THAT, by Bette Davis with Michael
                 Herskowitz. (Putnam, $17.95.) The actress's
                 memories and opinions.

12      8   14   HOLD ON, MR. PRESIDENT! by Sam Donaldson.
                 (Random House, $17.95.) A White House television
                 correspondent comments on his assignment.

13            1  THE GREAT DEPRESSION OF 1990, by Ravi
                 Batra. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) An economist's
                 dire predictions about the coming decade.

14     14   2    THE SPY WORE RED, by Aline, Countess of
                 Romanones. (Random House, $18.95.)
                 Recollections of a woman from upstate New York
                 who served as an undercover agent in Europe
                 during World War II.

15 *   15   22   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Australia, from penal colony to its gradual
                 emergence as a flourishing nation.


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   96   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                 standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 2      2   6    WOMEN MEN LOVE, WOMEN MEN LEAVE, by
                 Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson N.
                 Potter/Crown, $18.95.) Why men are drawn to
                 some women and desert others.

 3      4   4    SIBLINGS WITHOUT RIVALRY, by Adele Faber
                 and Elaine Mazlish. (Norton, $14.95.) Ways to cope
                 with bickering between one's children.

 4            1              THE 8-WEEK CHOLESTEROL CURE, by Robert
                 E. Kowalski. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Ways to
                 lower your blood cholesterol level without drugs.

 5 *    3   37   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                 by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                 prepared at moderate cost.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE EMBARRASSMENT OF RICHES: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden
Age, by Simon Schama. (Knopf, $39.95.) A historian's deft moral examination
(plentifully illustrated) of a tiny, newly independent, 17th-century Calvinist
state adjusting its public conscience to cope with sudden, stupendous wealth.

THE CURIOUS CASE OF SIDD FINCH, by George Plimpton. (Macmillan, $14.95.) What if
a man, through Tibetan mystical training, could throw a baseball accurately at
168 miles per hour?

Well, he could heal the wounds of the world through play and wisdom, as Mr.
Plimpton's funny and poignant first novel shows.

MORTAL RIVALS: Superpower Relations From Nixon to Reagan, by William G. Hyland.
(Random House, $19.95.) A shrewd and readable analysis of Soviet-American
relations since 1969, by a former subordinate, and current admirer, of Henry A.
Kissinger.

THE RAT, by Gunter Grass. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$17.95.) The ends of language, mankind and the world are the concerns of Mr.
Grass's maddening and brilliant novel.

UNASSIGNED TERRITORY, by Kem Nunn. (Delacorte, $16.95.) An evangelical preacher
becomes obsessed with the reality of a desert tourist-trap monster from outer
space in Mr. Nunn's second novel, resonant with weird Western locality.

SHOWDOWN AT GUCCI GULCH: Lawmakers, Lobbyists, and the Unlikely Triumph of Tax
Reform, by Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and Alan S. Murray. (Random House, $18.95.) A
blow-by-blow account of improbable forces combined, for once, to simplify the
law.

GEORGE C. MARSHALL: Statesman 1945-1959, by Forrest C. Pogue. (Viking, $29.95.)
The fourth and final volume of the five-star general's biography is, like its
subject, thoughtful, mature, balanced and full of humanity and intelligence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By PATRICIA T. O'CONNER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 942 words



THE COLONEL'S DAUGHTER: And Other Stories, by Rose Tremain. (Owl/Holt, $7.95.)
On the surface portraits of British decorum, Rose Tremain's characters harbor
''feelings of jealousy, anger, vengeance and loss, emotions so intense they
constantly threaten to break through to the surface,'' Caryn James said in The
Book Review in 1984. ''These may look like Barbara Pym people, but they are
bitter from years of keeping a stiff upper lip. . . . Always there is a sense of
impending psychic violence; this tension . . . gives the stories their
originality and power.''

HOME: A Short History of an Idea, by Witold Rybczynski. (Penguin, $7.95.) This
widely praised study of com-fort and domesticity and their meaning in our lives
treats such subjects as intimacy and privacy, cleanliness, light and air,
efficiency, style and substance. The author's ''defense of common comfort is a
good one,'' William H. Gass said here last year, ''for between the polemical
beginning and ending of his argument there is a book of great interest and
instruction. . . . He tells the story of the development of the private dwelling
from house to home, and he does it in a sensitive and balanced way.'' And he
''is particularly good at describing the effects . . . of invention - whether
water closet, gas jet, electric lamp, window sash or whatever.''

SELECTED STORIES, by Robert Walser. Translated by Christopher Middleton and
others. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $8.95.) These tales by the Swiss-born Robert
Walser (1878-1956), who spent some 27 years in mental institutions, are ''to be
read slowly and savored,'' Ronald De Feo said here in 1982, for they make up a
volume, by a ''self-styled exile,'' that is ''filled with lovely and disturbing
moments that will stay with the reader for some time to come.''

ENTRANCES: An American Director's Journey, by Alan Schneider. (Limelight,
$17.95.) This posthumously published memoir by the theatrical director Alan
Schneider (1917-84) is an ''outstandingly valuable, extremely well-written and
excitingly readable autobiography,'' our reviewer, Martin Esslin, said last
year. Schneider was most closely associated with the works of Edward Albee,
Harold Pinter and especially Samuel Beckett (a memorable episode is Schneider's
account of the doomed American premiere of ''Waiting for Godot,'' which opened
in Miami, billed as ''the laugh sensation of two continents,'' starring Bert
Lahr and Tom Ewell).

SATURDAY NIGHT AT SAN MARCOS, by William Packard. (Grove, $7.95.) William
Packard's novel, a satire on the world of writers' conferences, is fast and fun,
portraying the writing industry with ''a sharp yet loving bite,'' Regina
Weinreich said in The Book Review in 1986. ''Picture the pace of Jack Kerouac's
'On the Road' plus caricature worthy of Portnoy.''

ANATOMY OF A JURY, by Seymour Wishman. (Penguin, $6.95.) Seymour Wishman, in his
study of the workings of the jury in our criminal-justice system, weaves
''information and statistics about the history, psychology and sociology of the
jury into an often compelling narrative about a murder trial,'' Carol E. Rinzler
said in these pages last year.

LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $3.95.) The hero of this
contemporary adventure thriller by Louis L'Amour is an American Indian test
pilot who is downed in Siberia and captured by the Russians. The author ''brings
the same colorful realism to this sweeping adventure that has made his westerns
so beloved,'' one reviewer said last year.

RAIN OR SHINE, by Cyra McFadden. (Vintage, $4.95.) Cyra McFadden's book is a
reminiscence of her parents - her father, Cy Taillon, the dean of rodeo
announcers, and her mother, Pat, a vaudeville dancer and trick rider. It amounts
to a ''spare-parts monument to life in the West,'' Thomas McGuane said here in
1986.

ONE TO COUNT CADENCE, by James Crumley. (Vintage, $5.95.) Set in the Philippines
and Vietnam in 1962, James Crumley's novel has as its hero Slag Krummel, the new
sergeant of a rough company of enlistees. The author ''has a faultless ear for
filthy speech,'' David Dempsey said here in 1969. He found the book ''a
compelling study of the gratuitous violence in men - and how it is unleashed by
the frustrations of military life. It is a story of bars, brawls and brothels -
and I don't know of any writer who has done it better.''

ISAK DINESEN: The Life of a Storyteller, by Judith Thurman. (St. Martin's,
$9.95.) This life of Karen Blixen, the writer Isak Dinesen, is ''a fine
achievement,'' Margaret Drabble said in these pages in 1982. ''Well researched,
sympathetic, fair and imaginative, it tells the story of an enigmatic and at
times infuriating woman. . . . Witch, sybil, lion hunter, coffee planter,
aristocrat and despot . . . she steps forth from these pages with all the force
of legend.''

HEART'S DESIRE, by Gwyneth Cravens. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) A death in the
family has far-reaching effects on three generations of women in Gwyneth
Cravens's novel. In The Book Review in 1986, Mark Dintenfass called it ''sad,
funny, intelligent - why not just say glorious.''

THE MASTER TERRORIST: The True Story of Abu-Nidal, by Yossi Melman. (Avon,
$3.95.) Born Sabri al-Banna in Jaffa in 1937, the man now known as Abu Nidal is
widely considered the most dangerous international terrorist operating today.
The Times correspondent John Kifner, writing in The Book Review last year, said
Yossi Melman's biography ''makes a wealth of information on Sabri al-Banna
available to the general reader for the first time, including his labyrinthine
relationships with the Arab world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Witold Rybczynski

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHOPPER'S WORLD;
Kyoto Has Fans For All Reasons

BYLINE: By AMANDA MAYER STINCHECUM; Amanda Mayer Stinchecum is studying ikat
textiles in Japan on a grant from the Social Science Research Council.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 6, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1494 words


The dark old storefront of Miyawaki Baisen'an, with the silver, gold and vivid
pigments of its sheaves of fans gleaming faintly from the dim interior, bespeaks
a tradition that goes back over a thousand years, to the first flowering of
classical Japanese culture. Heavy fans made of cypress slats held together with
silk cords were part of the formal accouterment of the aristocrats who attended
the imperial court during the Heian period (794-1185) and thereafter. Over the
centuries the slats became thin ribs covered with paper, and the folding fan
took on the form we know today.

In 1823, a sake brewer from Mino, in central Japan, moved to Kyoto and took over
a business known as Ogiya Shinbei, in Rokkaku-dori, three blocks north of
Shijo-dori, near the Rokkakudo Temple. Even at that time, the area itself had
long been one of the city's three fan-making centers. The old shop was destroyed
in a fire that devastated much of the city in 1864. The present store, with its
deep eaves, barred second-story windows and heavy wooden bench in front that
folds up to become part of the storm shutters at night, was built soon after the
fire, but in 1902 the interior was altered to a new and modish elegance that
remains very much intact today.

If you pass through the main showroom and enter a room on your left, look up.
Each square of the coffered wood ceiling is painted with an imaginatively
decorated fan, each done by a different artist of the period, including the
painter Tomioka Tessai, who also chose the new name of the shop, Baisen'an, (it
means something like ''the hermitage where fans are sold''). To the rear of this
room there is a small Western-style sitting room, with carpeting, upholstered
chairs and painted wooden fan panels on the walls. Those on the ceiling are the
work of Kyoto artists and reflect the taste of the old capital, while those in
the small sitting room were painted by Tokyo artists, and display the
preferences of the burgeoning city, barely 100 years old, according to the shop
manager, Miyawaki Shozo. It is difficult to characterize the difference: perhaps
those of Kyoto are more brilliantly colored and more boldly decorated.

It may require a midsummer trip to Kyoto to realize that fans are not obsolete
ornaments but still belong to the realm of everyday life. And in Tokyo, to be
sure, you see the occasional woman of a certain age, elegant in kimono or
restrained Western clothing, fanning herself languidly while sitting in a hot,
motionless train. Or even, as a visitor glimpsed one day in late August, a group
of businessmen standing on a platform at Ueno station, fanning themselves as
they waited impatiently for their train. But in Kyoto, steaming in the muggy
heat of July, August, September, any hope of a breeze broken by the hills
surrounding the city, life is unbearable without a neatly folded and immaculate
handkerchief in one hand, a fan in the other. Never mind what your third-grade
teacher told you: The cool movement of air across one's face is well worth the
energy expended in the quick, fluttering but relaxed motion of the hand that
stirs it.

Japanese fans fall into two general categories: uchiwa and sensu (also called
ogi). Uchiwa are shaped roughly like an outspread hand, a rigid construction of
paper applied to ribs cut from a single piece of bamboo. They are the most
effective fan for creating a brisk breeze, and are often used in the kitchen, to
fan the charcoal fire, or to quickly cool the sushi rice to the perfect
consistency.

Uchiwa are firmly associated with cooling power, and with summer.

They used to be found in every room of every inn, in waiting rooms and living
rooms, were given by shops and merchants to their regular customers as a token
of their appreciation (and as portable advertising, with the shop or product's
name boldly printed on one side) in mid-summer. On hot summer nights, on the
streets of Kyoto and Tokyo's shitamachi or low city, men and women in cool blue
and white cotton kimono can be seen fanning themselves vigorously with uchiwa,
or, when the heat grows less oppressive, with broad fans tucked firmly into obi
sashes, under the knot at the small of the back. Baisen'an carries a few uchiwa.
Among the most charming are miniature versions, about the size of the palm of
your hand, made of Japanese cedar and sparely painted with a single motif - a
cricket, a maple leaf ($20).

But uchiwa (of Chinese origin) are less portable and less convenient than
folding fans, which are said to be one of a very few original Japanese
inventions. Folding fans of precious woods, called hi-ogi, are still used today.
Those at Baisen'an, are of sandalwood with pierced designs. Some have outer ribs
of ivory or rosewood. The sandalwood itself comes from China and Vietnam, but
the carving is done in Japan, except for one example in a glass-topped box,
pierced in a lattice pattern with flowers - clearly a Chinese design ($375). The
Japanese sandalwood fans, larger ones for men, smaller ones for women, range
from $225 to $410. The smoky fragrance of the sandalwood that wafts from the fan
as it moves back and forth, and the decorative quality of the wood, compensate
for the diminished cooling ability resulting from the openwork designs. The
capacity of the fan to fold up into an austere shaft of lacquer, bamboo or wood,
to tuck into the folds of a sash, slip into a small handbag or carry discreetly
in the hand, gives the folding fan a formality foreign to the carefree uchiwa.

Folding fans have long symbolized enduring happiness in Japan: the opening out
of the fan stands as a metaphor for the opening out of a happy future, so the
fan often appears as a decorative motif on wedding kimono and quilts for the
newly married pair. A couple exchange fans as a sign of their engagement.
Originally, the woman gave her betrothed one of her own fans as a gift, and he
gave her one of his. Because men's and women's fans differ in size, color and
decoration, the fans could not be used by the recipients. So it has become the
custom for the bridegroom-to-be to give his intended a fan with black lacquered
ribs, gold on one side and silver on the other, while she gives him a larger
fan, usually white paper with satiny bamboo ribs.

Fans for less happy occasions also play an important role in the rituals of
Japanese life, fans to carry at a funeral (a formal occasion, and one of the few
to which many women still wear kimono) and use during the mourning period. The
deep gray, slightly metallic surface of the paper and gleaming black lacquered
ribs are temptingly elegant, but to carry one for informal use, or worse, for
what is supposed to be an auspicious event such as a wedding, would be in very
poor taste.

There are small fans, about eight inches long, for the tea ceremony, painted in
colors or in gold and silver ink on white paper. Most have black ribs, but some
are natural bamboo or a transparent red-brown lacquer. Although the fan is not
actually opened in the tea room, it is an important accessory, and usually
painted with flowers and grasses that reinforce the seasonal associations of the
ceremony. Baisen'an carries the large, elaborately decorated fans for
traditional Japanese dance. A particularly striking one depicts a closeup of
speckled bamboo trunks and leaves on a gold background ($170). The shop avoids
dance fans associated with any particular school of dance. Because fans for No
theater performance are always linked to one school (Kanze or Kongo, for
example), Baisen'an does not carry them but leaves them to the specialist.

But by far the majority of fans at Baisen'an are for everyday use. In spite of
the dramatic decline in the number of kimono wearers over the past 10 years,
when the weather turns sultry and stays that way for weeks, many people of both
sexes still carry and use fans. As with fans for formal occasions, women's fans
are smaller than men's. Delicately painted, boldly printed, plain colored paper
or pristine white with a few characters traced in black ink, a multitude suits
many tastes (from $7).

Men's fans are more severe, but not all are plain white. Somber shades of blue,
brown, gray and green, relieved by an occasional discreetly painted mountain
landscape, suggest coolness and repose. One of the most handsome and unusual is
a large fan of deep rust brown or smoky black shibugami ($25), the paper
impregnated with persimmon tannin that is traditionally used for stencil papers,
for covering baskets, and for raincoats (the persimmon juice is water
repellent).

Whether the fans are purchased as a gracious way to keep cool, an accessory for
a formal occasion or a reminder of Japan's fragile beauty, a new world unfolds
with each.

                                     *  *  *

Miyawaki Baisen'an. Nakagyo-ku, Rokkaku-dori, Tomino-koji Nishi-iru, Kyoto.
Telephone 221-018. Open 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. every day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of showroom of Miyawaki Baisen'an in Kyoto (Kaku Kurita); photos
of fans; phot of fans dating to the eighth century in Japan (page 29)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
PEACE IS OUR RESPONSIBILITY

BYLINE: By ALLISON A. DAVIS; Allison A. Davis lives in North Haven.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 28, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


AS the helicopter lands on the yellow scorched grass, green canvas covers blow
off the battered and bloodied bodies. Soldiers dressed in green Army fatigues
move swiftly and silently as they carry their dead toward the aircraft. Once all
are on board, the helicopter takes off amid a spray of bullets. The soldiers are
squeezed into the aircraft; some sit with their legs dangling out of the doors.
They are silent.

Suddenly one soldier looks to the ground. They have left one behind. Running
like a pursued deer from a pack of hungry wolves, he stumbles. He has been shot.
He gets off the ground and continues to run, hunched over, to nowhere. His
friends are in the sky. The helicopter turns around and fires upon the enemy.
The soldier still runs. The helicopter team is successful in defeating the
wolves, but not in time for the soldier.

He stumbles again, this time falling to the ground. The vest he wears is covered
with blood, his face muddy. He carries no gun. He attempts to rise again,
getting only to his knees. He sees the helicopter in the sky; he raises his arms
and face to the heavens. His is the sacrifice. Falling over, arms out stretched,
he dies in the grass that has been scorched by previous fire bombings: nepalm.

I have been to the Vietnam War -in a movie theater with 100 other people who
were seeing ''Platoon.''

I had remembered the Vietnam War as peace signs, M.I.A. bracelets, and the
constant fear my cousins were in about the draft. I was born in 1962, and
otherwise I have little recollection of the war, a war that millions of American
men, their average age 19, fought on the beaches and jungles of a country 10,000
miles away from home.

My first recollection of the Vietnam War was when I was 7 years old. I went to
play at a friend's house. On the mantle in the livingroom were two photographs,
one on each end. The young man on the right wore the uniform of the Marines, the
other, the Army.

My friend said, ''My brothers are both dead, killed in the war.'' Later that
day, I asked what the war was; why was my father yelling at the television and
the politicians about stopping the war, and ''those guys who go to Canada.''
When I asked, I got the reply most 7-year-olds get: ''You're too young to
understand.''

My older sister dressed me in peasant dresses, pants that tied up the sides, and
put my hair into long pony tails with peace sign elastics.

When I began to read, I remember the long lists of names in tiny print on the
pages that my father casually glanced at when he read the evening newspaper. How
small the names looked.

Then, the war was over as I entered sixth grade, something about the evacuation
of Saigon. I still had the unanswered question: ''What war?''

I am a child of the 70's. The ''Me Generation.'' The years of self-analysis and
material gain, heavy-metal music, jeans jackets and concert T-shirts. My
thoughts were tied up in Friday night parties. Would I be single the rest of my
life, go to college and be successful. I often contemplated the fate of the
world, but in ecological terms, not war. But how can a child at 17 understand a
war that she was told nothing about, save one day in a history class in the 10th
grade? How could I relate to a man who fought a war and was disabled or died for
my country, who, at 18, went to a strange country thousands of miles away and
fought a jungle war and a unknown enemy, and yet, could not vote for the
politicians who sent him to the war.

My generation is that of the young urban professionals. The educated money
grabbers. Reality is the V.C.R. and color television. The closest we get to war
is Rambo and his lone mission to rescue American prisoners in Vietnam or
''Apocolypse Now,'' the story of a crazed general in Cambodia and the man who
must assassinate him. We sit in our armchairs and cheer the hero on as he shoots
his way across enemy lines, without getting a scratch. In reality, the real
American veteran was shot, did feel compassion, is just like us. But he has
scars. It is then our responsibility to educate our ourselves and our children
about the war we missed. Someone once said that ignorance is bliss. But
ignorance about the Vietnam War and the outcome can be dangerous.

My generation must educate itself about war. We will be the people to fight in
Central America, Lebanon, or any other threatened country. It is our
responsibility to help avert war and violent disruption. We have grown up in a
time of peace for our country, except for Beirut and other isolated incidents.
It is our job to preserve it for our children.

Many thoughts ran through my mind as I left the movie theater and ''Platoon.''
My white Reeboks and designer jeans are getting splashed with mud as I walked
through the wet parking lot. It didn't seem to matter. Innocence is the first
casualty of war, it has been said. My war innocence is shattered. It really did
happen. The shadowy question in my child's mind has been answered.

The helicopter glides easily across the mountains of lush green trees, this ride
will be the last for a young soldier. He is going home. At the end of
''Platoon,'' the soldier says it is the responsibility of those who made it out
of Vietnam to make the world a better place. It is not only the veterans' job,
but our job, too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from ''Platoon''

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Blurred Lines for Lawmakers in Albany

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2455 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 12


The political and ethical practices of the New York State Legislature are being
challenged as rarely before, raising questions that go to the heart of how the
Legislature governs 17 million New Yorkers.

Prosecutors, an aggressive Governor Cuomo, a public stirred by corruption in New
York City and a younger and less accepting Albany press corps have all begun to
question the conduct of individual lawmakers, some of whom are under
investigation for possible payroll abuses.

An examination by The New York Times - including interviews with dozens of
legislators and a review of legislative records - has found that the problems go
far beyond the possibly illegal or unethical acts of individuals, hitting at the
core of how the Legislature conducts its affairs.

It is a body, even some lawmakers acknowledge, in which the lines between what
is acceptable and what is unacceptable are sometimes blurred, and in which
legislators and staff members sometimes weigh governmental decisions against the
interests of their law clients and business partners.

It is also a body dominated by two leaders - the Assembly Speaker and the Senate
majority leader - whose control extends not only to how their members vote on
bills, but even to the running of those members' election campaigns. And more
and more legislators - among themselves, if not publicly - are beginning to
question that control.

So deep and far-reaching are the challenges being raised about the way business
is conducted here that lawmakers agree that the conflict did not end with the
passage of a new ethics code this month or with Saturday's adjournment of the
Legislature. Instead, the lawmakers say, the conflict will boil through the year
and into the 1988 session.

Some New Standards

The ethics code set standards for individual legislators, requiring greater
financial disclosure and attempting to curb conflicts of interest. To be decided
now, some lawmakers say, are more fundamental questions about whether to change
some of the century-old ways the Legislature as a whole operates:

Should the Legislature convert from part time to full time, thereby prohibiting
outside business and law activities by its members? Should the power of the
legislative leaders be decentralized?

''When I moved from Congress to Albany,'' former Gov. Hugh L. Carey said
recently, ''it was obvious that the extremely advanced reforms I had seen in
Washington, such as in the selection of committee chairmen, were not part of the
Legislature. I think the people perhaps pay less attention to the Legislature.

Legislature 'Coming of Age'

''But now I think it's coming of age - I hope it's coming of age. When all this
is done, I think you're going to see vast changes.''

Many legislators argue, however, that all the fuss is unjustified, the product
of overreaction to the New York City corruption scandals, of overzealous news
organizations and of a Governor who seized on the ethics issue as a political
weapon in a power struggle with the Legislature. They say that in the end the
Legislature may be harmed, not improved, by the changes being touted as reforms.

''When you hear the echoes of this a year or two from now,'' said Daniel B.
Walsh, Democrat of Olean, who resigned this year as the Assembly majority
leader, ''it will be: Who in his right mind will run for public office when he
has to give up all legitimate rights to privacy in order to fill disclosure
requirements? Who will want to subject himself to all this?''

What is at the center of the dispute is a world that even supporters of the
Legislature acknowledge is far from the textbook ideal of government. For
example, it is perfectly acceptable -and would continue to be under the new
ethics code - for a legislator to introduce a bill favorable to a utility
company even if his law firm is receiving money from that company.

Making Decisions in Private

It is also acceptable to abandon any pretense to objectivity. The Assembly
Housing Committee, for example, is widely viewed here not as an impartial
screener of housing legislation, but as an advocate for tenants. It is referred
to jokingly as the Tenants Committee.

Its counterpart in the Senate, meanwhile, has the sobriquet of Landlords
Committee. And when a group of landlords came here to demonstrate this year, one
of the leaders of the rally was Richard Runes, a real-estate lawyer who is
counsel to the Senate Housing Committee and who guides the passage of housing
legislation through that chamber.

Key decisions are made not in open forums but in private meetings - the
Republican caucus, or conference, in the Senate and the Democratic conference in
the Assembly - that the Legislature specifically exempted from the state's law
requiring government meetings to be open to the public.

Unlike in Congress, there is no conference committee made up of legislators to
work out differences between the two houses. Much of that is done here in what
is called a leaders' meeting, in which three people - the Governor, the Assembly
Speaker and the Senate majority leader - meet behind closed doors, with no
record kept, to strike the deals whereby legislation rises or falls.

Leaders as Benefactors: Creating New Loyalties

Lawmakers often telephone reporters to find out the results of those meetings,
so they will know how they will be voting. Control of legislators is so tight
that the Assembly Speaker, Mel Miller, held a news conference earlier this year
to present the Assembly Democrats' plan on tax cuts even before he had presented
the plan to the Democrats themselves.

That control by him and the Senate majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, stems
from enormous political and governmental power invested in them. For each of the
state's 211 lawmakers, the leader of his house either influences or outright
determines which of the legislators' bills will pass, the size of his staff,
whether he will be a committee chairman, how much in special allocations - from
zero to $1 million -his district will receive and how much in re-election aid he
will get from private campaign funds administered by each house.

Adding to the leaders' control is that, in comparison with the system in
Congress, the committee system here is less independent. Chairmen are selected
by the Assembly Speaker or Senate majority leader, not by seniority or in party
caucuses. The chairman of the Assembly Ways and Means Committee, Arthur J.
Kremer, Democrat of Long Beach, L.I., was removed this year by Mr. Miller after
challenging the Brooklyn Democrat in a race for the speakership.

And, unlike in Washington, the committees here are circumvented by the leaders.
It is often not committee chairmen, but counsels on the staff of each leader,
who negotiate key legislation with the Governor and the other house of the
Legislature. Just this week, the chairman of the Senate Crime and Correction
Committee, Christopher J. Mega, Republican of Brooklyn, was overruled by Mr.
Anderson, who pushed through a prison bill Mr. Mega had blocked.

A measure of how strongly it is assumed a legislator will vote with the
leadership is that, with no action on his part, his votes on most bills are
automatically cast by computer the way the leadership wants. A legislator must
actually cast a vote only if he is voting against the leadership.

''Until we get this Legislature operating with committees as a true force
instead of leaders operating behind closed doors, we're not going to have any
real change in the way things are done in Albany,'' said State Senator Nancy
Larraine Hoffman, an insurgent Syracuse Democrat. Her criticism of the system
led the Senate leadership to take her name off bills and deny her some travel
reimbursements.

Leaders of the Legislature defend the system, arguing that they are elected by
the majority party in each house and that ultimately they are accountable to
those majorities. They also argue that, for the most part, positions on issues
are generated from the bottom up - that is, they originate with the members and
are then embraced by the leaders - rather than being imposed on the members by
the leaders.

Mr. Anderson, of Binghamton, acknowledged that his staff took a strong role at
the end of the legislative session, saying it was necessary ''to close down some
issues.'' But he maintained that Senate committees ''operate independently for
90 percent of the session.''

He said that a strong leader was sometimes necessary to strike compromises
between factions of his house. ''Sometimes things work out that aren't what any
individual, including me, would like to see happen,'' he said. ''The legislative
process is a compromise process.''

A Growing Cynicism In Capitol's Halls

Still, even the leaders acknowledge that over the last decade they have accrued
political power - if not governmental power - over their members. As party
leaders have lost power, the legislative leaders have moved in to fill the gap,
running extensive campaign and fund-raising efforts for members.

Earlier this year, when the Republican and Democratic candidates for a vacant
Assembly seat near Jamestown were asked how much they were spending on their
campaigns, they said they did not know for sure. All that, they said, was being
handled out of Albany by the legislative leaders and their staffs.

Where a decade ago a legislator's loyalties might have been split - going
governmentally to the legislative leader and politically to the party -the
current system means that they are now frequently joined, with both going to the
legislative leader. The leaders hail that as reform, calling it a progressive
break from the influence of county political organizations.

But citizens' advocacy groups, which once agreed, are now questioning the
current system as well. Investing the leaders with both political and
governmental power, they say, makes it all the more likely a legislative leader
can control a lawmaker's vote.

Some citizens' groups - and some prosecutors - are also asking whether such a
closely held system has increased the chances for corruption, rather than
inhibiting it, since it encourages lawmakers to do as they are told, with no
questions asked.

Gerdi E. Lipschutz, a Queens Democrat, resigned as an Assemblywoman this year
after admitting she had two no-show employees on her payroll. She said she had
been told to carry them by Richard L. Rubin, then executive secretary of the
Queens Democratic Party and special counsel to the Assembly Speaker.

Half a dozen Senate Democrats are under investigation for various payroll
abuses, some of which stem from instructions on how to run their re-election
campaigns that came from their legislative leader, Manfred Ohrenstein, the
Senate minority leader.

All this - the tight political and governmental control by a few people -makes
for two worlds in Albany, the real one behind the scenes and the one for public
consumption. And that, in turn, makes for what even some lawmakers acknowledge
is a bit of cynicism in the halls of the Capitol.

Raising the Curtain On Legislative Theater

Group after group on tour peer from the galleries of the Senate and Assembly
chambers, listening intently to a debate that they think is influencing the
outcome of a vote, then waiting to see if the bill passes or fails.

In reality, usually only bills the leadership wants to pass are brought to the
floor for debate and vote, so any bill being debated is virtually assured of
passage. With some exceptions, the debate - although its contents are sincere
and sometimes emotional - is really part theater, generating quotations for the
news media and for newsletters to constituents.

Arthur N. Malkin, a lobbyist who teaches lobbying here, begins his course by
saying: ''Remember in school, the textbooks had diagrams that talked about the
legislative process - a bill is introduced, then there's meritorious debate and
committee votes? Throw that completely out of your mind. It has nothing to do
with the New York State Legislature.''

Many lawmakers take offense at such comments, arguing that in the end the
process works well. They point to the successes of the last year, which range
from a tax cut, to an $8.7 billion program to rebuild New York City's transit
system, to a $400 million plan for rehabilitating low- and middle-income
housing.

But others wonder if the current system has not limited creativity and kept
government from doing all it could. They say the system, because it is so
closely controlled, blocks innovation. They point out, for example, that New
York's approach to such problems as providing shelter for the homeless has been
simply to spend more money, rather than to develop imaginative programs that
could set the standard for the country.

''When I was in Congress,'' said Mr. Carey, who as Governor engaged in some
bitter fights with the Legislature, ''there was always an atmosphere of getting
on with it, of getting the problem solved. I never sensed that same commitment
in Albany.''

Whether fundamental change will be made in the structure of the Legislature
remains to be seen. But citizens' advocacy groups say they believe the time is
right to press for it, in part because of the investigations of lawmakers but
also because of some instability in the status of the leadership.

Mr. Anderson, who is 71 years old, is said to be considering not running for
another term, and Senators are already competing to be his successor. And Mr.
Miller, who was new this year as Speaker, is still firming up his control of the
Assembly.

The citizens' groups, and some lawmakers, say they will press to give committees
more power and to open up meetings that are now closed to news organizations and
the public. Speaker Miller is already moving to have the committees exercise
greater oversight of the executive branch, monitoring more closely the success
and failure of programs.

But at the same time, Mr. Miller and Stanley Fink, the former Assembly Speaker,
argue that much has already been changed in the Legislature over the last decade
- particularly in the Assembly - but has gone unnoticed by the public.

As reform-minded legislators were elected in the Watergate and Vietnam War eras,
they pointed out, the system was opened up from what it had been -as recently as
the 1960's, lawmakers were locked in the chambers to keep them present for
important votes.

''The Legislature has already been greatly democratized,'' Mr. Fink said. Asked
where all those reform-minded legislators were now, he said, ''They've become
the leadership.''

                                      ----

Next: Politics and the legislative budget.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: PUBLIC BUSINESS, PRIVATE INTERESTS: ALBANY'S CHANGING RULES - First of
three articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos of Assembly Speaker Mel Miller; Manfred Ohrenstein, Senate
minority leader; Governor Cuomo; Senate majority leader Warren M. Anderson and
the State Senate chamber (NYT/David Jennings) (page B2)

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

G.O.P. Hopefuls Backing Away From Reagan

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1231 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, July 12


For the first time, Republican Presidential contenders have clearly but
carefully begun to distance themselves from President Reagan.

At a convention of the Young Republican National Federation, which ended here
Saturday night, the contenders, with the exception of Vice President Bush,
implicitly criticized the President's leadership of the party. They said the
party was in serious trouble because it had failed to reach out to minorities.

And they criticized his leadership of the Administration and the nation in light
of the Iran-contra affair, making it plain that their management would be more
''hands on'' than Mr. Reagan's and that the White House's relationship with
Congress needed to be mended.

While the candidates made it clear they were not uncomfortable with their new
role as critics of Mr. Reagan, they went out of their way to praise the
Administration's military buildup, his economic policies and his nomination of
Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court.

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, in the most emotional speech at the convention,
gazed out at the overwhelmingly white audience of young Republicans on Saturday
afternoon and demanded that the party turn more ''sensitive.'' A similar theme
was sounded earlier in the day by Representative Jack F. Kemp of New York.

''I'd like to see 50 wheelchairs in this audience,'' said Mr. Dole, the Senate
Republican leader. ''I'd like to see 50 black faces, 50 Hispanics, 50
Asian-Americans.''

''We get a rap that we don't care about people who have real problems,'' he
continued. ''We turn our back on the disabled. We don't like low-income
Americans. We don't like old people. We don't care much for black people or
brown people or Asian-Americans or white people. We're sort of a hard-hearted
party. The upper crust. You don't want to be in the upper crust, you can't be a
Republican.

''The bottom line is how you treat others,'' Mr. Dole said. ''And we have an
obligation and a responsibility and above all an opportunity to open up the
doors of this party.''

The audience, composed mostly of Dole supporters, burst into applause.

Concern Over the Hearings

The dominant concern of the convention was the effect of the Iran-contra
hearings on the Republican Party and the Presidency in 1988.

A senior Republican campaign official said in an interview that Mr. Reagan
remained popular across the country in a ''broad sense,'' and there appeared to
be no desire among candidates to divorce themselves from the President. But he
said the Iran-contra affair and its implications about Mr. Reagan's management
and control over his staff appeared to be the one issue so far in which the
candidates wanted to maintain a distance from Mr. Reagan.

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll found that a majority of Americans
believe Mr. Reagan was lying when he denied knowing that money from the Iranian
arms sales had been diverted to the Nicaraguan rebels.

The problem of backing away from Mr. Reagan is especially delicate for Mr. Bush,
the only prospective candidate to appear here who refused to answer questions
from the Young Republicans or from reporters. In his speech, Mr. Bush, saying
''loyalty to this President is something to be proud of,'' assailed Democratic
critics of the Bork nomination. He also said that a key focus of his campaign
would be ''a renewed emphasis on education.''

Tough Words From Haig

At the Young Republican gathering, the bluntest critic of Mr. Reagan was his
former Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig Jr. He told a quiet and half-empty
auditorium at the Seattle Sheraton on Thursday that the G.O.P. was ''a party in
some trouble.'' He added: ''We shouldn't delude ourselves about that. We are a
party that's had a very bad year.''

In an apparent reference to the Iran-contra affair, Mr. Haig said he was deeply
distressed by ''a degree of sleaze in our party, and we're going to see more of
that in the weeks and months ahead.''

''It's hurt the party and it's probably going to hurt Republican candidates,''
observed Mr. Haig, who according to polls is far behind Mr. Bush and Mr. Dole,
the two leading contenders for the nomination.

In caustic comments, Mr. Haig said that what White House officials sought in
promoting covert operations in Central America ''was that the President go to
bed at night feeling he'd done something tough agaainst Marxist Nicaragua, but
still he wanted the luxury of getting up every morning being loved by the
American people because he hadn't destroyed their tranquillity.'' Where Does
Buck Stop?  ''We learned in Vietnam that the American people - where lives are
at stake - want to be in on the takeoff as well as the landing,'' he said at a
news conference. ''I think it'll take the next administration to deal with this
problem, hopefully in a more successful way.''

Asked who bore the blame for the Iran-contra affair, Mr. Haig replied: ''I don't
blame Colonel North. The blame has to go where Harry Truman said it goes - where
the buck stops.'' Referring to Mr. Reagan, Mr. Haig remarked: ''If the shoe fits
he wears it. He's already taken responsiblity. I wish he had done it in the
early hours of this crisis rather than later.''

Even former Senator Paul D. Laxalt of Nevada, one of Mr. Reagan's closest
friends, gently criticized the President.

Asked if it was conceivable that Mr. Reagan was unaware of the diversion of
funds if William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, and perhaps
other senior officials knew of it, Mr. Laxalt replied: ''Yeah. It's conceivable.
That's his style. Ronald Reagan historically has been a hands-off manager.
Everybody knows it. And it's perfectly conceivable that this would have been
going on and they wouldn't consult with him.''

'I Would Want to Know'

''I have a different management style than Ronald Reagan,'' Mr. Laxalt said.
''It served him very well. And I don't know if I'm overly curious or whatever,
I've got to know what's going on in my shop. So if I were President and you had
a substantial covert operation - any covert operation of any substance - I as
President would want to know about it.''

Mr. Kemp also made it plain that while he firmly supported Mr. Reagan's
policies, he was criticial of the President's management of the Iran-contra
affair.

''The next President is going to have to be more involved in foreign policy and
is going to have to have men and women who have the ability to say no to a bad
idea, like selling arms for hostages,'' Mr. Kemp said in an interview.

''The next President is going to have to be more involved in making sure that we
have a bipartisan foreign policy, in making sure that we have coordination with
the Congress and in making sure that the National Security Council is not
implementing foreign policy, but playing an advisory, a coordinating role,'' he
said.

Aside from Mr. Kemp, Mr. Dole, Mr. Laxalt, Mr. Haig and Mr. Bush, the other
candidate who addressed the convention was the Rev. Pat Robertson, the
television evangelist. He refrained from criticizing Mr. Reagan and said that
the Iran-contra affair and the Congressional inquiry was ''much ado about
nothing.''

''In my estimation,'' he told the young Republicans, ''the scandal is that the
Democratic-controlled Congress and the liberal media don't want to lift a finger
to control Communist aggression in the Western Hemisphere.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Bob Dole and Representaive Jack Kemp at the Convention
of Young Republicans (AP) (page A15)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Persian Gulf and the Eve of Another War

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words



To the Editor:

To anyone who has studied the events leading up to the outbreak of World War I
in 1914, the current chain of developments in the Persian Gulf seems
disastrously similar. For this reason, Bruce Laingen's excellent article on the
need for the United States to be prepared to resume quasi-normal relations with
a post-Khomeini Iran (Op-Ed, June 25), along with a copy of Barbara Tuchman's
''Guns of August,'' ought to be made compulsory reading if we are to avoid the
serious risk of becoming involved in a war with Iran.

Contrary to general belief, nations usually mean what they say when they give a
clear warning that they will resort to war if their vital interests are
threatened. Virtually all of the great powers of Europe did so in 1914. More
recently, China intervened in the Korean War after the United States ignored
Beijing's warnings, passed via India, that it would do so if United States
forces moved into North Korea and approached the Chinese border.

On June 26, Iran gave the strongest warning yet that deployment of United States
military forces to the Persian Gulf would not deter it from attacking shipping
in retaliation for Iraqi strikes against Iranian vessels. Hojatolislam Hashemi
Rafsanjani, Speaker of the Iranian Parliament and one of the Iranian leaders
regarded as relatively moderate during his participation in the United States
shipment of arms to Iran, declared that if the United States should become
involved in hostilities with Iran, it would not be permitted to withdraw from
the scene as it did with the Marines in Beirut. This time, Hojatolislam
Rafsanjani declared, ''we will pursue them,'' with the end of the fighting not
under United States control and ''rivers of blood'' running throughout the
world.

The Government of Iran is by no means known for showing restraint in its public
statements. However, its statements about the war have usually been truthful and
have conveyed a relatively accurate account of policy and intentions. Despite
United States warnings, Iran is going ahead with deployment of the Silkworm
missiles it obtained from China, and additional Revolutionary Guards units are
taking up positions on the Abu Musa Islands in the Persian Gulf with orders to
block the Strait of Hormuz if necessary.

Moreover, Iran has not shrunk from running risks in the war, including mining
the approaches to Kuwait and damaging at least one Soviet vessel. From this it
seems clear that the chance of the United States becoming involved in a war with
Iran, if Iraq attacks Iranian shipping and the United States attempts to stop
Iran from retaliating, are well over 50 percent.

While the United States clearly can deploy superior military forces to the
Persian Gulf, Iran is unlikely to be deterred from strikes against oil
installations in the gulf, from continued attacks against gulf shipping and from
terrorist attacks against United States facilities and population throughout the
world.

What can the United States do? Defenders of the Administration's plan to go
ahead with protecting 11 Kuwaiti tankers now argue that regardless of the
original merits of the proposal, for the United States now to retreat from the
procedure would result in a disastrous loss of American prestige around the
world. This is hardly likely; after all, the United States has survived without
significant permanent damage to its power the loss of the war in Vietnam and the
withdrawal from Lebanon. Even assuming that the United States decides to go
ahead with the plan to protect the Kuwaiti tankers and thus risk war with Iran,
measures can be taken to reduce the threat of hostilities.

At a minimum, the United States should insist that before agreeing to protect
Kuwait's vessels, Kuwait must cease support for Iraq in the war, and adopt a
neutral policy similar to that being followed by the United Arab Emirates and
other Persian Gulf states. To do any less could well see a repetition of the
events of 1914, with the United States becoming involved in a war far more
costly to us than anything now contemplated.

BENSON L. GRAYSON
   McLean, Va., June 27, 1987

The writer, an ex-Foreign Service officer, is author of ''Soviet Intentions and
American Options in the Middle East.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

For Deserter, Vietnam Is Past at Last

BYLINE: By THOMAS MORGAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


For Douglas G. Beane, 17 years of living under an alias in Australia was not
enough to distance himself from the Vietnam War and the ostracism he felt after
he deserted the Marine Corps.

''Only now is the war over for me,'' said Mr. Beane, 40 years old, whose return
to the United States after so many years as a fugitive, so that he could visit
his ailing father, received wide attention last month.

''I've been running from the war for a long time,'' he said last week. ''I've
had dreams about the war, dreams about not seeing my family in Vermont again,
never again seeing the foliage change there or the places I walked around as a
kid, where I went hunting and fishing with my parents. I missed all that.''

In Search of Movie Deals

Mr. Beane received a less than honorable discharge last month after the Marine
Corps decided not to court-martial him for deserting to avoid prosecution for
black marketeering and other charges.

His tales of daring escapes from the capture and custody of United States
military police in Vietnam, months of living by his wits and dealing in the
black market there, and years of living in fear in Australia as Paul Arthur Reed
could be the stuff of made-for-television movies. At least Mr. Beane hopes so.
He and his agent made the rounds of New York literary circles last week in
search of book and movie deals.

The blue-eyed father of two, with another child on the way, describing his
experiences, explained that he continued to face difficult choices. Not a hero
in this country and not a citizen of Australia, Mr. Beane is struggling to
choose a country, Australia or the United States, where he and his family can
fashion a new life. He said he decided to return not only to see his parents,
who are in poor health, but also because military officials said they might be
more lenient if he turned himself in.

A Small-Town Boy

It wasn't patriotism that enticed him to join the Marine Corps, nor did he
especially want to go to Vietnam, Mr. Beane said. Rather, it was the chance to
leave his small-town working class environment in the Green Mountains village of
Rochester, Vt. and see the world.

''You've got to understand that I was in a graduating class of 14, the only
options available to me after high school were construction jobs or technical
school, and none of that appealed to me,'' he said. ''The nice guy in the great
looking uniform said the Marines would build you in body, mind and spirit, that
I would see the world and that sold me. I had never been out of the state
before, never gone more than 50 miles away from my home.''

His transformation from rural innocent to wary survivor began weeks after his
arrival in Vietnam in May, 1968 when, during a brawl among the enlisted men, his
best friend and another Marine were shot dead. That incident and the frustrating
vicissitudes of war changed him, he said.

In 1969, about a month before he was to be released from duty in Vietnam and
then from the military, he said he was reported to the authorities for illegally
selling United States currency to Vietnamese civilians in exchange for military
scrip, the currency used by American troops to keep dollars out of enemy hands.

Eating Coat Hangers

He also threatened to kill the man who reported him, although Mr. Beane said he
never intended to carry out the threat. Two days before he was to be discharged
from duty in Vietnam, he was told he faced a court-martial and as many as 13
years in prison. He thought about jail, and decided to flee from Danang to
Saigon. That is when he began to sell United States currency to the Vietnamese
on the black market.

He was captured by military investigators several times, but always managed to
escape. On one occasion, after his mountain hiding place had been revealed to
military authorities who arrested him, he was held in a tin box. He ate bits of
metal to force the authorities to take him to the more relaxed security of a
military hospital, from which he escaped by borrowing some clothing.

Guards found him at the compound's gate and fired warning shots at him, but he
ran and eluded his pursuers for two days by hiding under bushes. A Vietnamese
family that had befriended him hours later turned him in, and Mr. Beane was back
in confinement.

Later, he ate a portion of a wire coat hanger and was readmitted to another
hospital. As his guards watched the interrogation of a prisoner about 50 feet
away, Mr. Beane put pillows in his bed to approximate his form and late one
night, crawled under other hospital beds and escaped. He hid buried in dirt
beneath the compound's armory for almost a day.

When the opportunity arose, he found a military flak jacket and helmet, hitched
a ride on a Navy truck leaving the hospital grounds and joined a convoy heading
to Saigon. There, he caught a flight to Australia on April 27, 1970.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Douglas G. Beane (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN-CONTRA HEARINGS;
The Committee's Turn: Speeches to North

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1776 words


The Iran-contra hearings featured several summations yesterday, some addressed
by members of Congress to Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North. Here are selections from
those statements.

SENATOR GEORGE J. MITCHELL, Democrat of Maine

ou've talked here often and eloquently about the need for a democratic outcome
in Nicaragua. There's no disagreement on that. There is disagreement over how
best to achieve that objective. Many Americans agree with the President's
policy. Many do not.

Many patriotic Americans, strongly anti-Communist, believe there's a better way
to contain the Sandinistas, to bring about a democratic outcome in Nicaragua and
to bring peace to Central America.

And many patriotic Americans are concerned that in the pursuit of democracy
abroad, we not compromise it in any way here at home.

You, and others, have urged consistency in our policies. You've said repeatedly
that if we are not consistent, our allies, and other nations, will question our
reliability. That's a real concern. But if it's bad to change policies, it's
worse to have two different policies a the same time: one public policy and an
opposite policy in private.

The rule of law is critical in our society. It's the great equalizer. Because in
America, everybody is equal before the law. We must never allow the end to
justify the mean, where the law is concerned, however important and noble an
objective. And surely, democracy abroad is important and is noble. It cannot be
achieved at the expense of the rule of law in our country.

Before I entered the Senate, I had the great honor of serving as a Federal
judge. In that position I had great power. The one I most enjoyed exercising was
the power to make people American citizens. From time to time I presided at what
we call naturalization ceremonies. They're citizenship ceremonies. These are
people who came from all over the world, risked their lives, sometimes left
their families and their fortunes behind, to come here.

They'd gone through the required procedures and I, in the final act,
administered to them the oath of allegiance to the United States, and I made
them American citizens. To this moment, to this moment, it was the most exciting
thing I've ever done in my life.

The ceremonies were always moving for me because my mother was an immigrant, my
father the orphaned son of immigrants. Neither of them had any education, and
they worked at very menial tasks in our society. But because of the openness of
America, because of equal justice under law in America, I sit here today, a
United States Senator.

And after every one of these ceremonies, I made it a point to speak to these new
Americans. I asked them why they came, how they came. And their stories, each of
them, were inspiring. I think you would be interested and moved by them, given
the views you've expressed on this country.

And when I asked them why they came, they said several things, mostly two. The
first is, they said ''we came because here in America everybody has a chance,
opportunity.'' And they also said, over and over again, particularly people from
totalitarian societies, ''we came here because here in America you can criticize
the government, without looking over your shoulder'' - freedom to disagree with
the government.

Now, you've addressed several pleas to this committee, very eloquently, none
more eloquent than last Friday, when in response to a question by Representative
Cheney, you asked that Congress not cut off aid to the contras, for the love of
God and for the love of country.

I now address a plea to you: of all the qualities which the American people find
compelling about you, none is more impressive than your obvious, deep devotion
to this country.

Please remember that others share that devotion and recognize that it is
possible for an American to disagree with you on aid to the contras and still
love God and still love this country just as much as you do.

Although he's regularly asked to do so, God does not take sides in American
politics. And in America, disagreement with the policies of the Government is
not evidence of lack of patriotism.

I want to repeat that: in America, disagreement with the policies of the
Government is not evidence of lack of patriotism. Indeed, it's the very fact
that Americans can criticize their Government, openly and without fear of
reprisal, that is the essence of our freedom and that will keep us free.

Now, I have one final plea: debate this issue forcefully and vigorously, as you
have and as you surely will, but please, do it in a way that respects the
patriotism and the motives of those who disagree with you, as you would have
them respect yours.

SENATOR PAUL S. TRIBLE JR., Republican of Virginia

I want to thank you, colonel, for your testimony. I do believe you testified
truthfully, and you certainly have helped us put the pieces of this puzzle
together. But I would, Mr. Chairman, like to make one personal observation. In
the activities of Mr. Hakim and Secord, we've seen private interest riding
roughshod over public motives; a cause compromised as individuals reaped
enormous profits; and in my judgment, the trust of Colonel North betrayed. All
this demonstrates to me the sheer folly of conducting the people's business
without checks and balances.

SENATOR ORRIN G. HATCH, Republican of Utah

Based upon what I've seen and heard in these hearings, there are mistakes here.
To the extent that this was purely an arms - an arms transfer for hostages, I
have to disagree with that, if that's all that it was.

But I think your answers have shown that it's more. I don't think the N.S.C.
should ever operate covert operations; I just don't think they should. And
frankly, I don't think that we should have had a diversion of funds here, even
though I have to confess I kind of think it's a neat idea, too, to take money
from the Ayatollah and send them over to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. What
a nice use of those funds, except that you have to be - I don't think it was
right.

I think it points out the difficulties - it points out the difficulties of the
private - it's still a neat idea, I've got to admit, and I don't care who
laughs. And I think you were right - at least well motivated - in your desires
to help them, because we weren't helping them like we should up here. We weren't
supporting this policy in our own hemisphere.

Fourthly, I think this - these hearings point up the difficulties with
privatization of our foreign policy. I'm not saying you should never do it, but
they point up the difficulties of privatization.

And last but not least - and let me end with this - I think these hearings
should not let the Congress escape. By gosh, I think if there's anything that
ought to come out of these hearings, it ought to be that we beat our breasts and
act very sanctimonious and act like we just would never have made any of these
mistakes, when we've never had really the responsibility of day to day carrying
them out.

                                     *  *  *

Now I'll just be honest with you, based on what I've heard thus far -with your
admission of mistakes, with your admission that some of the things you did you
feel are wrong in retrospect - and it's always easier to do these things in
retrospect. I don't want you prosecuted. I don't. I don't think many people in
America do. And I think there's going to be one lot of hell raised if you are.
Now that doesn't mean they won't, and it doesn't mean that sticklers in the law
won't pursue the last pound of flesh. But I tell you, I don't want you
prosecuted.

REPRESENTATIVE HENRY J. HYDE, Republican of Illinois

Let me put my own views on record, Colonel North. I think lying to Congress, I
think arms for hostages, arms to Iran, I think operating the contra support
operation out of the White House was wrong, and I think the failure to confer
with Congress was wrong, and we're paying a fearful price for that.

                                     *  *  *

In other words, when you have a liberal Democratic Congress - God bless them
all, the people elected them and that's democracy and all that good stuff - and
you have a conservative Republican President, you've got a recipe for gridlock,
don't you? You have a controversial program that cannot get the consensus that's
necessary and so it's - it's a recipe for gridlock, nothing will happen. And
those are the problems that we have to deal with here in our Central American
policy.

                                     *  *  *

And let me close by just saying that you, Colonel North, are a reproach to many
of us. You are a dangerous person. And the reason you are is you personify the
old morality - loyalty, fidelity, honor and, worst of all, obedience. Obedience
is so - is so out of step with today's spirit of the age, Zeitgeist. Obedience
is just the opposite of what defines the modern man, which is rebellion. And so
the notion of betraying freedom fighters bothers you whether they're at the Bay
of Pigs or whether they were taking off from the roof of the embassy at Saigon
on April 25, 1975, or whether leaving them to fend for themselves in the
mountains of Nicaragua.

So you've got a few more mountains to climb, Colonel North, but remember,
everybody remembers Billy Mitchell and nobody remembers who his prosecutors
were.

SENATOR WARREN B. RUDMAN, Republican of New Hampshire

You know, Colonel North, I go back to Korea in 1951. We won and then we lost and
were in a position to win again and Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower, who
succeeded, recognized that although it was a crime to leave the North Korean
people to the subjugation of North Korea, we walked away.

We could have won that war at that point. We could have liberated the North, and
many of us who were there wanted to. But the people didn't. They had enough of
the killing -550,000 casualties. Lyndon Johnson wrecked his Presidency on the
shoals of Vietnam.

I guess the last thing I want to say to you, Colonel, is that the American
people have the constitutional right to be wrong. And what Ronald Reagan thinks
or what Oliver North thinks or what I think or what anybody else thinks makes
not a whit if the American people say enough.

And that's why this Congress has been fickle and has vacillated. That is
correct. But not because the people here necessarily believe differently than
you do, but there comes a point that the views of the American people have to be
heard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Commodity Fund Gains Soviet Help

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 5, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 505 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, July 13


The Soviet Union said today that it would join a United Nations plan for
stabilizing world prices of raw materials, a plan that is supported by
developing countries but spurned by the Reagan Administration.

The prices of most raw materials, on which many developing countries depend
heavily for income, are at their lowest level (after adjustment for inflation)
since the 1930's, compounding the third world's debt problems and aggravating
hunger and poverty over much of the globe.

Today's Soviet decision, which virtually assures that the program can go into
effect, is regarded by Western diplomats here as of greater political than
economic significance. The plan is unlikely to influence commodity prices much,
these sources say, but it lets the Russians score an easy point off the United
States in the eyes of the developing world and it illustrates the new Soviet
leadership's interest in playing a more active role in international economic
diplomacy.

Goals of the Subscribers

Under the plan, called the Common Fund for Commodities, subscribing nations are
to create a $750 million pool to support commodity prices in world markets and
help developing countries modernize their production facilities and find new
uses for the commodities they sell.

Saying that ''the time has come for the most burning economic problems facing
humanity to be solved,'' Moscow's trade minister, Boris I. Aristov, told the
seventh ministerial session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development that the Soviet Union would join the Common Fund, contributing
almost $30 million to its capital.

This mammoth meeting of the world's rich and poor countries assembles every four
years for nearly a month's debate on global economic problems. It is the
principal U.N. forum for North-South issues.

Mr. Aristov put the decision to join the Common Fund in the context of the
Soviet Union's new interest in international economic cooperation.

Money for Some Nations

He also disclosed that the Soviet Union provided $23 billion in assistance to
the developing world last year. Western officials say the bulk of Soviet aid
goes to Communist countries, mainly Cuba and Vietnam.

The Common Fund is the centerpiece of Unctad's ambitious Integrated Program for
Commodities, first approved in 1980. This is intended to stabilize the world
prices of 18 raw materials, usually by buying up supplies when prices are weak
and selling them when they rise.

To please the third world, most industrial countries have gone along reluctantly
with the plan. At first the United States, under President Carter, agreed to
become a member, but it changed its mind under President Reagan and said it
would not join.

Partly as a result, the Common Fund has languished since 1980. It cannot
function until two-thirds of the planned capital has been subscribed.

By decidg g to join, the Soviet Union raises the financial support to within a
hairbreadth of that level. The additional required backing is now considered a
certainty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Lacking Parts, Armed Forces Cannibalize Costly Warplanes

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


Despite the vast military spending by the Reagan Administration over the last
six years, the armed forces today are so short of spare parts that they must
cannibalize some airplanes to keep others flying.

While the practice is not new, it has more serious consequences than in the past
because it disables multimillion-dollar pieces of military hardware like the B-1
bomber instead of smaller, less advanced items like jeeps.

The practice, officials say, erodes military readiness as aircraft are taken out
of service, some only for hours but others for days or weeks.

Criticized as Waste of Effort

In addition, critics say, the practice of cannibalizing is a waste of energy,
time and money.

At Dyess Air Force Base near Abilene, Tex., three new B-1 bombers, which each
cost $200 million, stand idle because parts have been removed from them and
installed in several of the 26 other B-1 bombers based there.

Air Force officers here say that the practice is common throughout the bomber,
fighter and transport wings of their service. ''On any Air Force base on any
given day,'' said one officer, ''the chances are that you're going to have an
airplane cannibalized.''

Similarly, Navy officers say that most aircraft carriers at sea, plus air units
like anti-submarine squadrons that are based ashore, regularly have aircraft
that have been cannibalized for parts. ''It's a maintenance management tool,''
one officer said.

In pushing Congress to provide more money for the military services over the
last six years, Reagan Administration officials indicated that the practice of
cannibalizing would be curtailed or eliminated as a part of the Administration's
program to improve combat readiness. In recent years the situation has improved
somewhat, according to military officers.

But in its military buildup the Administration has emphasized the purchase of
new arms, such as the MX nuclear missile and ships for the Navy, over the
stockpiling of spare parts. Consequently, the officers expect cannibalizing to
increase as tighter military budgets slow the purchase of spare parts.

Differences in the Budgets

Since 1982, when the Administration's military buildup began to take hold,
spending on new weapons has soared 52.3 percent, to $85 billion a year. But the
operations and maintenance budget, which pays for spare parts, has gone up only
18.5 percent, to $81.6 billion annually.

Many members of Congress have agreed with the Administration's emphasis on
high-cost weapons because they bring more jobs to their districts and home
states. Components of the B-1 bomber, for instance, have been made in more than
40 states.

Officers say cannibalizing is usually considered as a last resort, but it is
also a costly one because of the time and personnel required to remove a part
from one airplane, put it in another and then replace it later.

The need to cannibalize aircraft appears to reflect what critics have contended
has been an imbalance in the Administration's program to improve the armed
forces. In addition to slighting spare parts, the Pentagon has been criticized
as being slow to build stockpiles of ammunition and other wartime supplies, to
improve combat medical care and to provide enough sea and air transportation to
support forces abroad.

Parts Becoming Available

''I can see that in some circumstances it would have to be done,'' said
Representative Charles E. Bennett, a Florida Democrat who is a member of the
House Armed Services Committee. ''It's done in combat all the time. But in
peacetime, it represents a lot of waste of manpower.''

''What we ought to do is see to it that we have enough spare parts and use
them,'' Mr. Bennett said.

The use of cannibalized equipment to repair other pieces of machinery became
necessary shortly after the Vietnam War when the military supply pipeline began
to dry up.

The Air Force and Navy officers say that maintenance people at bases or aboard
carriers cannibalize less today than five years ago because spare parts ordered
in 1983 and 1984, when military budgets were rising, are now becoming available.

But they also note that the practice is likely to increase in several years
because growth in the military budget has stopped. In most cases, it takes 36 to
48 months from the time the money is appropriated for the parts to become
available.

Difficulty of Recordkeeping

For new aircraft like the B-1 bomber, there are two reasons for the shortage of
spare parts. First, to keep the cost of the 100 bombers within the $20.5 billion
limit set by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, the initial purchase of
spare parts has been limited.

Second, Air Force officers say that only by flying the airplane and establishing
a track record will officials determine how fast parts wear out and how many
spares should be ordered.

''You really can't tell until you get it into the air,'' said one officer.

''But,'' said another, ''it's extremely difficult even on an airplane that's
been around for awhile to predict with certainty when a part is going to fail.''

A naval aviator said that providing spare parts for older aircraft was also
difficult, citing the F-14 Tomcat, the Navy's premier fighter that was put into
operation in October 1972. Of the 240,000 parts in that complicated machine,
40,000 are carried in the Navy and Defense Department supply lines.

But an aircraft carrier has room to stock only 8,000 parts. Thus, he said, there
is no alternative but to cannibalize one F-14 to keep others flying.

Compounding the problem, Navy officers said, is that the F-14 has undergone 115
changes over the last 15 years. New technology has made radar, radios, controls
and other components more effective and reliable but has also made stocking
spare parts more difficult.

Still another hindrance, said the Air Force and Navy officers, has been a
frequent lack of reliability by contractors who fail to deliver parts on time or
who themselves have been hampered by a labor strike or inadequate quality
controls.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph showing the of the budget costs of buying and maintaining
weapons, 1982-1987* (*to date) (Source: Defense Department)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCHENECTADY CHILD-SUFFOCATION CASE GOES TO JURY

BYLINE: By ROBERT O. BOORSTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: SCHENECTADY, N.Y., July 15


After six weeks of testimony in the Schenectady County Court, seven men and five
women were asked today to decide whether Mary Beth Tinning fatally suffocated
her 3 1/2-month-old daughter, Tami Lynne.

The 12 jurors then began deliberating the evidence in a murder trial that has
generated fascination and disbelief in this city. Tami Lynne Tinning was one of
9 children to die in infancy or childhood in the Tinning house.

Mrs. Tinning, a 44-year-old former bus driver, was charged solely in the death
of Tami Lynne. The Schenectady District Attorney, John B. Proesch, built his
case around a confession that the police said Mrs. Tinning gave when she was
questioned after the death of Tami Lynne on Dec. 20, 1985.

'I'm Not a Good Mother'

In his 30-minute summation today, the prosecutor returned to a written statement
signed by Mrs. Tinning: ''I did not do anything to Jennifer, Joseph, Barbara,
Michael, Mary Frances, Jonathan. Just these three, Timothy, Nathan and Tami. I
smothered them each with a pillow because I'm not a good mother. I'm not a good
mother because of what happened to the other children.''

Between January 1972 and December 1985, Jennifer Tinning died when she was 8
days old, Timothy at 2 weeks old, Jonathan at 3 months, and Mary Frances at 3
1/2 months. Nathan lived to 5 months, Joseph to 2 years, and Barbara to 4 years.

A ninth child, a boy identified only as Michael by the authorities, died at 7
months old, before Mrs. Tinning and her husband, Joe, finished adopting him.

Mrs. Tinning's lawyer, Paul M. Callahan, in a 70-minute summation, contended
that police investigators coerced the confession and violated his client's
Miranda rights.

He said Mrs. Tinning had been ''tricked or deceived'' by the investigators who
came to her house and asked her to come to a police station for questioning,
which she did.

Twice, Mr. Callahan asserted that Mrs. Tinning was ''reliving nine tragedies''
during the questioning by the police.

''This is a housewife, not a 20-year Marine veteran who served three tours of
duty in Vietnam,'' Mr. Callahan said.

Mr. Proesch told the jury there was no evidence of coercion. ''You will
certainly get the idea that this statement was given freely and with
intelligence,'' he said.

A Rare Genetic Disease

Recalling expert testimony by Dr. Jack Davies, a forensic pathologist, Mr.
Callahan told the jury that Tami Lynne had died of a rare genetic disease called
Werdnig-Hoffmann syndrome. It is the childhood equivalent of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, and can cause degeneration of muscle tissue
and sudden stoppage of breath, according to testimony at the trial.

But Mr. Proesch ridiculed the testimony of Dr. Davies and another doctor who had
flown from Britain to corroborate the findings.

In his most biting criticism, Mr. Proesch called Dr. Davies, former supervisor
of the Albany County Coroner's office, ''a professional testimony-giver and
defense-creator.''

He recalled testimony from Mrs. Tinning's next-door neighbor on Michigan Avenue
that Tami Lynne was a seemingly healthy infant. ''This was not a floppy baby,''
he said.

''You've got to remember that nine children died crib deaths,'' he told the
jury, noting that Tami Lynne's crib had been about 40 feet from Mr. and Mrs.
Tinning's bed.

'It's an Outrage'

''Wouldn't your normal thoughts be, after eight children, to have the child
right there?'' he asked. ''It's an outrage.''

As she has throughout the trial, Mrs. Tinning, who was not called to testify,
listened intently today and wrote copious notes as the lawyers paced the
wood-paneled courtroom.

Despite the publicity that has surrounded her case, Mrs. Tinning seemed
unconcerned by the drama around her. She reached for papers in a red leather
satchel, occasionally examining one with wire-rimmed glasses that dangled from a
silver chain around her neck.

During the court session, Mrs. Tinning's husband, who works at the main General
Electric plant here, sat quietly by her.

Today's session was marked by few theatrics, but Mr. Callahan initiated two
unusual actions.

After Mr. Callahan finished his summation and Mr. Proesch began his, Mr.
Callahan leaned over to talk to Mrs. Tinning. He then objected to a point raised
by Mr. Proesch and, while he had the judge's attention, asked permission to
continue his summation, saying Mrs. Tinning had pointed out an omission.

''There are so many things in this case, it's easy to forget,'' Mr. Callahan
said. He said later that Mrs. Tinning was the first client charged with murder
that he has defended.

Then, during Judge Clifford T. Harrigan's charge to the jury, Mr. Callahan asked
for a brief recess to confer with his client, which the judge granted.

''She's feeling pretty good today,'' Mr. Callahan told a crush of reporters that
blocked his exit from the second floor of the courthouse on a hill just off the
main shopping street here. ''I'm sure she's feeling a little anxious,'' he
added.

Reckless Indifference

In his charge to the jury, which began deliberations just after 3 P.M. and
recessed at 9:25 P.M. until morning, Judge Harrigan cautioned the jurors not to
let Mrs. Tinning's statements about smothering two other children affect their
judgment of the case.

''You must steel yourself against such tendencies,'' he said. That knowledge, he
said, should only be used for establishing whether Mrs. Tinning was guilty of
the count charging her with intending to kill her daughter or the count charging
that she did so through reckless and depraved indifference to human life.

If the jury finds Mrs. Tinning guilty, it must choose to convict her on only one
count.

Judge Harrigan told the jurors to abandon ''sympathy and prejudice,'' urging
them to be ''cool, calm, impartial and discriminating.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mary Beth and Joe Tinning

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Nerds II' in First Place In Week's Ticket Sales

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 15


''Revenge of the Nerds II,'' a comedy sequel about a bunch of misfits who go to
Fort Lauderdale for a spring break from college, earned $7.9 million in its
debut weekend to take first place for the week at the box office.

''Full Metal Jacket,'' the Stanley Kubrick film about the Vietnam War, rose from
11th to second place, selling $6.1 million in tickets in its third week of
distribution.

Falling from first to third place was ''Dragnet,'' the movie version of the old
television series, starring Dan Aykroyd and Tom Hanks. ''Dragnet'' earned $5.3
million for the week, to bring its three-week total to $32.9 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Colonel North in Movies

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 177 words


A popular topic of discussion in town these days is which actors should be cast
in the movie or television mini-series that is almost certain to follow the
Iran-contra affair.

Starring as Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North would be Martin Sheen, several
spectators at the Congressioinal hearings have suggested. Perhaps they recall
Mr. Sheen's depiction of a Vietnam commando in ''Apocalypse Now.'' Other
suggestions included Treat Williams, who bears a strong resemblance to the
colonel. But Mr. Williams fame as a hippie in ''Hair'' doesn't exactly enhance
his image as a straight arrow.

Farah Fawcett Majors was a popular choice for the role of Fawn Hall, the
colonel's secretary at the National Security Council.

Democrats tended to favor John Hurt, who often portrays intellectuals, as John
W. Nields Jr., the House counsel, whereas Republicans preferred Bruce Dern,
known for his spacey characterizatons. As for the Senate counsel, Arthur L.
Liman, the consensus seemed to be that the late Zero Mostel would have been the
actor best suited to the role.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: Political Memo;
The Litmus Test: Use It or Confine It to the Lab?

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 16


If candidates want applause at either Democratic or Republican functions these
days, all they have to do is mention the Strategic Defense Initiative or the
Nicaraguan contras.

When Democrats attack ''Star Wars'' or aid to the contras, audiences start
applauding before the first sentence is out. When Republicans defend the
anti-missile shield or Nicaraguan insurgents, they get cheers that shake the
rafters.

These are the issues that move the souls of party loyalists, what politicians
and their Washington consultants call litmus-test issues. Just as litmus paper
is used to test whether a substance is acidic, so are certain issues used as
tests of ideological purity.

Some Tricky Questions

The term ''litmus test'' is generally used pejoratively, to suggest a certain
close-mindedness on the part of party activists. But Ann F. Lewis, a leader of
the Democratic Party's liberal wing, points out: ''One person's litmus test is
another person's fundamental principle.'' On issues like civil rights, she
argues, it is legitimate for partisans to demand loyalty to certain ideas. Why
should Democrats want to nominate someone who thinks as a Republican?

Still, litmus tests raise three tricky political questions that constantly haunt
party leaders here in the capital:

* To what extent is a party willing to compromise on principles to win a general
election?

* What is a party to do when issues that concern its hard core do not matter
much to the broader group of voters who usually support the party at election
time?

* When happens when the litmus tests change, when a party is in the process of
redefining where it stands on certain matters?

Democrats Recall the 1950's

For Democrats, litmus tests on foreign policy and military issues pose
particular problems because the party has changed dramatically since the Vietnam
War.

Hard-line anti-Communism was once the controlling idea in the party, especially
after Republicans in the 1950's accused their opponents of being soft on
Communism.

Present-day Democratic advocates of intervention are fond of quoting John F.
Kennedy's tougher statements on foreign policy, such as his declaration in the
1960 campaign that the world faced ''a struggle for supremacy between two
conflicting ideologies: freedom under God versus ruthless, godless tyranny.''

But as the anti-war movement became an increasingly important party constituency
during and after the Vietnam War, statements like Kennedy's became less
acceptable -they flunked the litmus tests, especially among Democrats who
customarily vote in primaries or attend caucuses.

These days, Democrats who are more hawkish on military issues face problems,
especially because of the need to do well in Iowa, the first caucus state of
1988.

Al Fromm, director of the Democratic Leadership Council, a group of moderate to
conservative Democrats, said, ''In Iowa, the peace movement is a lot stronger
than it is in a lot of other places.''

Former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona supports this view, noting that questions
about complex and little-known weapons systems, such as the D-5 missile, come
with surprising frequency in Iowa.

Indeed, some nuclear disarmament groups have made opposition to the D-5 - a
highly accurate, submarine-launched ballistic missile - a litmus test in the
1988 election. But others of like mind, particularly those based in Washington,
have urged a less exacting, less specific approach. They argue that all the
contenders for the Democratic nomination are essentially sympathetic to arms
control and should not be pressed too hard on every issue, lest they lose all
the flexibility they will need to win the November election.

This approach pleases most of the Democratic aspirants.

Using a pole-vault image, Mr. Babbitt said, ''The interest groups have lowered
the cross bar.'' Democrats are so tired of losing elections, he said, that they
are prepared to be more flexible and not force candidates to jump so high for
support in the primaries.

Still, crucial litmus tests remain. Many liberal Democrats, for example, wonder
whether Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia is so far from the liberal mainstream of the
party - he has favored aid to the contras, for example, and has voted with
conservatives on some civil rights issues -that he will be ruled out of
contention if he decides to run for President.

At the least, Mr. Nunn's strategists are saying that if he ran, he would
probably not even contest Iowa, where the litmus tests loom largest.

The Biden Example

There are other examples of litmus test politics at work on the Democratic side.

The eagerness with which Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. announced his opposition to
the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court was widely taken as
a sign of the power of litmus tests.

In the eyes of many politicians, Mr. Biden, a Democratc Presidential contender
who is the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, announced his opposition in
advance of the hearings on Judge Bork's nomination so as to show his loyalty to
the party's civil rights and feminist forces, which oppose the nomination.

Similarly, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri dropped his support
for a constitutional amendment to ban abortion, a testament to the power of the
movement for abortion rights within the Democratic Party.

A Republican Comeback

On the Republican side, litmus tests are making a comeback of sorts. In the 1984
campaign, with President Reagan certain of renomination, Republicans did not
have to worry much about such things. Mr. Reagan himself was the litmus test,
and whatever was good for his re-election was presumed to be good for the
Republicans.

But 1988 is shaping up quite differently.

''All the things that Reagan has kept bottled up in that party can't be held
down anymore,'' Paul Maslin, a Democratic polltaker, said with some glee.

Robert Teeter, a strategist for Vice President Bush, argues that litmus tests
come from two sources - the groups within each party that care passionately
about certain issues and candidates who can use a litmus test to promote
themselves at the expense of others.

One candidate clearly pursuing the second course is Representative Jack F. Kemp
of New York. Mr. Kemp is trying to consolidate the Republican right by pushing
for the deployment of the Star Wars program and opposing some of the arms
control agreements with the Soviet Union that the Reagan Administration is
supporting.

Anti-Communism is the ultimate Republican litmus test, Mr. Kemp's advisers
argue, and the Congressman wants to outflank everyone - notably Mr. Bush and Bob
Dole, the Senate Republican leader - on the question.

Abortion is an issue that falls more within Mr. Teeter's first category - a case
where a movement active in the party has pushed it well beyond its earlier
positions.

Polls show that Republicans are divided on the issue, with many in the party
favoring legalized abortion. But those who are opposed to abortion have become
such a strong Republican constituency that opposition to abortion is now very
nearly a party principle. Mr. Bush has steadily toughened his stand against
abortion and now says it should be legal only in cases of rape, incest or when
the life of the mother is in danger.

Perhaps the greatest problem of litmus tests is that although they may galvanize
party leaders and organizers, they are sometimes of little interest to the
broader electorate. Aid to the contras, for example, is rarely at the top of the
average voter's list of worries.

Not Even a Unifying Issue

For the Republicans, it is not even a unifying issue. A New York Times/ CBS News
Poll, taken by telephone on July 9, found the party evenly split on the
question: 40 percent favored contra aid, 39 percent opposed it. The finding had
a margin of sampling error of plus or minus seven percentage points.

In the end, both parties will find ways of coping with litmus test politics and
containing it.

For Democrats, the testing will be less severe than it was in 1984, when Walter
F. Mondale by beleaguered by group after group.

For Republicans, however, the testing will become tougher.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
The Issue Is Policy

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 754 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A cartoon in Le Monde shows Rear Adm. John Poindexter on the tube saying
earnestly, ''And I hid everything from the President.'' President Reagan,
watching with delight, says, ''Oh thank you, that's really nice of you.''

Europeans are befuddled by the whole Iran-contra scandal. But that is basically
because they do not understand, or rather cannot digest, the American
constitutional system.

Their governments come and go according to whether or not they have the
confidence of their parliaments. It is inconceivable that they could experience
what Le Monde's correspondent called ''the unhealthy revival of the eternal
battle between the legislative and the executive for control of foreign
policy,'' so they can't grasp the real meaning of checks and balances.

But at last the central issues in Washington's travail are emerging more
clearly. They have been there all along. But they were obscured by the fuss over
who knew when and who did what, then by Lieut. Col. Oliver North's theatrical
talent.

Even though he didn't tell his chief the grubby details because ''I was not so
naive as to believe that it was not a politically volatile issue,'' Admiral
Poindexter said the President told him in May 1986, ''Look, I don't want to pull
out our support for the contras for any reason. This would be an unacceptable
option. Isn't there something that I could do unilaterally?''

That can only mean behind the back of Congress. And that is the key point. The
Administration wasn't going to let lack of Congressional support, reflecting
lack of adequate public support, block the policy it wanted to implement.

Colonel North's attempt to justify his shenanigans because he believed in them
and blamed Congress for being ''fickle, vacillating, unpredict-able'' was an
attitude shared by others in the White House.

There is nothing new about battles between the two ends of Pennsylvania Avenue,
even when the same party dominates both. That is what the Constitution
deliberately arranged, to prevent abuses of power. Through control of money and
the requirement for Senate ''advice'' as well as ''consent,'' foreign policy is
clearly included in this process created to force consensus.

Obviously, Congress cannot negotiate on behalf of the U.S. or conduct its
diplomacy. Just as obviously, it cannot be excluded in shaping foreign policy,
and the effort to do that is the underlying cause of the scandal.

What is new in the perennial debate is the intransigence with which the
Administration refused to draw the constitutional consequences. If Congress
can't be persuaded to accept a policy, and the electorate endorses Congress,
then the policy has to be modified.

A vicious circle has been created because one President after another tried to
escape this fact of American institutional life by increasing resort to
deception, cheating, lying. It is true that Congress has passed inconvenient
laws that limit freedom of foreign policy maneuver.

The Boland Amendment was only one of a series. The War Powers Act, resulting
from Vietnam, and attempts to block funds for nuclear tests and for space-based
antimissile defense that would violate the ABM treaty, are other examples. They
all have their origin in legislative response to rejected policies. They are
intended to close loopholes through which Administrations relying on secrecy
tried to get around Congressional disapproval.

When the executive is caught out, Congress in frustration legislates more
constraints, more troublesome specifics. Then, and current senior White House
officials have argued that this is inevitable, the executive plunges further
into the murk because it can no longer do what it wants without breaking the
rules.

But it is not inevitable. The right answer is to work with Congressional leaders
in developing the policy, in building consensus, in providing honest, convincing
proposals with reasoning that will stand up to the light of day.

The Times of London's correspondent in New York explained the friction by
saying: ''Senators have been swanning around the world conferring directly with
heads of state. In Roosevelt's day, they would have been blown out of the water
before they reached the three-mile limit.''

He is dead wrong. In Roosevelt's day, senators and representatives were brought
in on major foreign policy issues from the start. The greatest attention was
paid to seeking approaches that majorities in both parties could support. The
system, wisely, demands it. Otherwise we get Iran-contra scandals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words



An Infant Cinema

When Marcos Zurinaga was a student of comparative literature at the University
of Puerto Rico in Rio Piedras, he thought he would become a teacher. That was
before he and some friends created a cultural organization and began importing
movies that were not otherwise being shown on the island.

''Then we said instead of bringing in foreign films, why don't we make them?''
he recalled. ''So I dropped everything, and I started learning film making.''

Some 15 years have passed. The film ''La Gran Fiesta'' opens today (review on
page C17). And the 34-year-old Mr. Zurinaga is here as its director and
co-writer. ''La Gran Fiesta,'' set on a single night just after the outbreak of
World War II at a ball in the ornate casino in San Juan, is a drama that
interweaves romance, family conflict and the uneasy relationship between the
United States Government and Puerto Rico.

''We feel this period is perhaps the most important period in the history of
modern Puerto Rico,'' said Mr. Zurinaga, ''a moment when the relationship
between Puerto Rico and the United States was redefined.''

But, he said, ''La Gran Fiesta'' is also important in current history. ''We have
never had a film industry in Puerto Rico,'' he said. ''Finally we feel we are at
the door of this industry.''

He said: ''The film industry is extremely vital for the development of the
society. It is a very important tool for the Puerto Rican to understand the
status of the society in a specific moment. The Puerto Rican can understand what
we are, what are our values and principles. When he goes abroad, then it is like
our presentation card to other cultures and countries, and it is a way to
influence other countries and other cultures.''

Mr. Zurinaga, who came to the making of the film as an outgrowth of his work as
a maker of commercials and documentaries, shot ''La Gran Fiesta'' in five and a
half weeks at the end of 1985 on a budget of $800,000. As co-writer and director
once more, he is now finishing work on his second film, ''Tango Bar,'' starring
Raul Julia, who makes a cameo appearance in ''La Gran Fiesta.'' The new film,
dealing with a Puerto Rican who goes to Argentina, is set mainly against the
background of the military regime that took power there in 1976.

''We feel strongly that finally the conditions for building up a film industry
in Puerto Rico are coming together,'' Mr. Zurinaga said, citing the presence of
technical skills, an infrastructure of services such as equipment rental and
transportation and the availability of Puerto Rican capital for financing
movies. ''And the last condition,'' he said, ''is that the Government is finally
starting to understand that a film industry is not only necessary but vital for
the development of our society.''

Mr. Zurinaga said that as a boy he liked movies. ''But it was not like an
obsession,'' he said. ''The obsession grew later. Now it is an obsession that
grows every day.''

Vietnam Whodunit

Political upheaval and war are also elements of the film that took Gregory Hines
to Thailand in the spring and early summer.

The working title of the 20th Century-Fox production - a thriller set in 1968,
about a high-ranking Army officer who has been murdering young Vietnamese
prostitutes - is ''Saigon.'' But, said Mr. Hines, ''I think they're going to
change the title. The primary reason is that it is not really a Vietnam film.
It's not a war film.''

In the film, Mr. Hines, playing a character named Al (Baby) Perkins, is a
military investigator who is teamed up with Willem Dafoe of ''Platoon'' fame in
the hunt for the killer.

Mr. Hines, whose screen credits include ''White Nights,'' ''Running Scared'' and
''The Cotton Club'' and whose stage credits include ''Sophisticated Ladies'' and
''Eubie,'' said that when he first read the script of ''Saigon,'' ''I was taken
by it immediately.''

''For the most part in my career,'' he said, ''I've looked for roles written for
white actors. Invariably these are the roles with the kind of scope and dynamics
that I'm looking to play.

''But most of the time, the roles that are written for black actors are very
one-dimensional - just a very straight-ahead character who is for the most part
very cool, distant and doesn't feel a whole lot and doesn't get to express that
wide a range of emotions. And here was a script that had a black character, that
had all those emotions and was very interesting. And also he wasn't a
particularly nice guy. In my career in films, most of the roles I've played were
nice guys.''

But Mr. Hines said: ''Basically, I consider myself a tap dancer. And everything
else I do springs out of that. I feel I can express myself most easily as an
artist when I'm tap dancing.''

Now, he said, ''Having worked on this film as an actor in Bangkok, I feel like
I'm ready to dance.''

''Jaws,'' Another Bite

''I was shocked and amazed,'' said Lorraine Gary. ''I hadn't worked in nine
years.''

Ms. Gary was explaining her reaction when she was offered the opportunity late
last year to resume her film career - in the role of Ellen Brody in ''Jaws the
Revenge,'' which opens today. Ms. Gary, who began her acting career in 1963 and
in private life is the wife of Sidney J. Sheinberg, president and chief
executive officer of MCA, the parent company of Universal Pictures, producers of
''Jaws the Revenge,'' said she had spent the last couple of years as a literary
agent. But in ''Jaws'' in 1975 and in ''Jaws 2'' in 1978, she played the role of
the wife of Chief Brody, the head of the police force of the fictional but
shark-bedeviled town of Amity.

What was different about Ellen Brody this time, she said, is that ''it's the
pivotal role in this film, the first time I haven't been the token woman.''

''I am allowed to develop complete relationships with a variety of people,'' she
said, ''primarily both my sons. And then there's a man played by Michael
Caine.''

Ms. Gary explained that by the time the events of ''Jaws the Revenge'' unfold,
Chief Brody is dead. ''He had a heart attack about a year and a half ago from
the stress of living with this situation,'' she said. ''So in effect, the shark
killed him, but on land.''

As for the relationship of the shark of ''Jaws'' to the creature who pursues the
widow Brody in ''Jaws the Revenge,'' she said, ''The shark is the mythical
incarnation of the same shark.''

What Ms. Gary - who is 50 years old both onscreen and off - likes most about her
role, she said, is that ''I get involved in the action of the film.

''The most exciting thing is that a middle-aged woman is responsible for the
thrust of the last part of the movie,'' she said. ''I would love to see more
women - particularly more women of my age - doing more active things.''

Pakula's ''Orphans''

Alan J. Pakula's new movie, ''Orphans,'' starring Matthew Modine, Albert Finney
and Kevin Anderson, has been chosen for showing at the Toronto Film Festival,
Sept. 10-19.

The movie is based on the Lyle Kessler play about an encounter between two boys
and a father figure. Because the life of the play was essentially in New York,
Chicago, Los Angeles and London, the director said as he discussed the festival,
''We felt it was a very good place to introduce the film outside New York
City.'' ''Orphans'' is to open here Sept. 23.

Mr. Pakula, whose directing credits include ''Klute,'' ''All the President's
Men'' and ''Sophie's Choice'' (which he adapted for the screen), has just
completed his first original screenplay. Its title is ''See You in the
Morning.'' It is a dramatic comedy. It is the story of a family. And aside from
saying that he's on the verge of making a deal for its financing and production,
with him as its director, he will say no more about it except:

''The oddest thing is that I hadn't done it before. I think what is exciting is
starting new experiences even though you've been making films for quite a
while.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gregory Hines

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JEFFREY S. CHILDS

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 110 words


Jeffrey S. Childs, a former Manhattan antiques dealer and art collector, died
Sunday at the New York University Medical Center of complications caused by
AIDS. He lived in Manhattan and was 41 years old.

Mr. Childs, who graduated from the Portsmouth Abbey School, attended Whittier
College. As a Navy medical corpsman he was wounded and lost a leg in the Vietnam
War.

For many years he had his own antique store on Madison Avenue at East 91st
Street.

His longtime companion was Robert C. Woolley. Survivors include his mother,
Sandra H. Childs, of Manhattan and Noroton, Conn., and two brothers, Nicholas,
of St. John, V.I., and Daniel, of Norwalk, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN-CONTRA HEARINGS;
A Majority in New Poll Still Find Reagan Lied on Iran-Contra Issue

BYLINE: By RICHARD J. MEISLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1686 words


Despite Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter's testimony supporting the President's
account, a majority of Americans still say that President Reagan lied when he
said he did not know that money from the Iran arms sales was channeled to the
Nicaraguan rebels, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.

A key reason appeared to be that nearly half of Americans said Admiral
Poindexter was lying when he testified to the Congressional select committees on
the Iran-contra affair that he had not told the President about the diversion of
funds.

The poll, which interviewed 665 adults nationwide by telephone on Thursday, also
found that the credibility and popularity of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North gained
sharply between the middle and the end of his testimony. #51 Percent Opposed
Assistance But it showed little change in American sentiment toward providing
military and other aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, a cause Colonel North promoted
frequently in his televised testimony, with 51 percent opposed to such
assistance by the United States Government, and 35 percent in favor.

That is about the same as last week, although it represents a gain for the
Administration's policy of supporting the rebels since an earlier Times/CBS News
poll in January, when 60 percent said they were opposed and 28 percent said they
approved. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus four percentage points.

Although the number of Americans who said Mr. Reagan is lying about his
knowledge of the connection between the arms sales and aid to the contras
remained about the same before and after Admiral Poindexter's testimony, the
number of those who thought Mr. Reagan was telling the truth increased.

In a New York Times/CBS News Poll a week earlier, 56 percent said Mr. Reagan was
lying and 26 percent said he was telling the truth; this week, 53 percent still
said he was lying but 34 percent said he was telling the truth. Mr. Reagan's
overall job approval rating remained virtually unchanged, with 50 percent saying
they approved of the way he was handling his job and 41 percent saying they
disapproved.

Of Admiral Poindexter's testimony that he did not tell Mr. Reagan about the
diversion of funds, 47 percent said he was lying and 33 percent said he was
telling the truth.

Lied About What Reagan Knew

Colonel North's credibility was considerably higher. Seventy-four percent said
they believed that the colonel generally told the truth in his testimony, while
only 15 percent said they thought he was generally lying.

Some of those who said he generally told the truth asserted that he lied about
some smaller matters so, in all, 45 percent said Colonel North had not been
completely truthful. In another indication of the damage to Mr. Reagan's
credibility, the lie they most often believed he had told was about what the
President knew.

The public also sided with Colonel North in his dispute with Robert C.
McFarlane, who as national security adviser was the colonel's superior in 1984
and 1985, over whether Mr. McFarlane had authorized Colonel North's actions in
aid of the Nicaraguan contras. Sixty percent said they believed Colonel North -
who said he had taken no actions without authorization from his superiors - and
16 percent said they believed Mr. McFarlane.

'A Real Patriot'

Overall, Colonel North continued to build a favorable impression in the public
mind in his six days of testimony. Fifty-six percent of the public said they
viewed him favorably (up from 43 percent last week) and 13 percent said they
viewed him unfavorably, compared with 14 percent last week.

By comparison, Admiral Poindexter was viewed favorably by 13 percent and
unfavorably by 24 percent, and Mr. McFarlane was viewed favorably by 15 percent
and unfavorably by 21 percent.

Two days after his testimony ended, Colonel North was viewed as ''a real
patriot'' by 73 percent of the public, up from 64 percent last week, although 56
continued to say that he ''went too far with his actions.'' And while 25 percent
said they considered him a ''national hero,'' that was a gain from 18 percent
last week.

Support for Congress

Congress also appears to be gaining in the public mind as the hearings continue.
Despite fears by members of the Congressional select committees that they were
being perceived as unduly harsh to Colonel North, 60 percent said they believed
the Congressmen had treated him fairly, up from 49 percent a week ago.
Twenty-one percent said the colonel had been treated too hard and 10 percent
said the committees were too easy on him.

Congress also was regarded overwhelmingly as a necessary element in the conduct
of foreign policy. Sixty-one percent of the public rejected the idea that a
President should be able to conduct secret operations in foreign countries
without informing top Congressional leaders ''if he thinks it's necessary to do
that,'' while only 34 percent said he should be able to do so.

Comparison With Watergate

The Congressional hearings continued to attract a high level of interest,
according to the survey, with three-quarters of Americans reporting they were
either very or somewhat interested in them, and more saying ''very'' than did a
week ago.

But at the same time, the severity with which the Iran-contra scandal is being
viewed by the public appears to be diminishing as the hearings continue.

The number of people who say that the Iran-contra matter is as serious as the
Watergate scandal declined in the past week, to 40 percent from 47 percent, and
the number who said it was not as serious increased, to 40 percent from 32
percent. The number volunteering that it was more serious remained about the
same, at 11 percent, compared with 9 percent a week ago.

Contrasting Results

The Times/CBS News Poll found the public still opposed to ''military and other
aid'' to the rebels trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government, with 51
percent saying they disapproved of such aid and 35 percent approving.

In the current survey, only a small number of people reported having changed
their opinion on aid to the Nicaraguan rebels since the hearings began, with 29
percent saying they approved of aid to the contras before Colonel North
testified and 54 percent saying they disapproved before that.

This result contrasts with surveys taken in recent days by Richard B. Wirthlin,
President Reagan's pollster, The Los Angeles Times and The Washington Post and
ABC News. All of them reported a shift since the Congressional hearings began,
finding the country now almost evenly split on the matter of United States
military aid to the contras.

Trouble Locating Nicaragua

Asked which aspect of the Iran-contra matter was worse - the sale of the arms to
Iran or the use of the profits from those sales to aid the Nicaraguan rebels -
47 percent said the arms sales were worse and 34 percent said that helping the
contras was worse.

Despite the discussion of Nicaragua in recent weeks, a substantial number of
Americans had trouble describing in what part of the world Nicaragua was
located. Thirty-two percent placed it correctly, saying it was in Central
America or Latin America. Another 21 percent were close, calling it a part of
South America. And another third admitted that they did not know.

The remaining 15 percent placed Nicaragua in a wide variety of regions, with
several placing it near Iran or Iraq, many in the Middle East, some in Africa,
and a few in Asia or near Vietnam. One person said it was ''just below, I think,
Texas.'' And another person described Nicaragua as ''south of the U.S. - and not
very south.''

AID TO THE CONTRAS: THE PATTERNS OF SUPPORT
''Do you approve or disapprove of the United States Government giving military
and other aid to the contras who are fighting against the Government in
Nicaragua?''
                               Approve  Disapprove
Men                              44%        45%
Women                            25         57
White                            37         49
Black                            17         67
18-29 years old                  33         59
30-44                            37         49
45-64                            35         50
65 and older                     33         43
Not a high school graduate       23         55
High school graduate             35         53
Some college                     42         44
College graduate                 37         51
Northeast                        33         52
Midwest                          32         56
South                            38         46
West                             34         54
Republican                       48         38
Democrat                         25         61
Independent                      34         52
Liberal                          29         62
Moderate                         35         53
Conservative                     41         45


In order to provide a sample that is statistically more stable for smaller
population groups, the table combines results from 658 telephone interviews
conducted July 9 and 665 conducted July 16. Overall results were very similar in
the two polls. Those with no opinions are not shown.

HOW POLL WAS CONDUCTED

The latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted July 16 with 665 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and
Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
insure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted residential numbers.
The numbers were then screened to limit calls to residences.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
residential telephones and to adjust for variations in the sample relating to
region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than 4 percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by interviewing all adult Americans. The error for smaller
subgroups is larger. For example, for women the sampling error is plus or minus
5 percentage points and for men it is plus or minus 6 percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Just Call It Playing With Nuclear Matches

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 494 words


To the Editor:

In opposing the ''abolition of nuclear weapons'' in ''More Straight Talk for
NATO'' (editorial, June 15) you argue, ''Nuclear weapons remain a necessary part
of deterrence.'' You speak of the need to build the necessary public support for
deterrence. Pity that you do not explain that both the quality and quantity of
our nuclear arsenal have little to do with deterrence.

For as Robert S. McNamara, the former Secretary of Defense, has observed,
deterrence requires only a few hundred nuclear bombs. Our thousands of nuclear
weapons, many of them designed for first-strike and war-winning - not
war-deterring -purposes, have only heightened tension between the superpowers
and made nuclear war by accident frighteningly likely.

Your belief that nuclear weapons offer ''a great benefit to mankind''
(editorial, Aug. 25, 1986) rests on the further belief that ''because of the
nuclear shadow'' the United States and the Soviet Union ''have enjoyed 40 years
of peace.'' This undocumented and unproved assumption neglects to mention that
in the judgment of the authoritative Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists the
nuclear-arms race has brought the world to the brink of nuclear holocaust.

You are of course right in noting that United States and Soviet troops have
''never met in combat'' in the last 40 years. But why does it follow that The
Bomb is responsible for this?

John Foster Dulles, W. Averell Harriman and other post-World War II American
leaders argreed privately that the Soviet Union had no intention of overrunning
Western Europe or the world. It can be argued that our development of thousands
of bombs targeting every Soviet military, industrial and population center, and
our secret plans to launch them in a pre-emptive strike, were part of a policy
that resulted in the tragic Vietnam War.

It is important to recall that we deployed atomic bombs against the Russians and
initiated the nuclear arms race, not to deter aggression, but rather to destroy
the Russians in the war that many of our leaders said was inevitable. Deterrence
was a rationale for a military policy that the United Nations and most of the
world's religions have judged unacceptable. As Adm. Gene R. La Rocque has
pointed out, deterrence was an afterthought, a theory ''to help justify our
nuclear weapons,'' which our leaders had put in place in order to achieve
''worldwide military dominance.''

Since you have learned to love The Bomb, one can understand your unhappiness
with what you call the ''growing public antagonism to nuclear weapons.'' Might
it not be possible that the public understands better than you do that weapons
so frightful and dangerous, so susceptible of being used as a result of
mechanical or human error, provide a treacherous and unreliable deterrence to
war?

EDWARD PESSEN
  New York, June 30, 1987

The writer is Distinguished Professor of History at Baruch College and the City
University Graduate School.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

In the Dark About Movies

BYLINE: By Steve Palay; Steve Palay sided with the coun-terculture during the
Vietnam War.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 462 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


We love Vietnam War movies.

This is one riddle of my times. The generation that did everything it could to
avoid going to Vietnam is now doing its duty, standing in line for ''Platoon''
and ''Full Metal Jacket.''

One riddle leads to another, and here's the second.

Last winter, ''Platoon'' was the definitive Vietnam movie. Now, ''Full Metal
Jacket'' is. How can both films be definitive? The dictionary says this is
impossible. In their time, ''Apocalypse Now'' and ''The Deer Hunter'' were also
''definitive,'' but now the ads for ''Full Metal Jacket'' promise that this
movie ''outpowers'' all the others.

Why does one Vietnam movie have to outpower another? Just who is the enemy here?
This, of course, leads to another riddle. We call it the Vietnam War.

Do the Vietnamese call it the American War?

The movies certainly make it an American war. You'd never know that we had
Australian and South Korean allies, sometimes even the Vietnamese are unvisible.
''Apocalypse Now'' had an obsessed American hunting a crazed American.
''Platoon'' featured a good American soldier against a bad one. Newsweek pointed
out that ''Full Metal Jacket'' combines the good American and the bad one into
one character. A Vietnamese actor couldn't make a decent living from all these
Vietnam movies. It seems that we want Americans to be the good, the bad and the
ugly.

Even in our nightmares, we're the stars. And in our dreams? There's a riddle in
our dreams as well.

We loved the counterculture: the demonstrations, the sexual revolution, the
love-ins, be-ins, happenings and three-day rock festivals.

But there's not a single movie out about this side of the 60's.

In fact, Hollywood goes out of its way to avoid making such a film. In ''Peggy
Sue Got Married,'' Peggy Sue skipped all the way back to 1962. ''Back to the
Future'' went even further, managing to slip back to the Eisenhower years. It's
as if the 60's never existed. Or perhaps all that grooviness is just too
embarrassing to remember. The beads, the paisley prints, the political slogans,
the communes waiting for the Revolution.

Imagine Peggy Sue waking up in San Francisco in 1967, the Summer of Love. She'd
take one look around and moan to herself, ''Oh no, not this again.''

Or imagine Michael J. Fox, the star of ''Back to the Future,'' who drove his
time machine back to the Eisenhower era, detouring en route into the middle of
Chicago during the 1968 Democratic convention. He'd wonder what all the
excitement was about. He might even stop a club-wielding cop to inquire: ''Hey,
what's going on? Are the Beatles in town?''

Fox is true to his generation. Children of the 80's know that only two things
happened in the 60's. Vietnam and the Beatles. Everything else is on the cutting
room floor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 131 words


Schroeder Collects at NOW

Patricia Schroeder, who may run for President, addressed the NOW convention and
got enough money to qualify for Federal funds. Page 22.

Flood Toll 6 in Texas

Four more bodies were recovered from the Texas river where a bus and van were
swept away. Page 16.

Jersey Seeks a New Team

New Jersey officials, pessimistic about luring an existing baseball team to the
state, are focusing on winning an expansion team. Page 24.

Hanoi Agrees to U.S. Terms

The Secretary of State won agreement to American conditions for talks on missing
servicemen. Page 3.

New in the Magazine: 'Works in Progress'

A weekly photographic feature will examine creative projects. Today: Identifying
the largest object yet observed in the universe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JULY 19, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 877 words



International   3-15

 After John Poindexter's testimony before the committees investigating the
Iran-contra affair ends early next week, only five more witnesses are scheduled
to appear before the hearings end.   Page 1

 The contras killed nine soldiers, three children and a pregnant woman, but
failed to capture their target Thursday in their first major attack since the
Iran-contra hearings focused American public attention on their movement.   1

 France suggested to Iran that both countries agree to evacuate their respective
diplomats and embassy personnel within five days. The move was a bid to calm the
crisis caused by France's decision to break diplomatic relations with Teheran.
   1

 The U.S. plan to escort tankers to and from Kuwait that are flying the American
flag is tailored to the relatively crowded waters of the Persian Gulf, officials
say.   12

 An anti-apartheid labor group in South Africa formally adopted the political
program of black guerrillas fighting to end white rule. The group also committed
itself to putting pressure on Pretoria to sign the Geneva Convention.   5

 Vietnam agreed to U.S. conditions for a meeting with a special envoy to discuss
the issue of missing servicemen, Secretary of State George P. Shultz said. But
he warned that there might not be much progress.   3

 Some Thai children from the U.S. have been sent to Thailand by their families
under an program designed to strengthen their cultural roots. For eight weeks,
the children experience what it means to be ''khon Thai,'' or a ''Thai person.''

   12

 In Cambodia, the soft approach has been adopted by the Vietnamese-sponsored
Government of Heng Samrin and his Prime Minister, Hun Sen, on sensitive issues
in agriculture and religion, in an effort to make Communism palatable.   8

 Army impatience hinted in Seoul    3

 South Koreans in U.S. go home    6

 Ethnic tension in Old Delhi    9

 Britain reviews war-crime case    13

 Casey left legacy of doubt    14

 National   16-23, 30-32

 A revision of the welfare program emphasizing parental responsibility rather
than Government handouts was proposed by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. He
expressed confidence that Congress could agree on the issue in the coming year.
   1

 Programs outside prisons for offenders are receiving growing support from
foundations and other private groups. The programs include alternative
sentences, detention at home and supervised detention in a halfway house.   1

 Democratic Presidential candidates lectured state party chairmen from all parts
of the country on how to win in 1988. For many of the officials, the speeches
represented a chance to assess many of the hopefuls.   22

 Patricia Schroeder was supported in her undecided quest for the Democratic
Presidential nomination at the convention of the National Organization for
Women. She received enough money to qualify for Federal matching campaign funds,
officials said.    22

 Six more bodies were found in Texas by searchers scouring a river downstream
from where floodwaters swept away a bus and a van filled with teen-agers leaving
a church camp Friday. With the death toll at eight, two youths remained missing
and were feared dead.   16

 Workers at a Hormel plant regained control of their union local 14 months after
the union's international unit placed the local in trusteeship and removed its
officers for refusing to end a strike.   23

 Village fights fast-food outlet    16

 Model addiction center thrives    16

 Museum of Indian art in Santa Fe    19

 12 voters discuss AIDS issues    22

 Regional   24-25, 27-28, 33-35

 2,,q>Trying to end free rides on subways in New York City, the Transit
Authority will use new procedures and technology. But while these measures will
make the transit system less porous, it will be far from impenetrable, officials
said.   1

 A new major league baseball team is becoming the focus of New Jersey's search
to fill the stadium it wants to build near the Meadowlands Sports Complex. The
search previously focused on existing franchises.   24

 Surrogate motherhood was opposed in a brief filed by New Jersey's Roman
Catholic bishops with the New Jersey Supreme Court. The brief argued that the
practice violates the public policy of the state.   28

 A barn shortage in Connecticut has forced some wealthy landowners to import
their rustic dream houses from upstate New York and Vermont. ''Everybody wants
to live in a barn, and there aren't any left,'' one barn importer said.   24

 A plan to crack down on tax evaders has brought praise for Abraham Biderman,
New York City's Finance Commisioner. Mayor Koch misses few opportunities to
boast about Mr. Biderman's initiative against the underground economy.   25

 A daylong prayer vigil was held at the Pilgrim Cathedral in the Bushwick
section of Brooklyn to draw attention to problems plaguing the black community.
A major focus was the use of crack, the highly addictive and smokeable form of
cocaine.   24

 Bridge team championship final    24

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Said to Agree to Meet on Missing

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 18


Secretary of State George P. Shultz confirmed today that Vietnam had relented
and agreed to American conditions for a meeting with a special envoy to discuss
the issue of missing servicemen.

But Mr. Shultz, speaking at the annual meeting of the National League of
Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, also warned that
there might not be much progress on the issue. He said it was good that Vietnam
no longer insisted that discussions on missing servicemen be linked with the
issue of normalizing relations.

''We are pleased that the Vietnamese Government has accepted our proposal for a
visit by a Presidential emissary on P.O.W. and M.I.A. and other humanitarian
issues,'' he said. ''We are also pleased that Hanoi has confirmed that the two
sides should not link these humanitarian issues with any outstanding political
problem between our two countries.''

Earlier this month a Vietnamese official said Hanoi had sent American
negotiators a letter dropping many previous conditions for talks.

Mr. Shultz warned, however, that Vietnam might still try to get economic aid in
exchange for genuine discussion on the missing servicemen.

''We intend to honor that agreement and expect Vietnam's leaders to do the
same,'' he said of the understanding that normalization of relations will not be
included in discussions. ''Nevertheless, in spite of these agreements, we must
face the possibility that we will not be able to move the issue forward.''

Disturbed by Press Reports

He said he was disturbed by press reports that despite the agreement, Vietnam
might try to raise the issue of reparations and economic aid under the heading
of humanitarian cooperation.

''Humanitarian reciprocity is one thing, but any attempt to trade information on
our missing men for economic aid is another,'' he said. ''We cannot agree to
this.''

An American negotiating team returned from Hanoi in May after failing to
persuade Vietnam to accept the visit from the special presidential envoy, Gen.
John A. Vessey Jr., retired, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

''The Government of Vietnam has agreed to receive General Vessey to discuss the
issue in Hanoi,'' Mr. Shultz said today. ''We are working out the final details
with the Vietnamese now.''

No date has been set for the Vessey mission, officials said.

Foreign Minister Interviewed

His remark about press reports apparently refers to an interview with the
Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, in The Washington Post this month
from Hanoi. Mr. Thach said Vietnam intended to raise a wide variety of issues
under the category of humanitarian matters, including property damage and
personal injuries suffered during the Vietnam War.

''If we can help the Americans on M.I.A.'s, then the Americans can help us heal
our wounds of war,'' he said.

The United States has been seeking Vietnamese help in determining the fate of
more than 2,500 American servicemen who were missing in action or failed to
return from prisoner-of-war camps.

American officials said Hanoi had been stalling on agreeing to the meeting in
hopes that Washington would to allow the discussions to include the
normalization of relations. The Vietnamese believe that normalization
discussions would include the issue of reparations.

The Reagan Administration has been adamant that talks about the missing
servicemen must precede any discussion of improving diplomatic relations.

Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, the chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, suggested this week that the Administration proceed
quickly with normalizing relations with Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sec. of State George P. Shultz after addressing meeting of
National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia
(NYT/Marty Katz)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia's Few Concessions to a Harsh Life

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


''Our farmers' rice is sold to the free market,'' said Kong Som Ol, Cambodia's
Minister of Agriculture.

''Maybe 10 percent is sold to the Government, but not if the crop is not good,''
he said. They sell their fruits and vegetables to the Government only if they
wish.''

Culture Minister Chheng Phon said: ''The Buddhist faith is the people's. The
Government and party don't violate that.''

On the two most sensitive issues in this agricultural and Buddhist nation, the
Vietnamese-sponsored Government of President Heng Samrin and Prime Minister Hun
Sen appears to have adopted a soft approach to make Communism palatable to a
people who for centuries, until war engulfed it in 1970, lived in traditional
ways in comparative isolation.

Diplomats in Cambodia, as well as Westerners working in various relief
capacities, say they believe the Government is motivated by the fact that it
must ask this nation of more than seven million to accept so many demands that
go against tradition that it has, presumably at Vietnam's advice, offered some
concessions on agriculture and religion in compensation.

One of the bitterest pills that the Cambodian people must swallow is Communism,
which has no roots here and whose image was fatally impaired by the nearly four
years of its most radical form, enforced by Prime Minister Pol Pot. He was
chased to Thailand by the Vietnamese invasion of 1979.

Liberation by Vietnam and a continued huge, albeit discreet, Vietnamese military
presence more than eight years after the event is another difficulty that
Cambodians must accept.

A more immediate reason for the soft approach is believed by foreigners here to
be the impoverishment and harshness of daily life.

Cambodians were never rich or accustomed to the fullest range of freedoms. But
until 1970 they ate their fill in their fertile and uncrowded country, and the
Government of Prince Norodom Sihanouk interfered little with the lives of the
vast majority.

Today, food remains scant, and malnutrition is widespread. The ruined
infrastructure left behind by a decade of war and Khmer Rouge rule is far from
being restored, and guerrilla war continues despite promises dating to 1979 that
the enemy would be destroyed.

Customary laissez faire has been replaced by insistent political indoctrination.
Cambodians are afraid to let it be known that many have relatives who escaped to
the West and consequently are isolated from them. They ask foreigners to carry
out letters. ''With all that the people have to accept, they still have to try
to keep them as happy as possible,'' a Western aid worker said. ''It's hard to
do when they pay them 200 riels a month.''

The standard wage amounts to $7 at the official exchange rate and $2 at the more
realistic free-market rate.

Despite apparent softness on religion and agriculture, real constraints are
apparent in both fields.

In describing the ''solidarity production groups'' of 10 to 15 families, the
basic units of agriculture, Deputy Agriculture Minister Chea Song said they were
''the small-scale collectivization that has been introduced so far.''

''We work to build socialism step by step,'' he said. ''It depends on the
awakening of the people. For the time being, private and collective farming are
accepted by party and Government.'' Although the Government has pledged to
protect religious liberty, it instituted a measure in 1985 that forbade men
under 50 to join the monkhood. In the absence of a widely accessible single
text, monks are the essential bearers of religious tradition.

''There are enough lay teachers now,'' said Prak Hel, senior monk among three in
the village of Dey Eth, 20 miles east of Phnom Penh. ''So now we only perform
ceremonies.''

Nob Ross, his associate, is only 30, he said, but added: ''He is not in good
health, so he is an exception. He can't be used for agricultural production or
the army, so he is here.''

''We can live a real Buddhist life,'' the older monk said. ''Sometimes I can
even preach, like before. But less than before.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Global March to Free Markets

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 4005 words

DATELINE: PARIS


IN Moscow, entrepreneurial comrades are running their own beauty parlors and
auto repair shops, while in China many farmers are eschewing the communal system
in favor of selling produce they grow themselves.

On the other side of the ideological world, Britain and France are pushing to
reinvigorate their state-owned companies by selling them to the public, while in
Washington the Reagan Administration is pressing ahead with tax cuts and its war
against government regulation of business.

It seems that no matter where you look, governments have been turning to market
mechanisms - Adam Smith's ingenious invisible hand - to pep up their economies.
Economists say there is unusual agreement among capitalist and Communist
countries about the importance of giving freer rein to the market: that
overarching mechanism that helps articulate consumer desires, encourages
inventiveness and disciplines inefficient producers.

''In remarkably different circumstances, people are learning that one can make
market systems work in very useful ways,'' said Charles Lindblom, a Yale
University political economist and author of ''Politics and Markets.''

The most important recent move toward the market was the historic policy change
that Mikhail Gorbachev announced late last month that would transfer much of the
power of Moscow's central planners to the Soviet Union's factory managers. For
the first time, managers would be allowed to negotiate with suppliers over
prices, with the aim of ending production bottlenecks and making producers more
sensitive to consumers.

In the view of many economists, market-oriented moves like these could slow the
growth of the developmental gap between the Communist world and the
industrialized West - and perhaps even close that gap a bit.

Many of the reasons behind Mr. Gorbachev's dramatic change in policy parallel
those fueling the market-oriented moves elsewhere. Capitalist and Communist
countries alike have been looking for ways to reinvigorate their economies and
avoid the kind of painful stagnation that marked much of the 1970's. They are
straining as well to increase efficiency in reaction to greater worldwide
competitive pressures. And they are also recognizing that central planning does
not work as well once countries achieve a basic level of industrial development.

While the trend is broad-based, many economists and political scientists are
questioning whether it represents a permanent shift or a mere swing of the
pendulum. They wonder if Mr. Gorbachev's efforts to reform the Soviet economy
will be overcome by entrenched interests and institutional inertia. And they are
waiting to see if Ronald Reagan's successor will conclude that he went too far
in scrapping regulations and cutting the Government's role in the economy.

''I think there is something of a permanent shift, but maybe I'm just sort of
hopeful,'' said Marvin H. Kosters, director of economic policy studies at the
American Enterprise Institute, the conservative study group. ''It's hard to put
Humpty Dumpty together again, but not impossible.''

Indeed, there are already signs of a backlash. Congress, for example, is playing
with the idea of re-regulating the airlines because of poor service, while
officials in London and Washington are debating whether to do more to curb
insider trading and the merger boom. In China, the Government has retreated a
bit after having taken the giant step of giving market forces freer rein in
industry.

The Chinese experience points to what has become one of the most hotly debated
topics among economists: To what extent can Socialist and Communist countries
incorporate market mechanisms into their economies - whose building blocks are
central planning and state ownership - and still remain Socialist or Communist?
While some economists see an inevitable tension, others think the Communist and
Socialist models are sufficiently flexible to co-exist with a market system.
Introducing elements of the market system is not the same thing as embracing
capitalism, they say. But the introduction of greater economic freedoms in
Communist countries could well lead to demands from the citizenry for greater
political freedoms, as well.

IN ANY event, the market-oriented moves by many Communist nations represent a
turning point, economists say, because they are a tacit admission that the
Stalinist model of centralized planning has failed.

''What Gorbachev is saying is that the old revolutionary centralism has ended up
in a nightmare, that it has paralyzed initiative,'' said Tony Benn, a Member of
Parliament and one of the Labor Party's most respected and outspoken figures.
''I think he's right.''

''One thing awfully clear is that complex industrial societies can't be run by
central planners,'' said Robert Heilbroner, an economist at the New School of
Social Research in New York. ''They have to be run by some looser mechanism, by
something with feedback.''

Conservative economists in capitalist countries, especially in the United
States, have made a similar critique of government regulation. They have
contended that regulations - of airlines, trucking, labor relations and the
environment - were too inflexible, interfered with market forces and usually got
in the way of growth. It was these economists who helped plant the ideological
seeds for the new emphasis on market forces.

The shift began in earnest with the elections of Margaret Thatcher in 1979 and
Ronald Reagan a year later. By now, the trend has been felt almost everywhere.

There have been privatizations in Italy and the Ivory Coast. In Vietnam, the
Government is encouraging privately owned small business, while in Hungary, the
Government offers venture capital to local entrepreneurs. Indeed, Hungary now
boasts a small but thriving privately owned software industry thanks to
inventive engineers who are trying to take advantage of the West's computer
boom.

If there is any one factor that explains the global embrace of the market
system, it is the increasing competitiveness of world trade, economists say.

''This means you can no longer afford all those inefficiencies,'' said C. Fred
Bergsten, director of the Washington-based Institute for International
Economics. The spectacular rise of South Korea and other Pacific rim countries
from backward economies to industrial dynamos helps explain much of that
increased competitiveness. The import of their success has not been lost on
Communist planners.

''It's well known in Eastern Europe that their share of the Western market for
manufactures has been eroded by the newly industrialized countries,'' said
Philip Hanson, professor of Soviet economics at Birmingham University in
England. ''They see evidence of superior development'' by those countries.

Economists cite another reason for the push to market mechanisms: State planning
often worked well in the early stages of developing industry or rebuilding from
war, but now economies and technologies have grown so complex that central
planners just cannot master them.

When a country is underdeveloped or decimated by war, for example, it is not
hard for central planners to conclude that steel mills are needed and to
determine which technology is best. But when that country wants to make
computers, say, decision-making becomes more complicated. Myriad manufacturing
processes are involved, and technologies and market conditions change rapidly.
Central planners may not be up to the task of managing such projects.

''When you get to the stage of having developed most of your basic industries
and you want to adapt to the new technologies available in the capitalist
world,'' said Professor Hanson, ''then the capacity of a centralized system to
monitor these changes and to respond and produce new technologies quickly is
rather weak.''

The end of the Stalin era and the beginning of glasnost - Mr. Gorbachev's policy
of openness - have enabled citizens of many Communist countries to complain more
vocally, but still in a limited fashion, about shortages and the poor quality of
consumer goods. This has also increased pressures on government officials
torevamp their economies.

A rather different set of factors has motivated the West. For 30 years following
the end of World War II, an unusual degree of cooperation between government and
business helped create prosperity and economic security in the United States and
Western Europe. The United States, for example, used government incentives, such
as the G.I. Bill, to build housing, while Europe created a welfare state.

BUT when growth slowed in the 1970's, conservatives blamed government's broad
role for stifling initiative and taxing away incentives.

''We created a welfare state through active government participation,'' said
Juergen Donges, vice president of the Institute of World Economics in Kiel, West
Germany. ''But then we found you can't maintain a welfare state unless your
economy is producing productivity gains. If it isn't, you can't finance your
welfare state. Politicians started thinking that they had to use the market more
to reach their productivity goals.''

Because the world economy has become so interdependent, a market-oriented move
by one industrial democracy to increase productivity sends more ripples than
ever before into other countries. When the United States, for example, slashed
tax rates in 1981, its European trading partners felt pressured to follow suit
to prevent an exodus of business.

This interdependence has also placed new pressures on nationalized companies in
the West. State-owned industries in Britain, France and elsewhere have usually
failed to expand beyond national boundaries, while many private companies see
such expansion as essential for achieving economies of scale and weathering
national downturns.

Lionel Zinsou, a French Socialist economist and author of a book on nationalized
industry, said this factor helped create a climate for privatization. ''We saw
that one of the disadvantages for nationalized companies was that it was hard to
expand on an international scale,'' Mr. Zinsou said. ''We also saw that
privatization often makes it easier for companies to obtain more capital to
grow.''

Mr. Zinsou, who has often served as an economic consultant to African nations,
said that many of those developing countries are taking market-oriented steps,
including privatization, not only because of pressure from the World Bank but
also to increase efficiency and to encourage their wealthiest citizens to invest
their money at home rather than abroad. [See box.] The dramatic changes planned
in the Soviet Union have stirred much of the recent talk about the importance of
the marketplace. ''The Soviet Union is really at a point of loss of confidence
in the traditional system,'' said Ed A. Hewett, a specialist on the Soviet
economy at the Brookings Institution in Washington.

Indeed, Mr. Gorbachev's proposals to reform his nation's economy are far more
sweeping than many Soviet watchers were anticipating. At the heart of the
program is the plan to allow producers and customers to negotiate prices rather
than have them set by the State Committee for Prices. This daring proposal runs
the risk that higher prices could set off protests, as they often have in
Poland.

Mr. Gorbachev also proposed to shrink the role of Gosplan, the immensely
powerful state planning committee, and give much more power to the managers of
the nation's 48,000 enterprises. By having managers rather than Gosplan order
components and raw materials for their factories, for example, Mr. Gorbachev's
plan in theory will make producers more sensitive to consumer demands and more
insistent on receiving quality parts.

Another controversial proposal would widen pay differentials between skilled and
unskilled workers to encourage workers to develop more skills. And all this is
in addition to another move that would no doubt surprise Karl Marx: Mr.
Gorbachev's giving the green light to small privately owned service businesses.

''We're seeing a rediscovery of incentive,'' said Madsen Pirie, director of the
Adam Smith Institute, a free-market study group in London.

China began its flirtation with greater incentives in the late 1970's when it
introduced more market forces in agriculture and set up enterprise zones to
entice foreign investment. No longer is all farming done by communes. Now,
individual farmers can rent plots from their commune and sell everything they
produce in excess of rent payments.

''If you pay 60 percent of your production in the form of rent, you give the
commune your worst 60 percent, keep the best 40 percent and sell it at a higher
price,'' said Michael W. Oborne, an economist at the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development in Paris. ''Because of the higher quality, private
farmers have almost put some state-run markets out of business.''

While market forces have helped to increase production and quality on the farm,
China's efforts to employ those forces in industry have stumbled. There have
been turf wars over who should negotiate orders - the factory managers or
central planners.

Many economists emphasize that just because the Soviet Union and China are
invoking more market forces than ever before, that does not mean they are
embracing capitalism.

''In the Soviet Union,'' said Mr. Hewett of Brookings, ''even a broad range of
people pushing for radical reform have no desire of becoming like the United
States, with its homeless problem and 6 to 7 percent unemployment.'' He added
that while the Soviet moves involve less interference in the day-to-day running
of the economy, the Kremlin had no intention ''to let go of control over
investment.''

MR. OBORNE of the O.E.C.D. took a similar view toward China. ''It's a mistake to
say that the Chinese have abandoned socialism,'' he said, noting that Beijing is
sticking to such tenets as contempt for extreme wealth and the importance of a
relatively equal distribution of income.

''I don't think their reforms will lead them to Wall Street,'' he said. ''I do
think it will lead them to modify the primitive Communist system set up under
the influence of Stalinism. These systems are evolving the way capitalism is
evolving.''

But some economists say that when countries move away from centrally
administered economies, they open the door to more and more questions about how
far they should go to maximize benefits stemming from the market, such as how to
best encourage innovation. And that raises the key question of whether the
markets can coexist with communism and socialism.

Mr. Lindblom of Yale thinks they can. 'What is appealing to many of these
countries is not private enterprise or socialism, but a thing called the market
system which can be built in under capitalist or Socialist auspices,'' he said.

But Professor Hanson of Birmingham University sees things differently. ''I think
there isn't much alternative,'' he said. ''You either have a centrally
administered system of resource allocation or a market system, despite some
academic speculation about third systems. It's very hard to have anything
else.'' If the Communist world's openings to the market create pressures to move
further toward capitalism, they can also produce pressures to do the opposite.
Government officials can grow angry that they are losing too much of their power
through decentralized decision-making. The public can also rise to protest
higher prices or rising inequities in income.

Some economists say these pressures could easily result in a pendulum swing back
that curbs some market experiments. ''There have been a lot of speeches by
Gorbachev but not much has happened so far,'' said Mr. Donges of the Institute
of World Economics. ''But that's understandable. There are many interest groups
that are resisting change.''

And many economists say there could be a similar pendulum swing in the West.
They see a widespread feeling among Americans that Washington should play a more
vigorous role in the economy. And a goal that inspired a more modest role -
making the nation more competitive - is behind this latest push.

''The people feel there is a tremendous lack of support for public
infrastructure and education and the Government should do more about this to
make the economy more competitive,'' said Professor Heilbroner. ''My guess is
we'll enter a period of reassertion of the Government's presence in the economy
to try to establish a new momentum.''

A NEW ECONOMIC ORDER COMES TO AFRICA

ABUJA, Nigeria - ''Goodbye to Marxism,'' proclaimed the newsweekly Jeune Afrique
in a recent article about the advent of free enterprise in the People's Republic
of Benin.

The country is only Africa's latest convert to open markets. Tanzania is
trimming public payrolls. Angola is trying to sell state companies to private
entrepreneurs. And Nigeria has abandoned exchange controls, a standard feature
of centrally planned economies, to allow supply and demand to set the value of
its currency.

After decades of adherence to various tenets of socialism, African economies are
opening up. At the same time, some African officials fear that the West is
missing an important opportunity to encourage the trend.

In one measure of the change, 28 of sub-Saharan Africa's 45 countries have taken
the steps necessary to qualify for loans from the World Bank's Special Facility
for Africa, a $1.9 billion fund. To qualify for the money, countries must adopt
what the bank considers realistic exchange rates, pay farmers fair prices, cut
government bureaucracies and sell unprofitable state industries.

''Most African countries have gone through a period of setting prices and of
setting up public corporations,'' Kalu I. Kalu, Nigeria's Planning Minister,
said at an economic conference held last month here in the new capital that
Nigeria is building near the geographic center of the country. ''Now there is a
need to recognize the role of efficiency, the role of prices for resource
allocation.''

Paradoxically, American aid to Africa is leveling off or dropping at a time when
Africa is moving toward the most pro-Western economic policies since
independence.

Despite the Reagan Administration's eagerness to see free enterprise spread in
the third world, United States bilateral economic aid to Africa, excluding the
northern tier states, dropped 21 percent this year, to $772 million, from $972
million in 1986, according to John W. Sewell, president of the Overseas
Development Council, a Washington research group. ''Western signals are mixed -
the message has been heard, but we have not backed it up with resources,'' said
Mr. Sewell.

A problem, economists say, is that in many African countries the adoption of
free market changes has collided with an unrelated cash squeeze. The prices for
minerals, cocoa and other commodities - the main source of foreign exchange -
are at record lows, while Africa's debt payments have reached a new high.

Some African and Western economists fear that the high cost of servicing the
debt will discredit free market policies in the eyes of many Africans. In May,
Zambia reinstated subsidies for food and gasoline after rioting erupted over the
increased costs. Also, the Ivory Coast, usually held up as the model of fiscal
strength, recently announced that it could not keep up with payments on its $8
billion debt. ''There is great danger that the process will have a negative
impact on growth, living standards, employment, social development and political
stability,'' warned a statement adopted by participants at the economic
conference, which was organized by the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa.

The conference came one year after the United Nations had brokered a development
pact in which the African nations agreed to accelerate the move toward open
economies and the Western nations promised to give more aid. The Africans
complain that they have lived up to their side of the bargain, but that the West
has lagged in its commitment. ''The Africans are taking the policies they
struggled against for so long very seriously now,'' said Joseph C. Wheeler, an
American who oversees third world aid for the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. Mr. Wheeler said that Western assistance to Africa
did not change appreciably after the pact was adopted. He said aid was about $9
billion in 1985 and 1986.

Some African experts suggested that the West's slow response could be attributed
to Africa's lack of credibility on economic matters. ''The skeptical world did
not think Africans meant business,'' said Adebayo Adedeji, executive secretary
of the United Nations commission.

Under pressure to balance the Federal budget, Washington often trims aid to
sub-Saharan Africa and other regions to protect aid to such favored recipients
as Israel, Egypt and El Salvador.

The Administration has pledged to contribute $958 million next year to the
International Development Association, a World Bank subsidiary, with about half
of the money earmarked for loans to Africa. But, according to the Overseas
Development Council, Congress may cut the figure to about $620 million. Aides to
some members of Congress argue that the Administration's own insistence on
budget ceilings may make a reduction necessary.

Meanwhile, Representative Howard Wolpe, a Michigan Democrat who is chairman of
the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Africa, has introduced a bill to grant
five-year grace periods and interest rate relief on the debts that Africa's
poorest nations owe the United States.

African leaders say they desperately need such help from the West if the free
market experiments are to succeed. ''We have demonstrated the viability of
running a fairly open economy in place of one burdened by excessive control,''
said President Ibrahim B. Babangida of Nigeria at the conference. ''What Nigeria
now needs most is the continued appreciation and support of the international
community.''

- JAMES BROOKE

A MARKET BASKET OF CHANGES
A sampling of actions and proposals designed to give market mechanisms a freer
hand.

Austria
    Debating selling off 49 percent of many state-owned businesses.

Britain
    Privatized British Telecom, Rolls-Royce and other companies valued at a
total of more than $10 billion.

Deregulated the financial markets.

Bulgaria
    Encouraging some privately owned service businesses, including taxis and
restaurants.

China
    Opened up part of the country for foreign investment.

Set up freer markets in agricultural and consumer goods. Introduced bonus-pay
schemes.

France
    Privatized Paribas, Saint-Gobain, Societe Generale and the country's largest
television station. Hopes to privatize 65 companies in all. Lowered taxes and
made it easier for companies to lay off workers.

Hungary
    Allows privately owned service businesses and some market-oriented
agricultural operations. Gives venture capital to entrepreneurs.

Japan
    Talking about selling off Nippon Telegraph and Telephone.

Soviet Union
    Proposed a number of far-reaching changes in economic policy. These include
slashing the power of central planners, allowing enterprises to negotiate their
own prices with suppliers, reducing subsidies for some basic consumer goods and
pushing enterprises to make a profit. Other elements in the plan include
increasing pay differentials between skilled and unskilled workers, allowing
some privately owned service businesses and permitting poorly performing
enterprises to go bankrupt.

United States
    Reduced Government regulation of business, a move that included the
deregulation of the trucking and airline industries. Cut personal and corporate
tax rates.

Vietnam
    Experimenting with private ownership of some retail and service businesses.
Encouraging some foreign investment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing; drawing of Adam Smith (page 12); photos of crowds of
prospective British Telecom stockholders in London and Zheng Shiqin, manager of
the Hua Fa Electronic Company in a Chinese special economic zone (AP; The New
York Times/Edward A. Gargan) (page 13)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'THE BUCK STOPS HERE'

BYLINE: HAS ADMIRAL'S TESTIMONY BEEN CLEARING THE PICTURE OR INTENTIONALLY
OBSCURING IT?By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 3726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


FOR more than seven months, since Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d disclosed that
profits from the secret sale of American weapons to Iran had been secretly used
to arm the Nicaraguan rebels, Americans have been trying to unravel the tangle,
seeking in particular the answer to one key question: What did President Reagan
know of the whole affair, and when?

Last week, in what may have been the climax of the Congressional inquiry, they
got an answer. Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter, the President's former national
security adviser, testified that he had approved diversion of the profits to the
contras without ever telling President Reagan or anyone else. On this whole
issue, he said, ''the buck stops here with me.'' But some members of Congress
immediately declared that they did not believe him.

Since Congressional hearings began May 5, senators and representatives have
heard more than 180 hours of often riveting testimony from 25 witnesses,
including Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the zealous, indefatigable supervisor of
covert operations aimed at arming Iran and freeing American hostages in Lebanon,
and supporting the Nicaraguan rebels.

The witnesses disagree on key points, and many are so forgetful that they could
say, with Colonel North, ''My memory has been shredded.'' But after the last two
extraordinary weeks, many more pieces of the puzzle have begun to come together,
and there is an ever clearer picture, with abundant, rich detail, of how Mr.
Reagan allowed himself to become ensnared. What follows, significantly enhanced
by the North and Poindexter testimony, is a much fuller account of the worst
crisis of the Reagan Presidency.

THE ROOTS
Fall of Two Rulers

In a sense, the roots of the Iran-contra affair can be traced to events that
occurred on opposite sides of the globe in 1979. The Shah of Iran was forced out
of his homeland in January 1979. Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, leader of the
Islamic revolution, returned to a nation in turmoil on Feb. 1. Revolutionary
militants invaded the United States Embassy in Teheran on Nov. 4, 1979, and
seized 66 hostages, 52 of whom who were not released until the day President
Reagan was inaugurated, Jan. 20, 1981.

Animosity between the two countries was so intense that the United States had
virtually no public contacts with Iran for five years. Mr. Reagan's ill-fated
secret overtures re-established contact amid growing concern about the fate of
Americans held in Lebanon by pro-Iranian extremists. One recent witness before
the Congressional panels, Noel C. Koch, a former Defense Department official,
quoted Colonel North as saying that the plight of the hostages in Lebanon was
''eating'' at the President, who was driving the colonel ''nuts'' with his
concern.

Just six months after the Shah left Iran, the President of Nicaragua, Anastasio
Somoza Debayle, was forced by Sandinista guerrillas to flee his country. General
Somoza's resignation marked the end of a 46-year family dynasty that had been
installed with the help of United States Marines.

In September 1979, the Carter Administration asked Congress to provide economic
aid to the Sandinista Government, saying its initial orientation seemed to be
''moderate and pluralistic, and not Marxist or Cuban.'' Just before President
Carter left office in 1981, the United States suspended such aid, asserting that
the Sandinistas had supplied arms to left-wing guerrillas in El Salvador.

1981-82
A Commitment Grows

President Reagan's passionate commitment to the rebels in Nicaragua evolved
gradually. At first, the Administration's public policy toward the Sandinista
Government combined confrontation with conciliation, in a diplomatic balancing
act.

By November 1981, the Administration was running out of patience. Alexander M.
Haig Jr., then Secretary of State, said that Nicaragua was ''moving toward
totalitarian government.'' But Pentagon officials argued against the use of
military force, saying it might lead to a protracted, Vietnam-like involvement.

Mr. Reagan moved to resolve the debate by authorizing a covert program. In late
November 1981, he issued a directive authorizing $20 million for the Central
Intelligence Agency to build a 500-man paramilitary force.

According to recent testimony at the Congressional hearings, the Administration
told Congress privately that the rebels were being trained only to intercept
arms shipments from Nicaragua to El Salvador. But Mr. Reagan, according to the
testimony of his advisers, was even more enthusiastic about the prospect that
the contras could prevent a new Marxist foothold in the Western Hemisphere,
''another Cuba.''

At a news conference on Feb. 18, 1982, Mr. Reagan was asked, ''Have you approved
of covert activity to destabilize the present Government of Nicaragua?'' In his
response, Mr. Reagan confused Nicaragua and El Salvador, then corrected himself
and refused to answer the question. A week later, Mr. Reagan assailed the
Sandinista Government in a speech, saying it had postponed elections, suppressed
free trade unions and exported ''arms and subversion to neighboring countries.''

On Dec. 21, 1982, Mr. Reagan signed an appropriations bill containing the first
of many statutory restrictions on aid to the contras. He opposed such
restrictions but was under pressure to sign the overall bill because it provided
money for dozens of Government programs, including national defense. In recent
days, giant poster-sized reproductions of the restrictive portion of the bill
were displayed in the hearing room as a reminder to the witnesses; trying to
counter, Republican members of the committees brandished sheaves of paper the
size of the overall bill.

The 1982 restriction prohibited the Defense Department and the C.I.A. from
providing military equipment, training or advice to any group ''for the purpose
of overthrowing the Government of Nicaragua.'' It was clearly understood at the
time that this amendment, proposed by Representative Edward P. Boland, a
Massachusetts Democrat, would not cut off all assistance to the contras. But
already there were reports of a secret war in Nicaragua, and many members of
Congress wanted to stop it.

The Administration acknowledged that it was supporting small-scale clandestine
military operations to harass the Nicaraguan Government, but denied they were
meant to topple it. Colonel North, who worked on the staff of the National
Security Council, told the committees this month that he was the ''action
officer'' in charge of dealing with the contras, assuring them of support.

1983-84
A Public Link

The American commitment to the contras grew steadily. The Central Intelligence
Agency provided them with arms, ammunition and money to buy food, clothing and
medicine. Administration officials insisted that such aid did not violate the
Boland amendment because, they said, the rebels were not trying to overthrow the
Sandinista Government. In an exchange with reporters in May 1983, Mr. Reagan
praised the ''freedom fighters'' and acknowledged publicly for the first time
that the United States was giving them money and other aid.

In September, President Reagan signed an order, disclosed months later, that
authorized an increase in covert activities to support the rebels. In December,
Congress decreed that no more than $24 million could be spent in support of the
contras.

Congressional opposition to the contra program grew when it was disclosed in
April 1984 that the C.I.A. had helped mine Nicaraguan harbors, but had not fully
informed the Senate Intelligence Committee. Barry Goldwater, the Arizona
Republican who was then chairman of the panel, exploded in anger at William J.
Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, who later apologized. Behind the
scenes, it is now known, Mr. Casey and Robert C. McFarlane, who was then the
President's national security adviser, began to consider soliciting funds from
other countries and from private citizens in the United States, because they
anticipated difficulty in persuading Congress to continue support for the
contras.

These efforts paid off in July 1984 when the rebels received the first in a
series of regular contributions, $1 million a month, from a foreign country, now
known to be Saudi Arabia. Adolfo Calero, leader of the largest group of contras,
told the committees recently that he did not know and did not care where the
money was coming from.

In September 1984, according to recent Congressional testimony, Mr. Calero
consulted in Washington with Colonel North, who advised him to defer plans for
an air attack on a Sandinista military school. The contras staged the raid
anyway and lost a helicopter. Colonel North told Mr. McFarlane it might be
necessary to ask a private donor to replace the aircraft. Mr. McFarlane
disapproved the proposal, writing, ''I don't think this is legal.''

The contra aid program reached a major turning point on Oct. 12, 1984, when
President Reagan signed an omnibus appropriations bill containing the most
restrictive version of the Boland amendment. It prohibited the Pentagon, the
C.I.A. and any other agency ''involved in intelligence activities'' from
spending money to support, directly or indirectly, ''military or paramilitary
operations in Nicaragua.''

Again, the President signed the bill only because he felt he had to, and he
vigorously opposed the amendment, which created a big problem: how to support
the contras without spending Federal funds or involving the C.I.A. Officials
disagreed on whether the ban applied to the staff of the National Security
Council. Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North told the committees this month it
did not; Mr. McFarlane said again last week that he believes it did.

OPENINGS TO IRAN
Protective Strategies

The Reagan Administration began a formal reappraisal of its policy toward Iran
in late 1984. It concluded that there was little chance of improving relations
while Ayatollah Khomeini was still alive. But it wanted to open a dialogue with
the Iranians, in part to protect America's strategic interests.

In May 1985, the C.I.A. circulated a five-page memorandum suggesting that the
United States permit its allies to sell arms to Iran as a way to increase
Western influence in the region. At about the same time, Michael A. Ledeen, a
consultant to the National Security Council, went to Israel and discussed the
situation in Iran with Shimon Peres, who was then Prime Minister. Israel had its
own reasons for maintaining secret ties with Iran and prolonging the Iran-Iraq
war, which began in 1980: It guaranteed that Iraq, one of Israel's foremost Arab
foes, would be tied down in a bitter conflict. Mr. Peres asked Mr. Ledeen if the
United States would approve of Israel's shipping arms to Iran.

By May 1985, five Americans, including William F. Buckley, Beirut station chief
for the C.I.A., had been taken hostage in Lebanon. Intelligence officials,
including Mr. Casey, the C.I.A. director, wanted to do everything possible to
rescue Mr. Buckley: They had information that he was being tortured.

EARLY WARNING
Bridging Two Worlds

When he was not busy coordinating guerrilla warfare in Central America, Colonel
North was trying to find ways to free the hostages. In June 1985, he wrote a
detailed memorandum to Mr. McFarlane on how the hostages could be ''spirited
out'' of Lebanon in return for payment of $4 million in ''bribes.'' Travel and
operational costs could be paid with ''funds normally available to the
Nicaraguan resistance,'' Colonel North wrote, in a startling early indication of
possible links between the two operations.

The Reagan Administration became more willing to deal with Iran after Iranian
officials used their influence to help obtain the release of American passengers
on a jetliner hijacked by Lebanese Shiite gunmen in June 1985 as it left Athens.

In July and August 1985, Mr. McFarlane briefed Mr. Reagan on Israeli proposals
to open ''a political discourse'' with Iran. In August and September, Israel
sent 508 American-made TOW antitank missiles to Iran. Whether the President
approved the shipment in advance or merely acquiesced after the fact is in
dispute. He told two different stories to the special review board headed by
former Senator John G. Tower, and said finally that he could not remember
''anything whatsoever'' about approving the sale.

President Reagan had repeatedly told the world that the United States would not
deal with terrorists. But his Administration secretly supplied weapons to a
country he had often accused of terrorist acts. The next Israeli shipment, in
November 1985, caused immense political problems for the Administration when it
was disclosed, because the C.I.A. helped arrange the shipment without the
Presidential authorization required for covert activities.

While in Geneva for a summit meeting, Mr. McFarlane got a telephone call from
the Israeli Defense Minister asking for help in clearing a planeload of missiles
from Israel through Portugal to Iran. Portuguese officials refused to grant
landing rights to the plane, which had been chartered from a C.I.A. proprietary
airline at the request of the National Security Council. Colonel North, Maj.
Gen. Richard V. Secord, a retired Air Force officer, and the C.I.A. made frantic
efforts to solve the problem.

C.I.A. officials insist they thought the cargo was oil-drilling equipment. But
the Congressional investigating committees have obtained evidence, including
depositions given in closed session by State Department and C.I.A. employees, to
show that C.I.A. officials knew the cargo consisted of Hawk missiles.
Administration officials later prepared a false account of the transaction,
saying: ''No one in the U.S. Government found out that our airline had hauled
Hawk missiles into Iran until mid-January'' of 1986, ''when we were told by the
Iranians.''

In testimony last week, Admiral Poindexter disclosed that President Reagan
authorized this transaction retroactively in an official document that he signed
on Dec. 5, 1985. The document, describing the deal as a straight trade of arms
for hostages, directly contradicted Mr. Reagan's characterization of it. Admiral
Poindexter said last week that on Nov. 21, 1986, as the scandal came to light,
he destroyed the document because ''I thought it was a significant political
embarrassment to the President and I wanted to protect him.''

1985
Concealing Contra Aid

At a news conference in February 1985, President Reagan called on the Sandinista
regime to ''say uncle,'' and in March he hailed the contras as ''the moral
equivalent of our Founding Fathers.'' But at the same time, because of the
Boland amendment, the Administration stepped up efforts to conceal its aid to
the contras. Testimony shows that the Administration entrusted the execution of
its policies to a private ''enterprise'' and tried to finance a secret war with
the help of rich Americans and foreign potentates.

General Secord's airlifts to the contras, containing grenades and ammunition,
began arriving in February and March 1985. Carl R. Channell, a fund-raiser for
conservative causes, began raising large sums of private money for the rebels.
In May 1985, Colonel North told Mr. McFarlane in a memorandum that the contras
had become ''an effective guerrilla army'' with the help of funds given by
private donors.

In his testimony, the colonel insisted that although he helped present the
contra case, he stopped short of actually soliciting these wealthy donors. Last
Tuesday, just before the committee excused him, he was permitted to give his
lecture on aid to the contras, though denied permission to show the slides that
usually went with it.

In August 1985, members of Congress expressed concern about Colonel North's
involvement with the contras after newspapers reported that he was giving the
rebels tactical advice on military operations. Mr. McFarlane insisted that he
and his staff complied with ''both the spirit and the letter'' of the Boland
amendment, even as Colonel North (code name BG, ''Blood and Guts'') got periodic
written reports from Robert W. Owen (TC, ''The Courier'') describing the
contras' needs for specific weapons.

In December 1985, Mr. McFarlane stepped down; Admiral Poindexter, his deputy,
became national security adviser.

1986
Diverting the Funds

The two threads of the Iran-contra affair were knotted together in the bathroom
of a London hotel in January 1986, according to Colonel North. He told Congress
this month that an Iranian arms dealer, Manucher Ghorbanifar, first proposed
diverting profits of the Iran arms sales to the contras when the two met in the
bathroom. The C.I.A. had warned that Mr. Ghorbanifar was a liar; Colonel North
said he believed the Iranian was an Israeli intelligence agent.

Mr. Ghorbanifar rejected Colonel North's story about the bathroom meeting,
saying it was ''the best joke I have ever heard.''

At least two other people have been given credit for what Colonel North and
Admiral Poindexter called the ''neat idea'' of diverting money to the contras.
Colonel North told Attorney General Meese last November that the idea was
broached to him by Amiram Nir, an adviser to Prime Minister Peres, in January
1986. General Secord's lawyer, Thomas C. Green, has attributed the diversion
plan to Albert Hakim, an Iranian-born businessman who is General Secord's
partner.

Admiral Poindexter testified last week that he approved the diversion plan in
February 1986 without telling the President. But Colonel North had testified
that he had described the plan in five memorandums that he sent ''up the line''
to Admiral Poindexter for transmission to Mr. Reagan. Only one of the memos,
from April 1986, has been found. General Secord, in his testimony, recalled that
the colonel had said, ''in a humorous vein,'' that he told the President how
ironic it was that ''some of the Ayatollah's money was being used to support the
contras.''

Throughout 1986, Colonel North, General Secord, Mr. Nir and Mr. Ghorbanifar met
repeatedly in Europe to arrange shipments of arms from United States military
stocks. There were four such shipments to Iran: TOW antitank missiles in
February and October; spare parts for Hawk antiaircraft missiles in May and
August.

Colonel North and Mr. McFarlane flew into Teheran in May on a plane carrying
Hawk parts. They held several days of frustrating talks with Iranian officials
thought to have influence over Islamic fundamentalists holding American hostages
in Lebanon. Colonel North said the McFarlane mission led to the release of at
least one hostage, the Rev. Lawrence Martin Jenco, in late July.

THE FINAL MONTHS
The Affair Unravels

Covert efforts to aid the contras continued through 1986. In August, Assistant
Secretary of State Elliott Abrams traveled to London, met with an official from
Brunei and solicited money for the contras. The Sultan of Brunei transferred $10
million to a Swiss bank account, but it went astray because American officials
had given him the wrong account number.

Robert C. Dutton, a retired Air Force colonel, testified recently that the
contra resupply operation, long plagued with problems, reached a peak last
September, when 185,000 pounds of supplies were delivered. From a contra base in
El Salvador, Colonel Dutton sent a message describing the latest news and
appealing to Colonel North to send his attractive secretary, Fawn Hall. ''Send
Fawn - Can't continue on milk and cookies,'' he wrote.

Details of the Iran-contra affair were revealed in a rush of disclosures
starting Oct. 5, 1986, when a cargo plane carrying arms to the contras was shot
down over Nicaragua. Three crewmen were killed and a fourth, Eugene Hasenfus,
was taken captive. Assistant Secretary of State Abrams said at the time,
''There's no United States Government involvement, direct or indirect,'' in the
cargo flight.

Testimony by Colonel North indicates that he and a few of his colleagues made
elaborate efforts in October and November to conceal evidence of their
activities in Nicaragua and Iran. These efforts intensified after a Lebanese
magazine, on Nov. 3, disclosed Mr. McFarlane's trip to Teheran.

Soon after Mr. Meese began probing the arms deals with Iran, Colonel North told
Mr. McFarlane that he planned a ''shredding party,'' Mr. McFarlane testified.
Miss Hall destroyed Colonel North's telephone records, and she took documents
out of his office by hiding them in her boots and in the back of her clothing,
she testified.

Colonel North said this month that he continued to shred documents in his office
last November even as Mr. Meese's investigators worked 10 feet away reviewing
other files. Some members of Congress say the Attorney General's inquiry was so
inadequate that it may have permitted a cover-up.

An independent special prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, was appointed in December
to probe the activities of Colonel North and others. Admiral Poindexter is the
''primary target'' of a Federal grand jury working under Mr. Walsh's
supervision, the admiral's lawyer said last week. In February, the review board
headed by Mr. Tower issued its report, which harshly criticized President's
Reagan's passive management style. And the Congressional committees will
continue their inquiry with testimony by Donald T. Regan, the former White House
chief of staff, and three Cabinet officers: Secretary of State George P. Shultz,
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Attorney General Meese. Mr. Casey,
with whom Colonel North testified that he worked very closely, even getting
pointers from the C.I.A. director on memos to Admiral Poindexter, was
hospitalized in December with a malignant brain tumor the day before he was to
testify before Congress. He died in May.

The Congressional committees expect to finish their hearings this month or early
next month. The panels plan to issue a final report by Oct. 30.

Their conclusion may echo the words of Representative Lee H. Hamilton of
Indiana, chairman of the House committee, who last week denounced the Reagan
Administration's policies as ''driven by a series of lies - lies to the
Iranians, lies to the Central Intelligence Agency, lies to the Attorney General,
lies to our friends and allies, lies to the Congress and lies to the American
people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing of Rear Adm. John Poindexter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?;
Power to Make War

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 307 words


To the Editor:

The oddest thing about the Iran-contra affair is the prompt separation of Lieut.
Col. Oliver L. North and Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter from their official roles
in it. While Congress, the media and the public are caught up in a
cloak-and-dagger story, the larger questions of what our national ends are and
what means we should use to gain them go unexamined.

Our Founding Fathers were very concerned that the power to make war should not
reside in one man, and our Constitution is clear on this. The last time Congress
declared war was December 1941. Military operations since have not been called
wars while in progress: we had a ''police action'' in Korea, ''military
advisers'' in Vietnam, ''peacekeeping'' in Lebanon, ''covert action'' in Central
America and something in Grenada.

First we gave up the formality of declaring war. Then we gave up the formality
of letting the public know what was going on. Then we gave up the formality of
asking Congress to appropriate money for it. We do not know what is being done,
who is doing it or even who is paying for it. Surveys show that a majority of us
do not even know which side we are on in the Central American conflicts.

The obvious remedy for these half-wars is impeachment. President Reagan is sworn
to uphold the Constitution, not to subvert it. Setting up a White House group to
make policy in secret and carry out secret wars to put it into effect is a
direct assumption of the war power that is expressly forbidden by the
Constitution.

Congress should call off the Iran-contra hearings because they are serving no
legislative purpose. They are merely a sideshow. We don't need more laws, just
as we don't need more religion. We need to pay some attention to the laws and
religion that we have.

ARTHUR D. PENSER
  Huntsville, Ala., July 3, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?;
A Good Show

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


To the Editor:

The daily diet of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North on the Iran-contra hearings has
included two courses for which we Americans have always had a fondness: a good
show and the performance of an individual under pressure.

The proceedings have taken on the appearance of pitting an individual against
the forces of government. He seems under attack by a clever New York lawyer
posing complicated questions. The atmosphere is charged, the stakes are high,
and yet the individual survives, perhaps prevails. Television provides the most
dramatic context for the performance of Oliver North. We can study his demeanor,
his voice and speech, his movements. We can dissect, inspect and connect. He is
on stage, and we are the theater critics.

In making our judgment, we may conclude that the individualistic virtues -
fortitude, sincerity, eloquence, and the like - are good. Weakness, phoniness
and verbal ineptitude are bad. Therefore, it seems, our job as audience and
critics is to determine whether Colonel North is sincere or a phony. If we
conclude that he is forthright, the inquiry may end.

The combination of the medium of television and the notion of the individual
under fire creates a powerful momentum toward basing conclusions about the
subject matter of the hearings on how Oliver North ''plays'' on television.

Yet, shouldn't we try to insulate ourselves from the power of television and the
image of a Vietnam veteran under apparent personal attack? We are, after all,
not attacking, defending or judging Oliver North as a person. We are analyzing
his behavior - what he did, how he did it and under whose orders or with whose
knowledge. We have to educate ourselves on what the laws are, what they were and
what people thought they were.

The combination of the medium of television and the grilling of Oliver North
does make for high drama. Yet we should appreciate that Colonel North's
testimony provides only one piece of a very complicated puzzle, a puzzle that
contains some black and white, some gray and some dark corners.

ELLSWORTH MCMEEN
  New York, July 13, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JULY 19, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1466 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   7    MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
                 Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
                 psychotic fan.

 2      2   4    PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
                 creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and
                 lawyers.

 3      6   3    WEEP NO MORE, MY LADY, by Mary Higgins
                 Clark. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Love and
                 murder at a swank California health spa.

 4      3   10   THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
                 (Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
                 Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.

 5     10   6    MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow.
                 (Morrow, $17.95.) The many-faceted relationship of
                 the 35-year-old narrator and his uncle, a famous
                 botanist.

 6      9   4    DIRK GENTLY'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE
                 AGENCY, by Douglas Adams. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $14.95.) A private eye's search for a missing cat
                 takes him on a trip through space and time.

 7      4   6    EMPIRE, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.50.)
                 Turn-of-the-century Washington, from the point of
                 view of a young woman newspaper publisher.

 8      8   24   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                 (Morrow, $18.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall
                 a woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 9      5   6    THE TIMOTHY FILES, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran turned
                 detective checks out dubious entrepreneurs for
                 Wall Street firms.

10     11   18   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                 $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                 way to the 80's.

11      7   6    PALE KINGS AND PRINCES, by Robert B.
                 Parker. (Delacorte, $15.95.) Spenser on the trail of
                 a major Northeastern cocaine ring.

12     13   5    SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                 Four scientists explore the mysteries of an alien
                 spaceship found on the floor of the South Pacific.

13            1  TO SAIL BEYOND THE SUNSET, by Robert A.
                 Heinlein. (Ace/Putnam, $18.95.) A pastiche of
                 themes and characters from the author's earlier
                 work, related as the memoir of a spirited woman.

14     14   10   HEIRESS, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                 Two sisters, one legitimate, one not, vie for their
                 father's affection and fortune.

15     15   25   THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                 (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                 king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   12   THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by
                 Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
                 of liberal arts education during the past 25 years.

 2      2   33   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                 Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                 recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 3 *    3   7    CULTURAL LITERACY, by E. D. Hirsch Jr.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) The information -
                 geography, history, literature, politics - that you
                 need to read with.

 4      4   10   HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon.
                 (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the
                 octogenarian industrialist and philanthropist.

 5      7   21   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                 Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                 visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his home.

 6      6   15   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
                 Siegel. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A surgeon stresses
                 the importance of the patient's mind and emotions.

 7      5   5    EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Jimmy and Rosalynn
                 Carter. (Random House, $16.95.) The former first
                 couple tell what they're doing to make the most of
                 the rest of their lives.

 8     13   2    THE GREAT DEPRESSION OF 1990, by Ravi
                 Batra. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) An economist's
                 dire predictions about the coming decade.

 9      9   7    THE DIFFERENT DRUM, by M. Scott Peck.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A psychiatrist's
                 prescription for personal and communal peace.

10 *    8   4    LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien
                 Cheng. (Grove, $19.95.) China's Cultural Revolution
                 as experienced by a wealthy woman accused of
                 spying for the West.

11     14   3    THE SPY WORE RED, by Aline, Countess of
                 Romanones. (Random House, $18.95.)
                 Recollections of a woman from upstate New York
                 who served as an undercover agent in Europe
                 during World War II.

12            1             BLUES, by John Hersey. (Knopf, $16.95.
                 Reflections on angling as a sport, presented in a
                 dialogue between two fishermen on Martha's
                 Vineyard.

13     11   14   THIS 'N THAT, by Bette Davis with Michael
                 Herskowitz. (Putnam, $17.95.) The actress's
                 memories and opinions.

14     15   23   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Australia, from penal colony to its gradual
                 emergence as a flourishing nation.

15            7  GRACE, by James Spada. (Dolphin/Doubleday,
                 $17.95.) The private and public lives of Princess
                 Grace of Monaco.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   7    WOMEN MEN LOVE, WOMEN MEN LEAVE, by
                 Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson N.
                 Potter/Crown, $18.95.) Why men are drawn to
                 some women and desert others.

 2      1   97   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                 standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 3 *    3   5    SIBLINGS WITHOUT RIVALRY, by Adele Faber
                 and Elaine Mazlish. (Norton, $14.95.) Ways to cope
                 with bickering between one's children.

 4      4   2    THE 8-WEEK CHOLESTEROL CURE, by Robert
                 E. Kowalski. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Ways to
                 lower your blood cholesterol level without drugs.

 5      5   38   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                 by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                 prepared at moderate cost.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

MEDITATIONS AT SUNSET: A Scientist Looks at the Sky, by James Trefil.
(Scribners, $16.95.) With superb clarity, Mr. Trefil's third book of essays on
physics delivers us the great natural laws that (for instance) make sunsets red
and skies blue.

A SCRAP OF TIME: And Other Stories, by Ida Fink. (Pantheon, $15.95.) The short
stories in Mrs. Fink's first collection, derived from the experience of the
Holocaust, speak in whispers of a world where everyday life was submerged in
unthinkable horrors.

THE ELIZABETH STORIES, by Isabel Huggan. (Viking, $15.95.) Wry, alarming stories
in the voice of a girl confronting the helpless, disenfranchised world where the
not-yet-adult live.

THE SOUL OF VIKTOR TRONKO, by David Quammen. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Plots within
plots and wheels within wheels spin smoothly and rapidly in this engrossing and
tightly written K.G.B.-versus-Central Intelligence Agency spy novel.

TOWN SMOKES, by Pinckney Benedict. (Ontario Review Press/ Persea, Paper, $9.95.)
A 23-year-old West Virginian's intense, sometimes lyrical, always authentic
short stories from the hindmost gullies and hooch-sodden hills of Appalachia.

THE FAMILY MASHBER, by Der Nister. (Summit, $22.95.) A messianic Jewish sect in
the Ukraine of the 1870's does duty as a subtle parallel to the Russian
Revolution in this large-scale, ambiguous, morally inquisitive historical novel
by the pseudonymous Yiddish writer Pinhas Kahanovitch (1884-1950).

COLLECTED PROSE, by Robert Lowell, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $25.) A posthumous collection that allows the reader to reconstruct the
development of Lowell's attitudes toward poetry and exhibits him on occasion as
one of the most serious and most learned of critics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C., SHUNNED NO MORE, GROWS INCREASINGLY SELECTIVE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1271 words

DATELINE: FORT BRAGG, N.C., July 15


The Army's Reserve Officer Training Corps, having recovered from its post-
Vietnam enrollment slump, has become far more selective in commissioning new
officers and calling them to active duty - to the dismay of some student cadets.

The competition for choice active duty assignments results from a combination of
fewer places in the Army for young officers and an increase in applications for
R.O.T.C. scholarships as the cost of education rises and the reservoir of
financial aid shrinks.

Adding to the competition, there has been a gradual revival of the R.O.T.C. on
campuses of the Ivy League and other prestigious universities where it was a
target for vociferous and often violent criticism during the Vietnam War.

Tension and Anxiety at Camp

Consequently, the Army has made R.O.T.C. summer training more rigorous and
eliminated weekends off. It has also required experienced middle grade officers
and senior noncommissioned officers to make tougher and more extensive
evaluations of the prospective officers. These evaluations determine who will
get the preferred assignments after graduation.

These factors have added a note of tension and anxiety as the student cadets go
through their required six-week summer camp here.

That is particularly true of those students who have generous R.O.T.C.
scholarhsips, in return for which they undergo weekly on-campus training and six
weeks of summer camp and may be called on to serve for four years in the active
forces or eight years in the reserves.

After the end of the draft in 1973, enrollment in the training corps plummeted.
In 1967, at the height of the Vietnam war, Army R.O.T.C. enrolled 177,400
cadets, with many having signed up to avoid being drafted. By 1974, enrollment
in Army R.O.T.C. was down to 33,200. The Air Force had a similar experience
while enrollment in the much smaller Navy R.O.T.C. dipped slightly.

In the 1980's, as a new generation of young people without memories of Vietnam
came of military age, Army R.O.T.C. recovered, hitting a peak in 1983 with
73,800 members, then sliding off and stabilizing with enrollment averaging about
63,000. The pattern in the Air Force has been the same but the Navy is up to a
recent high of more than 11,000.

By the end of the month here, eight units of 400 cadets each will have completed
their summer training, shooting rifles, navigating the piney woods, crawling
through red mud, throwing hand grenades, scouting for opposing forces,
patrolling sandy lanes and assaulting hills.

The cadets, 2,600 men and 600 women, have come here from all over the Eastern
seaboard between their junior and senior years in college. Students from the
Midwest and the Pacific coast are being trained in camps at Fort Riley, Kan.,
and Fort Lewis, Wash.

Most cadets will be commissioned as second lieutenants next spring. But only
half of those who apply for four years of active duty will be accepted, down
from 60 percent last year and 70 percent the year before. The rest will go into
the reserves.

Active Duty Is Sought

The Army can afford to be more selective not only because of the quantity and
quality of R.O.T.C. cadets, but also because more lieutenants are staying on
active duty longer and because Congress has ordered cuts in the size of the
officer corps.

Many of the cadets training here said they were eager for the increasingly
scarce active duty assignments. Paul J. Bohr, a student at Princeton University,
said he wanted to be a lieutenant in the infantry or field artillery because of
''the awesome responsibilty that's dropped on your shoulders when you're 21 or
22.''

A senior at Tufts University in Medford, Mass., Maria B. Lodi, who hopes to be
chosen for military intelligence, said she wants to go on active duty ''because
I'm not sure what the market will be for a liberal arts major.''

Women Favor Intelligence

The competition is not only to be selected for active duty, but for a choice
Army branch. Many of the male cadets said they hoped to be chosen for the combat
arms - infantry, field artillery or armor - which were the least popular
branches in the Vietnam War. Among the women, who are not eligible for combat,
military intelligence and the signal corps seem to be among the favorites.

The competition for choice assignments has led some cadets to grumble about the
rating system. Only 10 percent get top grades, another 20 percent are rated
better than average and the remainder are graded as satisfactory. About 10
percent are dismissed, mostly for medical reasons.

''The quota system is Catch-22,'' said Kyle G. Lundstedt of Yale. ''They are
always drilling into your head that you must work as a team, which is an
excellent aspect of the training. But at the same time, we are competing against
the people we're supposed to be helping.''

'It Makes You More Alert'

Several cadets said, for example, that during an exercise known as ''squad in
the attack,'' they did their best to cooperate with the squad leader. This
helped the leader receive a good grade, but the members of each 11-member squad
received no credit for their team spirit.

Walter R. Schwartz, of the University of Pennsylvania, said he liked the
competition because ''it makes you more alert.'' He added, however, ''it can
undermine the natural workings of a squad.''

Defending the system, Lieut. Col. David C. Kirk said: ''There's got to be a
balance between competition and teamwork. They are taught that they must excel
but not at the expense of other people. And if they stay in the Army, they will
be ranked in order throughout their careers.''

'The Hostility Was Open'

The officers at the R.O.T.C. camp said the competitive atmosphere at summer
training here is heightened by the presence of cadets from the more prestigious
colleges, where competition is a way of life.

Cadets from those schools said the R.O.T.C. has slowly gained acceptance on
their campuses. Andrew B. Worden of Harvard, who won the physical fitness award
for his unit, said he had noticed a change in the attitude at Harvard, even
among many students who consider themselves politically liberal.

''Three years ago, the hostility was open,'' he said. ''People really didn't
like it. But now people are positive; when I walk around in my uniform, I get a
thumbs-up. Some people think it's interesting and they always ask why I'm doing
it.''

But Ms. Lodi, of Tufts, said she had been challenged. ''Our campus is pretty
liberal,'' she said, ''and people question why I do it.''

Eight-Year Commitment

Among the prominent schools, enrollment in the R.O.T.C. has not been uniform. A
unit formed at Duke in 1982 enrolled 288 students in 1986, but slipped back this
year to 198 cadets. The unit at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology went
from 81 cadets five years ago to 97 last year and 88 this year. At the
University of California at Berkeley, there were 68 cadets in 1983 and 81 this
year. But enrollment at the University of Michigan dropped from 194 cadets in
1984 to 106 this year.

In exchange for the eight-year commitment, the Army awards scholarships, the
majority for the two final years of college, that cover tuition, books and a
subsistence stipend of $1,000 a year. Cadets without scholarships in the final
two years get the $1,000 allowance. All are paid for summer camp.

David A. Duckenfield, a student at Dartmouth, said that ''in the private
schools, the money is definitely a factor.'' But Daniel W. Evarts of Yale said
he would have joined even without a scholarship. ''I've always wanted to do
something different after I graduate from college,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph shows enrollment in R.O.T.C., from 1967 until 1985 (Sources:
Departments of the Army, Air Force and Navy) (Pg. B7); Photos of cadets taking
part in leader reaction test and physical fitness training test (Pg. B7)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COFFIN RESIGNS TO PRAISE AND CRITICISM

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


There were tears and tributes - and one or two hurrahs - yesterday as the Rev.
William Sloane Coffin stepped up to the pulpit of the Riverside Church and
announced his resignation as the senior minister. Dr. Coffin said he would work
full time for nuclear disarmament.

The reaction of the congregation that filled the majestic sanctuary on the Upper
West Side was perhaps best expressed by one parishioner, 17-year-old Lauren
Gropp, who said: ''Oh no. The church will be boring again!''

In his 10 years at Riverside, Dr. Coffin helped transform it from a wealthy
church built in the 1930's by John D. Rockefeller Jr. into a lively and
ethnically diverse church dedicated to helping the poor, the homeless, those
afflicted with AIDS and refugees from the violence in Central America.

An Ovation

It may also be the only church with a full-time disarmament program that works
toward the goal of a freeze of nuclear weapons.

But these additions to Riverside were not made without battles within the
congregation. And while most people joined in an appreciative standing ovation
after Dr. Coffin announced that he was leaving, there were a handful who said
they will be happy to see him go.

Nearly all 2,500 seats in the Gothic church, inspired by the Cathedral of Notre
Dame at Chartres, were filled yesterday because word had filtered out that Dr.
Coffin would announce that he was becoming the president of a Washington-based
disarmament organization called SANE/Freeze.

''After being in a place for 10 years and you're 63, you've got, maybe, one
biggie left,'' Dr. Coffin, who wore an embroidered stole from Guatemala over his
bright red ministerial gown, explained at a news conference after the morning
service. Leaving Riverside, he added, ''is like leaving home.'' He said, ''One
doesn't like to leave home, but one has to.''

After the announcement, as the congregation rose and applauded, Dr. Coffin
responded by lifting his hands in a V-sign of peace. It was a reminder that he
first came to national attention in the struggle against the Vietnam War in the
1960's.

Led 60's Protests

As the chaplain at Yale University from 1958 to 1976, Dr. Coffin, whose family
founded the W. & J. Sloane furniture stores, led civil-rights marches in the
South and peace rallies in the North. At one march in Boston in 1967, he and the
pediatrician Dr. Benjamin Spock collected 944 draft cards and presented them to
the Justice Department in protest of the war. They were charged with counseling
young men on how to evade the draft. The charges were later dropped.

In his new position, Dr. Coffin will head a peace organization that was formed
recently by the merger of the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy, known as
SANE, and the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign. The organizations have a combined
membership of 180,000. He will begin working for SANE/Freeze on a part-time
basis in September, and work full time after leaving the Riverside Church at the
end of the year.

Dr. Coffin's opponents within the Riverside congregation, who last April called
for his resignation and accused him of bringing ''infamy, disrepute and near
destruction'' to the church, welcomed the announcement of his departure.

''We're glad he took our advice,'' said Bryan Sterling, editor of the newsletter
of the Men's Class, a Bible study group founded in the 1890's. ''We hope that we
get a theologian now instead of a political activist.''

Financial Problems

Dr. Coffin belittled the opposition. ''I don't think 4 1/2 people could have
chased me out,'' he said, insisting that his resignation had nothing to do with
those charges. He acknowledged that the church was in a ''fiscal crisis,'' with
a deficit of $1.2 million in its $7.4 million budget, but said that ''the
pathway out of the financial woods is visible.''

The president of the church board of trustees, Cheryl Parkham, said a
combination of fund-raising and austerity programs were being put in place to
eliminate the deficit.

The vice chairwoman of the board of deacons, Margo Neale, said an interim
minister would probably be appointed as the search for a successor to Dr. Coffin
gets under way. She said the search was expected to take more than a year.

The lay leaders said that despite opposition within the church, Riverside would
continue with the programs that were started under Dr. Coffin.

Kermit Boston, chairman of the board of deacons, said the church would continue
its ''partnership'' with Dr. Coffin in ''strengthening and nurturing the
diversity that makes this church so special a place to worship.''

Dr. Coffin uncharacteristically steered away from controversy yesterday in his
sermon, which addressed his decision to resign with the question: ''How do any
of us decide what to do with our lives?''

''God presents us with choices we have to make ourselves,'' he said. ''I believe
that God calls each of us to be a co-creator, to help make the crooked straight
and the rough places plain, to exalt the valleys and not to be deterred by high
mountains.''

Dr. Coffin said his decision was determined by a world living in ''the shadow of
Doomsday,'' in which poverty is not addressed and nuclear arsenals are bulging.

''It's not easy, in fact it is heart-wrenching to leave,'' he said. ''Still,
like Abraham, one has to move on if you think that's what God wants you to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORKERS LEARN TO PROTECT THEMSELVES AT GUN SCHOOL

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


David Scott says he is ''not into macho stuff.'' He became a vegetarian 12 years
ago because ''I don't believe in killing animals.'' He practices yoga. He spends
several months every year at a retreat in upstate New York where he does nothing
but meditate.

Yesterday, he learned how to handle his .357-caliber revolver - one of two guns
he owns.

''It's awful to consider that this city is such a place that I have to do
this,'' said Mr. Scott, a 37-year-old Brooklyn resident who is concerned about
holdups at the ''trendy vintage clothing store'' he owns in Park Slope. ''I
guess I don't really have to, but I sleep better knowing I have a gun in the
house.''

Mr. Scott was one of 10 gun owners who each paid $175 to enroll in a daylong
class in ''defensive pistolcraft'' at a Manhattan shooting range. Except for the
gun cases they brought with them - which looked like briefcases, not weapons
containers - they looked like pupils who could have been there for instruction
in a foreign language or ballroom dancing.

Ear Protectors Necessary

That was before they lifted out their guns and clamped on their ear protectors -
revolvers are quieter than rifles but far from noiseless - at the West Side
Rifle and Pistol Range, on 20th Street between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of
the Americas.

The students listened as two instructors demonstrated, step by step, the right
way to load and shoot. One of the instructors, John S. Farnam, spent time
discussing ''how a handgun fits into this society today'' and ''having a gun
around the house.'' He also talked about the legal aspects of the use of force.
And both cautioned the students about psychological and physiological
distortions that the body experiences under stress.

Later the students practiced firing at targets that flashed across the shooting
range. One target looked like a criminal, another a movie cameraman. The idea
was to be quick enough to shoot the criminal but not the cameraman.

''We get very few mistakes,'' said the other instructor, Emanuel Kapelsohn.

Mr. Farnam said the most important requirement for students was the lack of a
criminal record. They were also required to provide their own weapons and 300
rounds of ammunition.

Mr. Farnam said there were no ''never-evers'' in yesterday's class. That is what
he calls students who have never taken their guns out of the box.

The instructors said there had not been a surge of interest in the wake of the
Bernhard H. Goetz case. ''What stimulates an increase in sales is some terrible
crime like a murder,'' said Mr. Farnam, who lives in Niwot, Colo., and travels
around the country, giving weapons classes and making videos about firearms.
''It could be that the Goetz case did that around here, but I don't think so.''

Mr. Farnam - who is 42 years old and won three Purple Hearts in Vietnam, where
he was a Marine second lieutenant - told the students that their goal should be
to defend themselves in circumstances ''where you would certainly die
otherwise.'' He said that in such situations, ''the danger is lethal, imminent,
substantive and otherwise unavoidable.''

Mugged 3 Times

''Those of us in Colorado get the impression that everyone in New York City gets
mugged three or four times a day,'' Mr. Farnam said. ''I guess your chances of
walking three blocks and being mugged are really about the same as being struck
by lightning, but when it's you you're talking about, your chances of being
mugged are 100 percent.''

Mr. Scott said he had been mugged three times. ''Once I was jumped by four guys
who beat me up pretty badly,'' he said. But he said that was not why he bought
his guns. Rather, it was concern about the safety of employees at his store.

If the class is any indication, the couple that shoots together stays together.
Eileen Jennings and her fiance, Bill Cunningham, began going to the shooting
range together several years ago. She said she was once so interested in guns
that she considered becoming a police officer. She took the examination but
ultimately dropped her application because she felt that ''just having an
interest in guns is not enough to be a police officer.'' She is now a social
worker.

''I felt I should know how to handle a gun'' in real-life situations, Ms.
Jennings said, explaining why she enrolled in yesterday's class. ''I have no
wish to use it.''

'My Husband's Idea'

Betty Silbergleith, an office manager for a Manhattan environmental testing
laboratory, said that taking the class was ''my husband's idea.'' She said she
had tried karate and swimming but found that neither required the
''concentration and assertiveness'' that it takes to aim and shoot a gun.

Mrs. Silbergleith said she learned a lot in yesterday's classroom session, which
preceded the hands-on time in the shooting range.

''There were some things I'd never thought about, like after you pull the
trigger where the bullet goes,'' she said. ''They talked about an accidental
discharge where the bullet went through several thick walls in an apartment. I'd
never thought about it.''

Later, as some of the students fired practice shots, Mr. Farnam was asked if he
makes a good living.

''No,'' Mr. Farnam said. ''By New York standards is this the big bucks? No. I
make no excuses for my life, I have fun doing this, and we know that when we
turn these people out, they're less likely to shoot someone than when they came
in.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of gun school instructors and students (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)
(Pp. B1 and B5)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Issue in Nicaragua Isn't Communism

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 349 words


To the Editor:

The Rev. George W. Webber's humane and principled letter (''Reappraise the
Sandinista 'Evil Image,' '' June 30) misses a crucial point about the debate.
Once the label ''Communist,'' which Mr. Webber seems willing to accept for
Nicaragua, attaches to a government in the minds of many North Americans, humane
considerations become irrelevant. The fear of this devil justifies any
infringement of human rights in third world countries. McCarthyism can still
take a large bite out of any politician who forgets the power of that label.

The ironic thing is that the label doesn't fit. Nicaragua uses a cooperative
farm system, not a collective farm system. Sixty percent of businesses in that
country are privately owned. If that's Communism, it sure isn't the kind I
learned about in school.

Many people emphasize that Nicaragua gets arms and advisers from the Soviet
Union and Cuba. But that doesn't mean the Sandinistas are Communists, any more
than the fact that the United States provides arms to the Afghan guerrillas
means that they are capitalists. Meanwhile, the hundreds of millions of dollars
in nonmilitary aid that Nicaragua has received from Western European nations is
hardly ever mentioned. The war has been sold, deceptively, as an anti-Communist
crusade.

Given the contras' lack of military and political success, a far more accurate
label would be ''no-win war.'' The only conceivable value of the contras' effort
is to put pressure on Nicaragua to negotiate a settlement that is as acceptable
as possible to the United States Government. But since President Reagan refuses
to negotiate, it appears that he wants a military solution - and the one that
seems most likely is a repeat of Vietnam.

Labels are important. If Europe had viewed our Civil War as a battle for
independence instead of a war against slavery, the South might have had powerful
allies and the outcome might have been different. I applaud the efforts of
people like Mr. Webber, but they are peripheral to the heart of the debate.

WILLIAM L. SCHLOSSER
Indianapolis, July 1, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
A Ship on His Shoulder

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 750 words


The United States is going to reflag oil tankers belonging to Kuwait. This is a
boon to Kuwait, which gets the U.S. Navy for its very own, and for Scrabble
players, who can now make ''reflag,'' ''reflags,'' ''reflagged,'' ''reflagging''
and ''reflaggings'' without being put out of the game at gunpoint.

Kuwaiti tankers that are not reflagged will give us the word ''unreflagged.'' If
the President later calls off the reflagging we will have ''disreflagging.'' Try
saying it out loud: ''disreflagging.'' Makes your mouth tired, doesn't it?
Reflagging is a high-tech version of something tough guys used to do in the
schoolyard. One boy put a chip on his shoulder and dared another, usually a
small anemic boy, to ''go ahead and knock it off if you think you're tough
enough.''

No fooling; boys really did that once, but not often with wood chips, which were
not easy to find. A schoolyard Dempsey once challenged me by putting his
handkerchief on his shoulder.

After the weapons of choice for schoolyard tough guys shifted from fists to
pistols and stilettos, the old chip-on-shoulder gambit went the way of helping a
blind woman to cross the street without knocking her down and stealing her
purse.

But back to reflagging: What the U.S. is doing is putting a Kuwaiti tanker on
its shoulder and daring the Ayatollah to knock it off if he thinks he's tough
enough.

The people behind this idea say there isn't much risk the Ayatollah will do it.
They say he knows he isn't tough enough. They say good sense will probably
prevail.

They must know something the rest of us don't. Our past experience with the
Ayatollah suggests only one certainty: to wit, that in Iran good sense will
never prevail when dealing with the United States.

Long before reflagging was invented, Iran regularly blasted Kuwaiti tankers in
the Persian Gulf. This was not pure Iranian nastiness. Kuwait's big oil money
helps pay for Iraq's war against Iran. You can see how Iranians might feel
justified in blasting the tankers.

So look what we have: After losing tankers because it sides with Iraq, Kuwait
persuades us to put U.S. flags on Kuwaiti ships, so that Iranian attackers will
hereafter be attacking U.S. tankers, thus knocking the chip off President
Reagan's shoulder. What then? Since doing nothing would raise humiliating
questions about why he issued a dare to the Ayatollah in the first place, he
would presumably have to do something. Chances are he would do something robust
with explosives.

For years Americans of bellicose disposition have favored the ''surgical
strike'' in cases like this.

Warplanes with the latest high-tech gear might be summoned to reduce a few
Iranian bases. Airplanes are much favored for surgical strikes, but a battleship
firing gigantic shells was used off the Lebanese coast a few years ago with
devastating effect upon inland Bedouin camps.

The surgical strike is the seductive dream of people with high-tech weapons at
their disposal. Dating from the Vietnam War, the phrase ''surgical strike''
sounds so efficient, so scientific, so clean. (''We'll just go in there and
clear out that bothersome old appendix, and you'll be good as new in a day or
two.'') So doubtless one of the choices offered the President, should the
Iranians behave irrationally about reflagged tankers, will be the famous
surgical strike.

Ah, trouble, your name is Surgical Strike.

A President who is thinking about dealing with the world's Irans with surgical
strikes is like a person whose doorbell is being rung by a friend bearing a
kitten. In either case, you had better have a firm policy prepared in advance or
you are in for trouble.

The kitten will be irresistible, but do you realize that a kitten turns very
quickly into a cat and will remain with you for the next 15 years, shredding the
upholstery, spreading fumes from parlor to bedroom, repelling friends with cat
allergies and requiring constant care until you are thick, bent and wan with
age? If so, you may accept the kitten anyhow, but you do so wisely prepared to
accept long years of anguish.

Long years of anguish: so many Presidents since World War II have suffered them
after choosing the surgical-strike policy against countries not much bigger than
Grenada. You might suppose that before letting themselves in for such pain,
Presidents nowadays would first make sure the country is willing to put up with
whatever may come.

Everybody out there ready to persevere in case the Ayatollah doesn't behave
sensibly?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 22, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

UBON RATCHATHANI JOURNAL;
ON WEEPING PRAIRIE, WILL A SHOWER OF CASH HELP?

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: UBON RATCHATHANI, Thailand


They call this Issan, the vast, flat northeast of Thailand where few crops but
all manner of problems grow.

It was here, under the sweeping arc of the Mekong River flowing between Thailand
and Laos, that a Communist insurgency flourished a decade ago, tapping the
misery of hungry people rapidly being left behind by urban progress.

From Issan (it is a Thai word pronounced EE-sahn that means ''large and
prosperous'') still come the poorly paid housemaids, the masseuses and
prostitutes, the odd-job laborers and other dispossessed and displaced rural
people who crowd into Bangkok's slums and listen to sad songs of country life.

In Issan children sometimes starve; skeletal widows in barren huts are
photographed by crusading newspapers to remind city readers that the Northeast,
a third of Thailand's territory, has become its Appalachia.

The Weeping Prairie

Issan's unyielding plains, stretching northwest and west of here toward Khon
Kaen and Nakhon Ratchasima, are known as the Weeping Prairie. There, the earth
cracks in months of drought, or is washed away by monsoon floods.

Thailand faces its only strategic threat in the Northeast, where Vietnamese
gunners are dug into the hills that form a land border with Cambodia. Several
Thai military leaders say they fear Hanoi would like to annex the area to
complete its Indochinese empire.

This month, as the people of Issan celebrate the arrival of the summer rains and
the planting of the rice crop that will keep them alive next year, the Thai
Government begins work on its largest and most comprehensive national
development project: the ''greening'' of the Northeast.

More than $550 million has been committed to Issan. It will be spent on well
drilling in regions around Nakhon Ratchasima, Khon Kaen, Mahasarakham and
Roi-Et, where there is a severe shortage of drinking water. Dams, reservoirs and
irrigation channels are in the master plan.

The Government's budget will also pay for reforestation, raising the percentage
of forested area from 14 to 25 percent by 1992, the planners hope.

Tourism Is Promoted

To encourage new sources of income, tourism is also being promoted for the first
time in the Northeast. Most of Thailand's most impressive ancient ruins are
here: Khmer temples in the style of Angkor in Cambodia, cave paintings and the
remains of the mysterious Bronze Age culture of Ban Chieng.

A slow process of restoration is beginning on some of them. Through years of
neglect, ancient monuments have deteriorated and been looted.

Taking a cue from Vietnam, which wants to encourage Americans to come back as
tourists, people of the Northeast say their region is a natural stop for
veterans from the United States.

Huge American bases once marked the landscape in several towns, bringing jobs
and entertainment. American engineers built Issan's superior roads and almost
all of its airports.

Issan has a limited general allure, however, Veerayuth Photi-Art said as he
guided an experimental group of wealthy people from Bangkok into the Mekong
River valley, the region's most scenic terrain. Most of them, all Thais, had
never been here.

''The Northeast is hard to sell,'' said Mr. Veerayuth, who works for Thailand's
domestic airline. ''The distances are great, the hotels are not up to Bangkok
standards. We have to combine a tour with an important festival.''

Authenticity Still Prevails

His charges had come to see Ubon Ratchathani's Khao Phansa, the Northeastern
celebration of the beginning of the rainy season and a festival called Buddhist
Lent. In Issan, authenticity still prevails over commercialization, and the
Bangkok tourists were charmed.

A procession of candles is the highlight of this festival, a time during which
young men, having planted the family's rice fields, enter the monkhood for study
and meditation in the three months of rain.

What used to be simply giving a gift of light to illuminate the gloomy days of
monastic retreat has turned into a competition among provincial towns to produce
the most complex and stunning wax carving.

The competing candles - set on wax fountains or lotuses or statues of kings and
gods from Khmer-Hindu mythology - are paraded through this provincial capital on
floats, to the accompaniment of children dancing the traditional dances of a
farming society. Their movements symbolize the planting and harvesting of crops,
the weaving of silk and other rituals of daily life.

Gifts are still brought to the monks, however, and these are displayed by their
donors, marching in the candle procession.

This being the straitened Northeast, the gifts are practical offerings cloaked
in cellophane: detergent, toilet paper, toothpaste and hand soap were carried
proudly through Ubon Ratchathani's streets to its temples.

A Sense of Hope

This year, the pre-Lenten celebrations got a special lift from the news of the
Government's plans for the region, which were made public just before the
festival week began. Local officials radiated a sense of hope.

But ''the greening of the Northeast'' has run into controversy in Bangkok
because of the dominant role the Thai Army wants to take in the project. Army
trucks and bulldozers have already rumbled into Issan, the enthusiastic vanguard
of development.

To civilian political leaders and social scientists, the project appears to be
turning into a military ploy to usurp the role of Government institutions while
building a popular base in the Northeast for the army Commander in Chief, Gen.
Chavalit Yongchaiyudh.

General Chavalit, who has been critical of what he believes are ''do nothing''
politicans, responds that the army became involved only because King Bhumibol
Adulyadej asked him to do something about deprivation in the Northeast.

This year the King's will turn 60, an auspicious year for Thais. The army says
it is speeding the process to honor the King.

In Thailand, where the monarchy is sacred, it is hard to take issue with that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of farmer's shack in ricefields in Issan (NYT/Barbara Crossette);
Map shows location of Ubon Ratchathani (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 22, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'Robocop' in First Place In Box Office Sales

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 21


''Robocop,'' the story of a half-man, half-robot police officer battling evil in
a futuristic Detroit, earned $8 million over the weekend to take first place at
the box office, spoiling the much-publicized 50th anniversary re-release of
''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.''

The Walt Disney classic, which cost $1.5 million to make in 1937, came in second
for the week, earning $7.5 million in ticket sales.

''Jaws the Revenge,'' the fourth movie starring the voracious man-eater, sold
$7.1 million worth of tickets in its opening week to take third place. ''Revenge
of the Nerds II'' dropped to fourth place, with $4.6 million in ticket sales,
and ''Full Metal Jacket,'' Stanley Kubrick's Vietnam War film, was in fifth
place at the box office with $4.5 million in ticket sales.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 23, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY ENTERS GULF WITHOUT INCIDENT

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words

DATELINE: KUWAIT, July 22


Within striking range of Iranian bases and with their crews at a high state of
alert, three United States warships escorted two re-registered Kuwaiti tankers
into the Persian Gulf today.

The Defense Department in Washington said there was no attempt to interfere with
or intercept the convoy.

The display of what the Reagan Administration has depicted as American resolve
to counter Soviet influence in the region met with no Iranian interference as
the convoy passed through the narrow Strait of Hormuz at the entrance to the
gulf, according to shipping officials in the region.

American warships took the lead, central and rear positions in the convoy, with
the unloaded tankers sandwiched between, the officials said. [Reuters said that
the convoy was shadowed by a Soviet Krivak-class frigate, which pulled to within
about 1,500 yards of the port side of the United States Navy destroyer Kidd
before steaming away.] Dangerous Part of Voyage The Strait of Hormuz is
considered by shipping experts to be the most dangerous part of the convoy's
600-mile voyage to oil terminals in Kuwait since deep sea channels lie only 14
miles from the Iranian mainland. Iran has tested and practiced assembling
Chinese-supplied Silkworm anti-ship missiles along the shores of the strait
recently.

Iran, moreover, has said it will not shy from challenging the American presence
in the gulf and has challenged the American decision to put Kuwaiti tankers
under the American flag since Kuwait has sided with Baghdad in the seven-year
Iran-Iraq war.

Despite the threats, shipping officials in the gulf, who declined to be
identified by name, said the Iranian Navy withdrew from the 24-mile-wide Strait
of Hormuz several hours before the American-led convoy approached. And the
Pentagon spokesman said there was no sign that the Iranians had tried to prepare
their Silkworms for use.

Western and regional diplomats here said they had not expected the Iranians to
challenge the re-registered vessels at the start of the operation.

A Complex Agreement

Under a complex agreement entitling the vessels to American naval protection,
the United States flag was hoisted yesterday on the Kuwaiti tankers - the
401,382-ton Bridgeton and the 46,723-ton Gas Prince shortly after the United
Nations Security Council ordered a cease-fire in the war between Iran and Iraq,
which has made gulf shipping perilous because both sides have attacked the
other's shipping.

There was little sign today of the cease-fire taking root. Both Iran and Iraq
reported renewed fighting on differing fronts of the land war between them.
Additionally, Iraq formally qualified its acceptance of the United Nations peace
demand, making it dependent on Teheran's agreement to ''implement
unconditionally'' the Security Council order, while Iran renewed hostility to
the call.

Iranian radio broadcasts and news agency reports quoted President Hojatolislam
Ali Khamenei as saying Teheran's Islamic leaders would never accept the United
Nations action and would continue the war ''until the elimination of the regime
governing Iraq.''

Teheran, moreover, continued verbal attacks on the American move, which has
drawn Congressional criticism in Washington.

Flag Is No 'Criterion'

''Any continued fire-kindling in the gulf will be decisively answered,'' Teheran
Radio said. ''As has been shown, the flag of no country will be the criterion of
political consideration.'' Iran attacked a Soviet freighter May 6 in what was
described as an accident, and an Iraqi warplane attacked the American frigate
Stark, killing 37 American crewmen.

''If the big shots in Washington think they can make the Islamic Republic bow to
their oppressive policies by military display and threats, much more bitter
consequences than the experiences of Lebanon or Vietnam await them,'' the
Teheran radio said.

Discussing the American escort operation today in Washington, a Defense
Department spokesman, Robert Sims, said the naval vessels were at a state of
alert just below ''general quarters,'' which meant their watertight bulkheads
were closed and all crewmembers were at battle stations.

The spokesman said the American sailors would be on a slightly lower state of
alert for the rest of the voyage. But, the spokesman said the convoy would
remain supported by Awacs aircraft based in Saudi Arabia and other American
vessels in the region.

Under arrangements for their registration as American vessels, the ships have
been put in the control of masters, the commercial equivalent of ship captains,
who are American civilians. There is also a Navy officer aboard each of the two
tankers to speak for the vessels in case they are challenged by Iranian forces,
according to reporters traveling with the convoy. The others aboard the tankers
are non-Americans.

Warplanes Fly Overhead

Shipping officials in the Gulf said American warplanes from the carrier
Constellation flew patrols over the vessels as they headed for the Strait of
Hormuz.

The air cover was reportedly suspended as the convoy passed through the strait
because of air space restrictions there. The re-registered Kuwaiti tankers were
escorted by the guided-missile cruiser Fox, the frigate Crommellin and the
destroyer Kidd.

Abandoning usual practices, the convoy made no halt in the lower gulf after
passing through the strait, and headed for Kuwait along the waterway's southern
coastline.

The convoy, however, is still in waters where Iranian revolutionary guards have
mounted hit-and-run attacks from small, fast vessels. The United States escort
is supposed to peel away and leave the protection of the tankers to Kuwaiti
vessels once they enter Kuwait's 12-mile territorial limit.

Apart from the American vessels in the gulf, Britain and France also maintain a
naval presence to protect their commercial shipping. After Iran boarded a Soviet
vessel last year, the Soviet Union has, for the first time, also established a
naval presence of seven warships in or near the gulf.

In the land war between Iran and Iraq, Teheran said it inflicted heavy losses on
Iraqi soldiers attacking Iranian positions on Iraq's occupied Fao Penisula.
Iraq, meanwhile, said it repulsed an Iranian assault in the Sumar area, 80 miles
northeast of Baghdad.

An Iranian leader accused the United States today of violating the United
Nations Security Council resolution ordering a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war.

Prime Minister Mir-Hossein Mousavi, quoted by the Iranian news agency IRNA, said
that no sooner had the resolution been approved than the United States had
trampled on it.

U.S. Officials Encouraged WASHINGTON, July 22 (Special to The New York Times) -
Senior American military officials were encouraged by the Iranian behavior in
the face of the convoy, which passed through the Strait of Hormuz during
daylight and apparently approached within a mile of the exclusion zone declared
by Iran.

Mr. Sims, the Pentagon spokesman, said that at times the Iranians did have
aircraft patrolling the area, but he said this activity was no heavier than
normal. He said the Iranians made no attempt to bring their Silkworm missiles to
readiness at sites that have been prepared overlooking the strait.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo shows meeting of Iraqi's National Assembly, which discussed U.N.
Security Counsel resolution of end Gulf war (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 23, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ALSO AT RISK IN THE GULF: U.S. DETERRENT STRATEGY

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 22


More than the Kuwaiti tankers sailing under the American flag were put at risk
today when the United States naval escort program got under way in the Persian
Gulf. The assumptions upon which the United States has based its deterrent
strategy in the gulf - that its willingness to use naval might to protect the
tankers and to retaliate if attacked will deter Iran from taking hostile action
-will also be tested.

Most senior military officers, in and out of Washington, agree that Iran is not
likely to attack the first convoys, but many of them take Iranian threats
seriously and doubt that over the long run the Administration's strategy of
deterrence will prevent attacks.

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. William J. Crowe, has said that
the expanded American role in the gulf is not without risk, but that he is
confident the naval escort for the oil tankers can cope with any threat to
American-flag ships. Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger has said American
forces will take prompt military action if they come under imminent threat of
attack.

But it remains open to question whether a strategy of deterrence, which is based
on convincing potential enemies that the cost of attacking American forces or
targets under their protection would be intolerably high and painful, will work
against a country like Iran that sees nothing to lose by being hostile to the
United States. Senior military officers, who are uneasy with the commitment the
United States has now assumed in the gulf, doubt it because they do not believe
the Iranian leadership is intimidated by the American buildup in the region.

Not Intimidated, Not Deterred

The general feeling among these officers is that in the long run the deterrence
strategy will not prevent attacks. ''If the Iranians are not intimidated,'' one
admiral said, ''they won't be deterred.''

At some point, they say, the Iranians will seek to humiliate the United States
and the cost to themselves will be of no consequence. A suicide or terrorist act
against a symbolic American target such as one of the ships in the gulf is seen
as the most likely form of attack.

Many military men are worried by the analogy of Vietnam. In that case,
deterrence failed as a strategy against North Vietnam early in the 1960's
because Hanoi was not intimidated by the American threat to use force if it did
not end its support of the Vietcong in South Vietnam. When deterrence failed,
the United States entered the war as the price of that failure.

The North Vietnamese, however, were prepared not only to endure the American
punishment that folowed, but also to match and better it. They did so until the
United States was forced to back out of the struggle. The threat of force did
not deter the North Vietnamese, and when deterrence failed, the use of force did
not defeat them.

Grenada and Libya Cited

Periodically, the United States has demonstrated that deterrence strategies in
other conventional-warfare situations are not based upon bluff, and it has shown
both its ability and willingness to use force. The invasion of Grenada in 1983
and the air attacks on Libya last year served that purpose, in addition to their
announced purposes.

Iran, however, has already shown its ability to endure severe punishment in its
war with Iraq. The Iranians have suffered hundreds of thousands of battle
casualties in successive, futile offensives against the Iraqis and have shown no
loss of their Islamic revolutionary zeal. In the last year Iran has also endured
Iraqi bombing raids, which rival the intensity of the American air campaign over
Vietnam. Short of all-out war, it is hard to imagine what the United States
could do to retaliate against an attack by the Iranians that would be beyond
their limits of endurance.

Senior officers say the Vietnam lesson and Iraq's experience in fighting Iran
are useful in assessing Teheran's likely response to what it considers an
American challenge in the Persian Gulf. To conclude that the Iranian leadership
will be deterred from striking at Americans because of American statements of
resolve and military posturing in the gulf, they say, puts too much emphasis on
the uncertain logic of deterrence and none at all on the political and
psychological motivation of the Iranians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE 'OLLIE' AND CONGRESS MINISERIES: FOUR POSTMORTEMS;
The Colonel Frightened Me

BYLINE: By Michael Norman; Michael Norman, a former New York Times reporter, is
writing a book about 12 comrades from Vietnam who served with him in Golf
Company, 2d Battallion, 9th Marines in 1968.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 629 words


I once wore the same uniform as Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North and walked in the
same bloody fields. Listening to him on television, I heard in his voice the
echo of the past, and I looked at my two sons and was afraid.

Although combat always marks a man - ''like the grooves of a gramophone
record,'' wrote one British veteran of World War I - only some of the survivors
are easy to read: Those who have seen too much combat and those who have not
seen enough.

The former sleep in mental wards or seek the quiet of the woods. They still have
hollow eyes, ''the 2,000-yard stare,'' as it was called in World War II.
Sometimes these haunted take their own lives. Three years after World War I,
Lieut. Col. Charles White Whittlesey, a Manhattan lawyer and an officer in New
York's famed 77th Division, boarded the steamer Toloa bound for Cuba and that
night slipped from his cabin and threw himself over the rail.

Colonel Whittlesey, commander of the so-called Lost Battalion, led a unit of 554
men into a trap. The unit fought valiantly and the Colonel won the Congressional
Medal of Honor, but only 154 of his comrades walked away from that battle. No
one knows why the commander later killed himself. Perhaps he had only one answer
for the wanton slaughter that is war.

Men who have not seen enough combat, on the other hand, come home belligerent.
They may have had several tours on the battlefield and even been wounded - as
was the Colonel, twice - but somehow the fighting did not sober them. Perhaps
they still need to perform some great deed of arms, still need to prove
themselves. Or perhaps they had faltered in their first action and want another
chance to wipe away the shame. Most, I suspect, are just plain angry. They have
spent years choking on the excess animus left from a defeat. In short, they
survived Vietnam but are still full of fight.

Oliver North reminds me of men like this, men who have seen corpses stacked like
cordwood on the fender of a tank and years later still shake their sabers.

''I honestly believe that any soldier who has ever been to a war truly hopes he
will never see one again,'' the Colonel told his Congressional interrogators,
and then he went on to detail how he not only organized an effort to wage
another war but violated his country's laws to fund it.

He called the men he served with in combat ''some of the finest people in the
world'' and said some of them have written him with stories of their families
and memories of ''the horrors we lived through.'' And yet he still proclaimed
himself ''action-oriented,'' an officer who followed orders, ''saluted smartly
and charged up the hill.''

I am not that kind of former Marine. Combat made me a skeptic. When the tin drum
of authority now begins to beat, I join the ranks of those who guard against
waste and demand an explanation. The Colonel's talk of ''freedom-fighters'' and
''Communist enemies'' frightened me. This was the way officers new to the field
in Vietnam used to talk before they spent their own lives or the lives of their
men.

Perhaps my pacifism is as predictable a response to slaughter and sacrifice as
is Colonel North's resolve to finish a fight. Twenty years after World War I, at
a reunion of the Lost Battalion, Colonel Whittlesey's former comrades were asked
if they would ever fight again. Definitely not, said one. ''I'm the most ardent
pacifist in Rochester.''

But I am still troubled by the echoes from my past and the testimony of the man
wearing Marine Corps green. Dark clouds have gathered over Central America and
men like Oliver North have been busy seeding them for rain.

I wonder if he would have been as quick to send the sons of his brother Marines
onto a bloody field south of here as he was those young Nicaraguans. <

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS: WILLIAM STEELE SESSIONS;
A Tough Nominee for F.B.I.

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, July 24


The man President Reagan selected today to be the new Director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, Judge William Steele Sessions of San Antonio, is a
minister's son who is known as a stern but scrupulously fair judge.

Lawyers who have argued cases before him say that if his demeanor in 12 years on
the Federal District Court in El Paso and San Antonio is any indication, he will
brook no nonsense from criminals or the layered bureaucracy of the F.B.I.

But probably no one knows better the quality of his discipline than his eldest
son, William Lewis Sessions, now a lawyer in San Antonio.

''My father has drilled honesty into me from Day 1,'' the son said today, adding
that childhood infractions were met with stern penalties that have never been
forgotten.

Announcement by Reagan

In announcing the choice of Judge Sessions to replace William H. Webster as head
the F.B.I., Mr. Reagan said in a ceremony at the White House, ''Judge Sessions
has established himself as a fair-minded, tough prosecutor and one of the finest
Federal judges on the bench today.'' White House and Justice Department
officials expressed confidence of quick Senate confirmation of the judge. [Page
10.] There are actually two Judge Sessions. The one who sits on the bench is all
business, ramrod straight, even-tempered, running a tight ship without
succumbing to the overbearing arrogance of some judges. But off the bench, he
turns into just plain Bill Sessions to friends, an easygoing man with a quick
laugh who often can be found working in his yard in Alamo Heights or washing his
blue 1969 Chevrolet.

At 57, he is an avid mountaineer and neither drinks nor smokes; his chief vice
appears to be chocolate ice cream.

Judge Sessions, a moderate Republican, has won the respect of lawyers in San
Antonio, even those on the losing sides of cases. ''He's all business on that
bench,'' said Roy Barrera Sr., a leading criminal defense lawyer. ''He is not
overbearing, he does not embarrass you. He is very even-handed and unemotional.
He doesn't reflect anything about what he thinks.''

Maury Maverick Jr., a civil liberties lawyer, recalls battling Judge Sessions in
draft resistance cases when the judge was the United States Attorney in San
Antonio in the Vietnam War. ''I was representing conscientious objectors and we
fought each other tooth and toenail,'' Mr. Maverick said. ''But I found him to
be tough yet fair. His style is not to bully, but if you are a crook and stick
your neck in a noose he will hang you and smile like Jesus while he's doing
it.''

''Lawyers can be needlessly cruel,'' he added. ''But I never saw him sticking
knives in anyone's back. We are philosophically 100 degrees opposite, but he
never pulled any cute tricks while I was fighting him.''

Trial in Slaying of Judge

But Judge Sessions has earned a reputation as being tough on criminals. He drew
national attention in 1982 when he presided over the trials of four people
charged in the 1979 assassination of Judge John H. Wood Jr., his predecessor as
chief judge for the Western District of Texas.

Defense lawyers contended that he should have disqualified himself because of
his friendship with the slain judge, but Judge Sessions refused and his decision
was upheld by the Supreme Court.

Charles V. Harrelson, who was convicted of killing Judge Wood for a $250,000
payoff, was sentenced to consecutive life terms. Two other persons were
convicted on conspirary charges. In a separate trial Jamiel (Jimmy) Chagra, a
convicted drug dealer who was charged with paying Mr. Harrelson to kill the
judge, was convicted of obstructing justice in the slaying. Judge Sessions
sentenced them to terms ranging from 15 to 30 years. Served in Justice Dept.
William Sessions was born on May 27, 1930, in Fort Smith, Ark., the son of Will
A. Session Jr., a minister with the Disciples of Christ church, and his wife,
the former Edith Steele. He grew up mostly in Kansas City, where he went to high
school, and then enlisted in the Air Force. He spent five years with the Air
Force, serving as a radar instructor and rising to the rank of captain. In 1952,
while in the service, he married Alice June Lewis.

The couple settled in Waco, where he completed college and then law school, in
1958, at Baylor University. After 10 years of law practice in Waco, he went to
Washington to work in the Justice Department as chief of the government
operations section of the criminal division. In that job he directed
prosecutions of a large backlog of cases involving draft evasion, obscenity and
voter fraud.

He was then appointed United States Attorney for the Western District of Texas
by President Nixon, and the family moved to San Antonio in 1971. In this job, he
helped send George and Archer Parr, prominent figures in Duval County, to jail
on corruption charges.

On Dec. 24, 1974, President Ford appointed him a district judge. He served first
in El Paso and later in San Antonio as the chief judge of the Western District.

'Loves Being a Judge'

Judge Sessions is better known as a legal administrator than legal scholar. ''He
loves being a judge,'' said one former judge, who also described him as ''rather
formal, but pleasant, the consumate jurist.''

Judge Sessions has occasionally clashed with the press. In the Judge Wood murder
trial, he reprimanded the lawyers on both sides for talking to reporters and
later prohibited reporters from repeatedly asking jurors for interviews if they
first refused to talk.

Friends and family say he is voracious reader, with particular interests in
Winston Churchill, American history and politics. He also has a fascination for
words and is an expert Scrabble player. He loves card games, particularly
cribbage, hearts and bridge.

His hair is thinning and gray, but Judge Sessions is a tall athletic man who
still can play basketball better than his sons and who walks with a vigorous
stride. He has twice climbed to the base camp on Mt. Everest in Nepal.

The Sessionses have four children: William Lewis, 33 years old, and Mark
Gregory, 29, who are law partners in San Antonio; Peter Anderson, 32, who works
for Southwestern Bell in New Jersey, and Sara Anne, 17, a ballet dancer who, in
the words of son William, is the ''extra twinkle in my dad's eye.'' They have
four grandchildren.

Did the son know of any skeletons in his father's closet? None, he said, except
the plastic one that his grandson gave him the other day to satisfy the Senate
confirmation hearings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Steele (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

General to Visit Hanoi On Missing

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 243 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


President Reagan announced today that his special envoy, Gen. John A. Vessey,
would travel to Hanoi next month in an attempt to revive negotiations over
missing American servicemen.

The announcement indicated that Vietnam had ended an attempt to link the
high-level talks to economic assistance and political concerns, including the
war in Cambodia.

A senior White House official said General Vessey, a retired officer and former
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, would seek the resumption of technical
talks on identifying the remains of missing American servicemen or prisoners of
war. Vietnam broke off such talks in October, when American officials asserted
that Hanoi was stalling to gain concessions on other issues.

''Both sides have agreed that these discussions on humanitarian issues should
not be linked to any outstanding normalization of relations or the Cambodian
qustions,'' said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman.

The visit, which was arranged in recent weeks, will take place Aug. 1-3.

American estimates placed the number of United States servicemen who are missing
from the Vietnam War or failed to return from prisoner-of-war camps at 2,500. In
September, the Pentagon said intelligence files and other evidence indicated
that some American prisoners of war were still alive in Southeast Asia and that
''a large volume of evidence'' points to the likelihood that they are being held
by the Vietnamese Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Dioxin Levels Found In Vietnam Veterans Termed Not Unusual

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 298 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, July 24


Preliminary results of a study of 444 Vietnam veterans who may have been exposed
to the herbicide Agent Orange show that very few veterans have unusually high
levels of dioxin, the potentially harmful chemical in the herbicide, researchers
said today.

Blood tests were performed on 444 combat veterans who served in areas where
Agent Orange was sprayed. The chemical was used widely in Vietnam to destroy
jungle plant cover that concealed enemy troop movements from the air.

Only one of the veterans tested showed a dioxin level higher than the expected
range for Americans with no known exposure, the Centers for Disease Control
reported. That veteran showed a dioxin level of 25 parts per trillion. The
expected range for Americans with no known exposure is from zero to 20 parts per
trillion, researchers said.

The report said the median level of dioxin exposure in the veterans was 3.8
parts per trillion, meaning that half the veterans had higher levels and half
had lower levels. This was virtually identical to the median level of 3.9 parts
per trillion found in the blood of people of the same general age who did not
serve in Vietnam.

Researchers have not determined the exact level at which exposure to dioxin
causes health problems in humans.

Result of 1979 Law

Researchers emphasized that the report drew no conclusions on the health effects
of dioxin and did not mean that no Vietnam veterans were exposed to harmful
levels of dioxin.

''This study really wasn't designed to do that,'' said Dr. Steve Thacker,
assistant director for science at the agency's Center for Environmental Health.

The blood tests are the result of a law passed by Congress in 1979 amid bitter
dispute over whether some veterans suffered health damage from exposure to Agent
Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Hollywood Summer Looking Up

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 24


With Superman taking his cape out of mothballs this weekend and James Bond
skydiving into the nation's box offices next Friday, all of Hollywood's most
awaited summer treats will have been delivered by the end of July.

Year after year, Hollywood repeats the cycle: summer escapism, October reality,
winter dreams of the following summer's reels of mind candy. From Memorial Day
to Labor Day, when the kids are out of school and bored, the movie industry
satisfies teen-age palates with comedies about underdogs taking on the
establishment and intrepid adventurers defeating evil on earth and in space.

The genres mutate slightly, and this year such movies as ''Dragnet,''
''Innerspace,'' ''Adventures in Baby-Sitting,'' ''Spaceballs'' and ''The Lost
Boys'' wrap their fantasy adventures in the tissue-paper of comedy.

For the creators of such movies, this may be the best summer in history. Since
Memorial Day was early and Labor Day, the official end of summer, is not until
Sept. 6, the summer of 1987 has 16 weeks rather than the usual 15. A summer
record of $1.58 billion was set in 1984. At nearly the half-way point, with
eight weeks to go, the 1987 box office stood at $820 million, the latest figure
available.

Paramount Leads the Studios

Leading the pack and not likely to be overtaken is ''Beverly Hills Cop II,''
with $138 million in ticket sales so far. ''The Untouchables,'' the big-screen
version of the old television series that pitted Eliot Ness against Al Capone,
is in second place with $62 million. That one-two punch makes Paramount Pictures
the most successful movie studio this summer. Indeed, during the first half of
1987, more than 21.2 percent of all movie tickets were bought by customers for
Paramount films. Warner Brothers is in second place for the year with 15.4
percent of the market.

Warner's ''Witches of Eastwick,'' loosely based on John Updike's novel about
three witches and a devil, is in third place this summer, having already grossed
$53 million. Twentieth Century-Fox's ''Predator'' ($50 million), in which Arnold
Schwarzenegger meets an alien monster, and Universal's ''Dragnet'' ($41
million), a remake of another old television series, round out the top five.

'Good Product' Responsible

Those positions may change by summer's end. Orion's ''Robocop,'' a violent but
clever and witty vision of America's future, opened last weekend with $8 million
and has sold at least $1 million worth of tickets every day this week. And
audiences will probably pack ''The Living Daylights'' to see a rejuvenated James
Bond played by Timothy Dalton.

When asked why the box office is booming, Hollywood's marketing experts solemnly
speak of ''good product,'' meaning pictures that people want to see. ''Poor
product'' is a synonym for uncommercial.

''Jaws the Revenge'' sold $7.1 million worth of tickets last weekend, although
Universal apparently thought so little of the movie that it was not previewed,
thus insuring that the fourth installment of the ''Jaws'' saga would not be
reviewed until a day or two after it opened. Nor does Warner Brothers appear to
have much confidence in ''Superman IV: The Quest for Peace,'' another movie that
is not being previewed for critics. The usual pattern for sequels that don't
satisfy audiences is that fans throng theaters the first weekend and then ticket
sales drop precipitately. ''Revenge of the Nerds II'' fell 41 percent last
weekend.

Winners and Losers

There are other box-office winners, including the 50th-anniversary release of
''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'' and the summer's one serious adult movie,
''Full Metal Jacket'', Stanley Kubrick's icy exploration of the Vietnam War.
''Roxanne,'' the summer's only comedy for adults, appears to be holding nicely.

There are also losers, the most prominent being ''Ishtar,'' starring Dustin
Hoffman and Warren Beatty. ''The Squeeze,'' which may set a record for the
lowest box-office gross of a major summer film, was another setback for its
star, Michael Keaton.

Far more interesting than the outright failures were two expensive
disappointments: ''Innerspace'' and ''Harry and the Hendersons.'' Both were from
Steven Spielberg's Amblin production company, although Mr. Spielberg did not
direct them. Although ''Innerspace'' was directed by Joe Dante, Warner Brothers'
advertising carried the line ''Steven Spielberg Presents.''

Teen-agers - Mr. Spielberg's core audience - dismissed Universal's ''Harry and
the Hendersons'' as a pallid imitation of ''E.T.''

Most of Hollywood expected ''Innerspace,'' which got some good reviews, to be
the No. 2 movie of the summer, behind ''Beverly Hills Cop II.'' But the science
fiction-comedy-adventure, in which Dennis Quaid invades the body of Martin
Short, is struggling at the box office. After a disappointing $4.7 million
opening weekend, Warner Brothers changed the ad campaign from a huge thumb and
index finger holding a tiny figure to a photograph of Mr. Short, Mr. Quaid and
Meg Ryan and a glowing quote from Time magazine. The change didn't help.

The implications are that the 10-year cycle of science fiction and fantasy
adventure films may be losing vitality and that Mr. Spielberg's name, though
valuable, is no longer an automatic open-sesame to box-office coffers unless he
has directed the movie himself. Mel Brooks's ''Spaceballs,'' which parodies
''Star Wars,'' has done surprisingly well despite poor reviews. Parodies often
signal the end of a cycle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scenes from ''Beverly Hills Cop II,'' starring Eddy Murphy,
''The Untouchables,'' with Kevin Costner, and ''The Witches of Eastwick,'' with
Jack Nicholson

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Illusions Exploded In the Gulf

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


If anyone, from the White House on down, thought the protective presence of U.S.
Navy vessels would guarantee safe passage for reflagged tankers through the
Persian Gulf, the mine that exploded against the Bridgeton should have disabused
them.

That explosion dramatized at the outset the high, probably unwarranted risks of
this new American venture in the gulf.

Despite intensive minesweeping efforts by American, Kuwaiti and Saudi Arabian
naval forces, the mine demonstrated what should have been evident from strong
Iranian statements - that the convoys can and may well be attacked.

The incident raised, moreover, and during the very first convoy, the dilemma
inherent in the reflagging scheme: whether and how to retaliate if Iran should
attack.

It was not immediately established whether the mine was directed specifically
against the American convoy that included the Bridgeton, a Kuwaiti tanker now
flying the United States flag. The weapon could have been anchored in the sea
lanes some time ago, or it might have floated randomly into the path of the
convoy. Such uncertainty may allow the United States to finesse the question of
retaliation in this case; but the next time, or the next, that won't be
possible.

If a ship flying the U.S. flag and under the supposed protection of U.S. naval
vessels should be deliberately attacked and damaged by Iran -particularly if
American lives were lost - retaliation would be unavoidable (unless President
Reagan decided to withdraw U.S. forces, as he did in Lebanon). The question
whether Mr. Reagan should have put American flags, ships and lives in such
jeopardy would be lost, at least for awhile, in the demands for a retaliatory
strike.

But against what? With what weapons? And to what degree of destructiveness? A
limited blow would all but surely invite new Iranian attack -which then would
demand another American response. That's the sort of lethal leapfrog that helped
draw the U.S. into a shooting war in Vietnam, as President Johnson retaliated
for attacks on U.S. forces in South Vietnam with the ''Rolling Thunder'' bombing
raids on North Vietnam.

In that kind of creeping war, both to protect U.S.-flagged ships and to
retaliate when attacked, the U.S. soon would need airfields in Saudi Arabia. Its
carriers cannot operate safely in the gulf and would be too far south to provide
the necessary planes, day in and day out, in the northern gulf.

Saudi Arabia has given no indication that it would let the U.S. use its
airfields for such purposes, since the Saudis can well imagine what the Iranian
response would be if planes from Saudi bases should attack Iran. The Saudis want
no part of war with Iran, and may fear that any American use of their airfields
would be taken in Teheran as an act of hostility.

If it's argued that Iranian attacks on U.S.-flagged ships in the gulf would
justify not just an occasional response but an unlimited American effort to
knock out Iranian air and naval forces, that's to say the Administration should
be willing to go to war with Iran to carry out its reflagging policy. No doubt
many Americans wouild like to hit the Ayatollah Khomeini hard, but the
consequences of such a war - aside from whether victory would be easily achieved
-could be disastrous.

Would Moscow stand by idly while the U.S. asserted such power virtually on the
Soviet Union's doorstep? Israel might not wish to see Iraq thus freed from its
consuming war with Iran. The third world would be embittered by a big-power
attack on Iran. What about terrorist activities? Surely such a war would destroy
the hopes for an Iranian-Iraqi peace that have been raised by a U.N. cease-fire
resolution backed by both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.

It would be consoling to think that the Reagan Administration had considered all
these problems coolly and realistically and concluded either that they could be
overcome, or that the European allies' need for Middle East oil, as well as the
goal of ''keeping the sea lanes open,'' outweighed the risks. Unfortunately, we
know that the reflagging scheme was a hasty and reflexive response to the
Kuwaitis' hints that they might turn to Moscow, thus ''letting the Soviets into
the gulf'' - though Soviet ships are there anyway, and any map of the region
will raise the question why they should not be.

Besides, after the Iran-contra fiasco, how can anyone believe that this
Administration acts on sober judgment, or can separate its ideologial nightmares
and its dreams of glory from the hard facts of life?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JULY 25, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words


International   2-7

 A Kuwaiti tanker hit a mine just west of an Iranian island in the Persian Gulf.
None of the 26 people aboard the 400,000-ton Bridgeton, which is traveling under
American naval escort, were wounded.   Page 1

 No U.S. minesweepers were around when the mine detonation sent a shock wave
through the American convoy in the Persian Gulf. There are only three active
duty minesweepers in the entire United States Navy.   1

 China is not likely to block an effort by the United Nations Security Council
to impose an arms embargo on Iran, but will continue to provide military support
to the Iranians nonetheless, Western diplomats said.   5

 Bonn's position on an arms accord between the United States and the Soviet
Union is avoiding a commitment on the fate of 72 Pershing 1A missles and their
American-held warheads.    1

 In the Iran-contra investigation, Senators and representatives on the
committees, Democrats and Republicans alike, praised Secretary of State George
P. Shultz as an emblem of sanity and candor surrounded by folly and deceit.   1

 Reactions to Mr. Shultz's testimony vary at the White House. President Reagan
believes it has been ''honest, sincere and helpful.'' But some officials are
squirming over his portrait of disarray in the Administration.   7

 A lone hijacker was overpowered by the cabin crew of an Air Afrique jet after
he killed a French passenger and critically wounded a steward while the plane
was on the tarmac at Cointrin Airport in Geneva.    1

 Tamil guerrilas in Sri Lanka agreed in principle to a proposal that could end a
bitter ethnic conflict, officials said. The move followed negotiations between
India and Sri Lanka.   3

 Pretoria continued its crackdown on opponents of apartheid, effectively wiping
out, with detentions, the visible leadership of the country's major
anti-apartheid group, the United Democratic Front.    3

 Interviews with top Israeli officials will not be granted to the NBC television
network in reaction to the network's failure to respond to Israeli criticism of
its recent documentary about the West Bank, the Government announced.   54

 Mapping the arctic    3

 Henley-on-Thames journal    4

 British novelist wins libel award    4

 Clash in Haiti leaves 10 dead    4

 American tells of massacre    11

 National   8-10, 32

 Man in the News: William Sessions was selected by President Reagan as the new
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. A Federal District Judge from
San Antonio, Judge Sessions is known for being stern but scrupulously fair.   1

 Confirmation of Judge Sessions should be relatively quick, White House and
Justice Department officials said. The selection of a Federal judge for the post
should limit Congressional opposition, they said.   10

 A sand bar in the ississippi River has paralyzed traffic, stalling hundreds of
barges with millions of tons in cargo in a nautical version of gridlock on the
nation's busiest inland waterway.   1

 Union Carbide will pay penalties of $408,500 in settlement of charges by the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration that it committed hundreds of
willful violations of Federal job health and safety rules.   8

 The economy grew somewhat faster this spring than was generally expected, the
Commerce Department said, but January-March growth was revised downward. The
second-quarter data pointed to a modest, but better-balanced, economic
expansion.    37

 Delta Air Lines will issue refunds to anyone concerned about flying on the
airline as a result of a recent series of mishaps, the company said. The refunds
will even be given to holders of restricted fare tickets.   37

 The Wedtech Corporation owes the Government tens of millions of dollars for
contracts that the company did not fulfill, company officials disclosed. The
failure was partly caused by the ''criminal acts of former management,'' they
said.   8

 The Interior Department suspended an official in California temporarily,
pending a review. At issue is whether the official sought employment with a law
firm whose client benefited from a water rights settlement he had negotiated.
8

 A new weapon for political strategy helps candidates understand how Americans
react to them and their ideas with a personal computer that measures an
audience's response instantly and then calculates changes from second to second.

   9

 Tests of Vietnam veterans find average dioxin levels    8

 Minnesota storms kill 2    8

 Jacobs severed from libel suit    9

 Worker turnover said to slow toxic waste cleanup    9

 F.A.A. head says flying is safe    11

 Promotion of two generals denied by Senate panel    32

 Regional   33-35

 A proposal on AIDS instruction for children in kindergarten through 12th grade
will be circulated to school officials across the state for their reactions, the
New York State Board of Regents voted.   33

 Columbus Avenue rents are soaring, and fashionable restaurants are being pushed
aside by high-priced clothing stores. Commercial real estate brokers see the
transformation as part of the evolution of the center of West Side Manhattan
glitz.   33

 A fire released toxic chemicals, exposing as many as 55 firefighters and police
officers to possible PCB contamination, the police said. The release was the
result of an underground fire in the Bronx that ruptured an electrical
transformer.   35

 As temperatures climbed past 90, New Yorkers took to tall drinks, short
haircuts and metaphysical means to maintain their cool. But much of the country
was even more deeply immersed in a pressure cooker.   33

 Verbal jousting over development in the region has become sharp. Mayor Koch,
who has appeared in a series of humorous advertisements, was the butt of the
joke in a commercial prepared by New Jersey's Public Service Electric & Gas
Company.   33

 After getting a taste of law school at the Summer Institute for Pre-Legal
Studies at Rutgers Law School, some of the 13 black and Hispanic college
students in the program have decided on law as a career.   34

 New York City's top labor negotiator sought to have a mediator join talks
between the city and municipal unions after declaring a lack of progress in
negotiations. The move would be a possible prelude to arbitration.   35

 Dispute over Kate Smith's tomb    34

 Ward suggests lone suspect in Queens rapes    35

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

China Bolstering Its Non-Communist Ties in Asia

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 23


The prolonged war in Cambodia between Chinese-backed resistance forces and
Vietnamese troops is giving Beijing the opportunity to strengthen and expand its
influence in Southeast Asia, regional officials and others say.

Some officials and scholars say this is happening at a time when United States
policy seems to have lost definition and direction, and both Beijing and Moscow
are seeking to fill a vacuum.

Officials say that on some issues -support for the Khmer Rouge, for example -
Washington appears to be deferring to Beijing's views as much as to those of the
Association of South East Asian Nations, or Asean.

''There is a general awareness on the part of Asean that China seeks to advance
her interests through the Cambodian issue,'' Lau Teik Soon, a political
scientists at the University of Singapore, said in an interview.

''China is in a position to entrench herself as the regional power that has a
significant say in how the conflict will turn out,'' he said. ''China seems to
be sympathetic to the Asean position and is seen to be gaining by its strong
opposition to Vietnam.''

The congruence of Chinese views on Cambodia with those of the Asean nations -
Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines - has made
it harder for the Soviet Union, which supports Hanoi, to make diplomatic or
commercial headway, Professor Lau and others say.

China has also been active elsewhere in Asia and the Pacific, attempting to
counter not only Moscow's initiatives but also the influence of Taiwan and and
Japan. In southern Asia, where Beijing has long been close to Pakistan, China
recently offered support to Sri Lanka when India dropped relief supplies in
Tamil rebel areas.

Bangladesh's President, Lieut. Gen. H. M. Ershad, visited China this month. His
Foreign Minister, Humayun Rasheed Chowdhury, said after the trip that the two
countries' relationship ''has reached a historical peak.''

In Southeast Asia, the most visible manifestation of China's involvement is
Bangkok's deepening military and diplomatic links with Beijing.

Less than a decade ago, China was supporting a Communist insurgency in Thailand.
Now Beijing is selling arms to Bangkok at ''friendship prices.''

In March, after a visit to Bangkok by Gen. Yang Dezhi, the Chinese Chief of
Staff, the Royal Thai Army confirmed that it was buying 50 to 60 T-69 tanks, a
modified version of the Soviet T-54 and T-55 tanks. Thailand also intends to buy
anti-aircraft guns and armored personnel carriers from China.

Thai-based Cambodian resistance leaders say that the Thai and Chinese armies
work very closely in supplying and training guerrillas. Thai officials, and
members of the royal family, visit China regularly.

Throughout the region, however, most nations are looking to China in hopes of
expanding trade and opening new markets to counter protectionist moves in Europe
and the United States.

This is happening despite the absence of diplomatic ties with Beijing and three
Asean countries, Indonesia, Singapore and Brunei.

In Indonesia - where fear of Chinese power is intertwined with domestic tensions
between Chinese and other Indonesian ethnic groups - contacts with Beijing have
been left to the Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

Singapore has a majority ethnic Chinese population that has said it will not
open diplomatic links with Beijing until all its neighbors do, in deference to
their fears of a potential fifth column of overseas Chinese whose loyalties
might lie with China. But Singapore is positioning itself as a go-between to the
West and a consultant to the Chinese.

The former Deputy Prime Minister, Goh Keng Swee, became an adviser to Beijing on
the development of new economic zones after his retirement from politics more
than two years ago. Singapore is also involved in China's hotel and tourism
industry, and in airport construction.

Southeast Asians cautioned that there were limits to burgeoning relations with
Beijing. There are still fears based on China's imperial history and its
involvement in Communist insurgencies in the region. China does not have the
money Japan has to invest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

CAPITAL POWER STRUGGLE;
For Congress, Iran-Contra Hearings Offer Chance to Seek More Say in Foreign
Policy

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 25


What the nation has been reading about and watching on television these last
weeks is not, in the strictest sense, a Congressional investigation. Had the
only purpose been to gain insights into what went wrong and to provide
legislative remedies for the problem, that could easily have been done in
private.

But nearly all of the Democrats and some of the Republicans in Congress also
wanted to rally support in the 200-year-old struggle between the executive and
legislative branches for influence over American foreign policy. So they chose
televised hearings, just as recent Presidents, fighting the same battle, have
used press conferences and electoral campaigns to take their case to the people.

As a consequence, the nation has witnessed a drama in several acts and dozens of
scenes - a political theater piece designed to display to the public as vividly
as possible the fruits of an investigation into the Iran-contra affair that has
already taken place and to convince that audience of the validity of the
Congressional point of view.

With the important exception of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the Senate and
House select committees knew from documents and from depositions what the
witnesses were going to say before the questions were asked. Part of the secret
of Colonel North's success as a witness was surprise - many of his answers were
as new to the interrogators as they were to the public - and part was his
shrewdness in grasping entially political rather than legislative nature of the
occasion.

Recognizing a good act when they saw one and the futility of trying to upstage
it, members of the committees rushed to praise Colonel North. But their praise
was conditional; few would have said after the Marine officer's testimony, as
Senator David Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, said on Friday after Secretary of
State George P. Shultz's appearance, that they ''had the urge to simply stand up
and cheer.''

Though a senior member of the executive branch, the Secretary met Congress more
than halfway. Like most members of the committees, he said he thought it wrong
for Colonel North and Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter to lie and dissemble when
asked questions by Congress, and he said he thought it wrong for them to try to
circumvent Congressional restrictions on aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents. Like
the committees, he said he considered the Iran arms deals ''crazy'' and the plan
for a permanent extra-governmental covert operations fund highly dangerous.

Confidentiality Is Waived

Mr. Shultz even went so far as to waive the usual rules of confidentiality -
''just this once,'' he said - and discuss his private conversations with
President Reagan. But when Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, began
his closing remarks with the observation that the Founding Fathers believed that
''no one could be trusted with power,'' the Secretary responded with the basic
argument of those who believe in Presidential primacy in foreign policy.

''Let's say it had to be distributed so that it could be checked,'' he shot
back. ''If we do not have the ability to act as a country, then we are in deep
trouble.''

The drafters of the Constitution, the bicentennial of whose work the country is
celebrating this year, spent a lot of time on this same argument. One delegate,
Charles Pinckney of South Carolina, was so worried about legislative intrusion
into foreign policy that he wanted to withhold from Congress the right to
declare war, arguing that it was too large a body and too slow.

'Invitation to Struggle'

But his view did not prevail. The framers agreed with Madison, who argued in
Federalist 51 that the ''greatest security against'' abuses by one branch of
government could be found in giving the others ''the necessary constitutional
means and personal motives to resist the encroachments of the others.'' Edward
S. Corwin, the constitutional historian, described the resulting document as
''an invitation to struggle for the privilege of directing American foreign
policy.''

That struggle began almost at once with President Washington's Proclamation of
Neutrality in 1793, which was attacked by Congress as a usurpation of its
authority. Andrew Jackson withheld information from Congress, and executive
authority continued to build up under James K. Polk and Andrew Tyler. Then,
during and after the Civil War, Congress reasserted itself.

But from the months preceeding World War II, when Franklin D. Roosevelt found a
dozen ways to circumvent the Neutrality Act, to the Vietnam War, Presidential
power waxed in this sphere. By 1962, Representative Carl Vinson, Democrat of
Georgia, could describe Congress as a somnolent uncle ''who complains while
furiously puffing on his pipe but finally, as everyone expects, gives in and
hands over the allowance, grants the permission or raises his hand in
blessing.''

Effects of Vietnam Era

All of that ended with Vietnam, Watergate and the revelations of ''dirty
tricks'' by the Central Intelligence Agency. Congress embarked on a 20-year
campaign to tighten the pursestrings, to insure that it would be consulted and
to insist on procedures that would guarantee legality. Its wrath at the
revelations in the Iran-contra affair arises directly from the sense that it has
not succeeded in those aims.

Colonel North tried hard to see that it never would. ''The President has a very
wide authority to carry out activities secretly or publicly, as he chooses,''
the marine said. ''The President can do what he wants to with his own staff. I
deeply believe that the President is the person charged with making and carrying
out the foreign policy.''

''The American people trust that the President will be conducting these with a
good purpose and good intent,'' he added, referring to secret operations.

The Diffusion of Power

Not much there about checks and balances, or what Senator Cohen called the
diffusion of power over foreign policy, with Congress authorized to declare war,
to confirm ambassadors, to appropriate funds and - through legislation - to have
its leaders told of covert actions.

Few if any of the committee members want to pass laws saying that Presidents
must always, even in times of grave emergency, come to Congress for its
blessing. They want to restore what they consider a proper balance. Most would
probably agree that in what witness after witness called ''a dangerous world,''
a certain degree of presidential primacy is inevitable -but not the degree shown
in this episode.

''The American democracy,'' wrote Arthur M. Schlesigner in ''The Imperial
Presidency,'' his 1974 book, ''must discover a middle ground between making the
President a czar and making him a puppet.''

It seems clear that the search for that middle ground has not yet succeeded, and
that the Congressional leadership will badly need the support of the public as
it changes its focus. Having concentrated so far, in the words of Representative
Lee H. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who heads the House committee, on trying
to determine ''what went wrong,'' it must now try to decide ''what needs to be
done - what kinds of constructive suggestions we can come up with to make this
system of ours work better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, a news analysis from Washington on July 26 on the
struggle between the executive and legislative branches for influence over
American foreign policy gave an incorrect first name for President John Tyler.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bob Pope reading mail received by the committee
(NYT/Photopress)

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOME VIDEO;
DOCUMENTARY

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 177 words



Vietnam: Legacies - Volume 7

Chief correspondent, Stanley Karnow; producer, Elizabeth Deane; executive
producer, Richard Ellison. Sony Video Software. 60 minutes. $19.95. The legacies
of the 10-year war in Vietnam - longer than World Wars I and II together - are
illustrated in the final film in the series, ''Vietnam: A Television History,''
originally presented by WGBH-Boston as a 13-hour series on public television.

The film begins in the spring of 1975, with the last Americans being picked up
by helicopters on the roof of the American Embassy just before the arrival of
the Vietcong. In poignant interviews, South Vietnamese refugees who managed to
get away sound bitter about the fate of their homeland.

Under the experienced guidance of Stanley Karnow, the series correspondent with
extensive experience in Southeast Asia, ''Legacies'' assesses the mood of the
generation that protested against the involvement in the war. The so-called
Vietnam syndrome -avoiding entanglement in unpopular and unsupported wars -
appears a lasting effect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Rebels Gain While Duarte Flounders

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 850 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


THE Salvadoran guerrillas are practicing what they call ''prolonged popular
war'' with a vengeance, as the country slides into its eighth year of civil
conflict.

In a tactical shift, the Marxist-led rebels of the Farabundo Marti National
Liberation Front are rebuilding their political and military presence in the
capital, moving to exploit Government failures and severe economic strain.

The Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte, which had the rebels on the
run two years ago, has now given them room to gain. It has failed to offer
social and economic programs that work and, after three years of formal
electoral democracy, the average Salvadoran feels worse off. ''This Government
does not realize that it is fighting a revolutionary war,'' a senior military
officer said. ''It has failed to apply the social and economic programs the
country needs and it is losing its social base among workers and peasants.''

Because Salvadorans are weary of killing and war, the rebels may well fail to
find new supporters among disgruntled urban workers and slum dwellers. But they
clearly intend to try, saying they have returned to San Salvador to sharpen
political and economic tensions. According to captured rebel documents, the
guerrillas hope to spark a general strike before the American and Salvadoran
elections in 1988 and 1989.

Such a strike seems highly unlikely but the documents, which both rebel and
diplomatic sources say are authentic, outline step by step how the guerrillas
intend to pursue it. The strategy calls for the formation of front groups in
labor unions, student organizations and human rights committees. These groups
would serve as a base to seek wider support, while they hold strikes, sit-ins,
embassy occupations and the street demonstrations that are already under way. At
the same time, the documents show, rebel military cells are infiltrating the
capital to raise ''the level of violence'' and further weaken the Government.
Several bombings and an effective rebel-imposed ban on public transport two
weeks ago attest to the rebel presence.

They have been assisted by the lifting of the longstanding state of siege that
permitted the police to detain suspects for two weeks and prohibited street
demonstrations. Suspected rebels can now be detained for only three days, after
which they are usually released. Government officials say the civil courts are
afraid to convict suspected guerrillas, who are capable of retribution.

Nearly every week 200 to 500 rebel supporters demonstrate in the capital. In two
recent incidents, the police wounded demonstrators wielding nail-studded clubs
as they tried to break through police lines. The police also opened fire when
demonstrators began destroying Government vehicles. But the authorities' overall
response has been cautious.

It is highly debatable whether the rebels' new tactics can be successful. People
resent bans on public transport and attacks in the largely tranquil capital.
They also fear a possible return of Government repression. Several bystanders
last week criticized club-carrying students for being violent. The size of
demonstrations is diminishing, not growing.

But unemployment and inflation are rising and the Government is widely seen by
Salvadorans as incompetent and corrupt. At a time when Mr. Duarte's popularity
seems to be lower than ever, the rebels are making their political presence
felt. They have spray-painted most of the city's walls and the American Embassy
with slogans. And in poorer neighborhoods, residents showed greater sympathy for
demonstrators.

For their part, the guerrillas say they had no alternative but to return to the
streets after four years in which, for most city dwellers, they had become
little more than a faceless military force somewhere in the distant hills. They
are trying to recover the political base they had in 1980 before the Government
cracked down on them, a probably unattainable goal.

The rebels have also have been working for two years to perfect a new military
strategy. They infiltrate army units and then launch precise and devastating
attacks by specially trained forces, backed by highly accurate mortar fire.
Military officials say they believe the army is now thoroughly infiltrated by
the rebels.

Meanwhile, the guerrillas have continued to use land mines and, more recently,
remote-controlled mines to great effect. According to captured guerrilla
documents and rebel deserters, most of the top commanders have been trained in
Cuba and, in several cases, Vietnam. After eight years of polishing the
techniques of revolutionary war, they are unquestionably the most able
practitioners of it in Latin America. With probably no more than 4,000 armed
rebels and perhaps 30,000 committed supporters, they have been able to cripple
this small country of more than six million people.

While they are effective in battle, the rebels have yet to show that they can be
more than spoilers. But given Government incompetence and their will to fight,
it would be a mistake to underestimate their capacity to grow stronger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of workers and peasants demonstrating in San Salvador (J.B.
Pictures/ Victor Hinterlang)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Headliners;
Moving On

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 137 words


After 10 years as the senior minister of the Riverside Church, the Rev. William
Sloane Coffin has chosen another sort of pulpit. At services last Sunday, Dr.
Coffin announced that he was resigning to become head of a Washington-based
disarmament organization called SANE/Freeze. Dr. Coffin, who was outspoken in
his support of civil rights and in his opposition to the Vietnam War while he
was the chaplain at Yale University from 1958 to 1976, said his decision to
leave Riverside had to do with ''the shadow of Doomsday.'' ''God presents us
with choices we have to make ourselves,'' he said. ''One has to move on if you
think that's what God wants you to do.''

But he also intimated a desire for new challenges. ''After being in one place
for 10 years and you're 63,'' he said, ''you've got maybe one biggie left.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Sloane Coffin

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIA'S RESTLESS YOUTH

BYLINE: By Bill Keller; Bill Keller is a reporter in The New York Times's Moscow
bureau.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3849 words


ON THE STAGE OF THE MAXIM GORKY House of Culture, beneath a red banner urging
all good citizens of the Soviet Union to ''fulfill the decisions of the 27th
Party Congress,'' Anatoly Krupnov, the lead singer of Black Obelisk, is howling
out the lyrics to ''Disease.'' Bare-chested except for a guitar and chain, he
struts through a cloud of artificial smoke. Below him, crowding the stage,
ecstatic teen-agers punch the air. Gloved fists and spiked haircuts twitch in
the strobe lights as Krupnov bellows:

People are burning, their souls on
  fire!
A march of empty faces.

Despite the presence of wary adult chaperones and watchful young
plainclothesmen, the catharsis verges briefly on the uncontrollable. The
blitzkrieg of electric guitars is loud enough to drown out the sound of the
Bolshevik forefathers spinning in their graves.

This explosion of what used to be officially condemned as bourgeois decadence is
a typical concert at Klub Vytyazi - the Warrior Club - a year-old venture in
north-central Moscow. The club is sponsored by the local chapter of Komsomol,
the Young Communists League, an organization better known for its
character-building summer construction camps in mosquito-infested Siberia. The
Warrior Club's soviet, or executive council, may be the only leadership body in
the vast apparatus of the Communist Party whose members posed for their official
portrait in full heavy-metal regalia: leather pants, studded bracelets, and hair
styles freely adapted from the Visigoths.

Even two years ago, says Valentina Nedzvetskaya, the earnest, dimpled den mother
in charge of Klub Vytyazi, the idea of Komsomol sponsoring a club where young
people dress up like leather fetishists and listen to decadent Western music at
earsplitting volume would have been inconceivable. These days it is inevitable,
evidence of the lengths to which Soviet officialdom is going to regain its grip
on a worrisome younger generation.

In a society in which conformity is both culturally and politically encouraged,
flamboyant teen-agers who would seem at home in Times Square or Piccadilly
Circus astonish the eye. Adult heads swivel disapprovingly as the punks in
rainbow hair and heavy makeup drift down the streets of Moscow, Leningrad and
Riga. Drivers slow down to gawk at Valentina Nedzvetskaya's beloved metallisti
as they gather outside the Warrior Club to smoke cigarettes. Grandmothers exhort
the police to shoo away the hippies who congregate around Gogol's statue in
central Moscow or at the Turista coffee shop on Kirov Street looking like extras
from a lost roadshow of ''Jesus Christ Superstar.''

On the old Arbat pedestrian mall, crowds of summer strollers gather to watch
break-dancers doing moonwalks and shoulder spins on a square of linoleum -
Russian high school kids emulating a street fad from black urban America. At
Kazanski Station, prides of young toughs in baggy pants and muscle shirts pour
off the electric trains from the suburbs, affecting the slightly menacing air of
droogs from ''A Clockwork Orange.''

Russia has always had its extroverts and nonconformists. But the slight
loosening of control under the Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and the years
of eroding official credibility that preceded his rise to power, have allowed
centrifugal forces to spin off in some wild directions.

Glasnost has given the young greater access to - and an appetite for - the
Western fads that drive their parents mad. Glasnost has also brought the young
infidels to Russian movie screens and newspapers.

The result is an uneasy stirring not entirely unlike what America went through
during the 1960's, as the Soviet Union's young begin to stretch their wings and
the nation's adults fret openly about their puzzling offspring, not just the
relative handful who sport chains and orange hair, but the masses who reveal
their disaffection only through their indifference.

Gorbachev's efforts to revive the Soviet Union's society from its torpor depend
to a great extent on his ability to engage the young, the only generation in
which lethargy and cynicism have not yet put down deep roots. It is to the young
that Gorbachev most passionately addresses his pleas to work harder, speak up,
take the initiative.

For anyone who has spent time with Russian teen-agers or read the startling
polling data that has trickled into scientific journals under glasnost, it is
hard to feel sanguine about Gorbachev's prospects. The country's young are - not
universally, but in sufficient quantity to spell trouble - spoiled, alienated,
and indifferent. Gorbachev may yet rouse their interest. But so far, in the
referendum on his ambitious plan for an economic renaissance - perestroika,
restructuring -the generation now coming of age shows every inclination to
abstain.


SOVIET OFFICIALS POINT OUT, FAIRLY enough, that the flamboyant cliques do not
typify the masses of children who dutifully make their way to adulthood along
the prescribed path, a process seemingly designed to preclude independent
choice.

Almost from birth, Russian children are smothered with familial attention,
hemmed in by official requirements, and pressed to defer to the kollektiv. In
state kindergartens and Young Pioneer summer camps and grade schools, they learn
that to call attention to oneself is rude and arrogant. High school brings a
social sorting-out; young people destined for blue-collar work head to
vocational schools, and those with intellectual promise or greater pull are
channeled to the equivalent of prep schools. Along the way, membership in
Komsomol and, for young men, mandatory military service reinforce the pressure
to conform.

More often than not, Russian young people emerge from the process exuding what
seems an old-fashioned wholesomeness. Teen-age girls dress up in skirts and
apply elaborate makeup for a day at the amusement park. At rock concerts, a
surprising number of boys wear ties and bring their parents. Most Russian young
people seem to negotiate the trials of growing up without displaying any
explicit tendencies toward outlandish behavior.

But as the film maker Yuris Podnieks points out, the nonconformists are leading
indicators of how well the society's contract with its people is holding up.
Podnieks's startling 1986 documentary ''Is It Easy to Be Young?'' focuses on the
fringes to tell the story of a generation disoriented by the yawning gap between
what it is told and what it sees for itself. The film follows a group of youths
from the Baltic republic of Latvia through several years of personal turmoil, as
some go off to war, others enact various forms of revolt, and a few submerge
themselves in aimless materialism.

The movie's popularity is an indication of Soviet fascination with its restless
young. When I talked to Podnieks in June, he was at the Moskva Theater signing a
program for the millionth Moscow viewer, a record for a Russian documentary.

''I can't say these kids are a big part of their generation, but they are the
ones for whom I feel the greatest pain,'' said Podnieks, who is 36 years old.
''The point is not just outward appearance, but a complex and alarming situation
that has developed in the country, when we do not teach the value of an
individual personality, when people are taught under the slogan 'Be like
others.' ''

Gorbachev's strategy for reclaiming this generation is to unswaddle them a bit,
give them greater freedom and respect. But that runs against a deep grain of
tradition.

''We still don't trust our children,'' Podnieks says. ''We treat them like
bricks for the future. When they are fully formed, we shall build our bright
future with them. But when they are 15, 16, we don't trust them to do real
things.

''And so they are like little volcanoes.''


ZHENIA IS 19 AND LOOKS A bit like the young Sal Mineo, with curly dark hair and
moist brown eyes. He puzzles his parents, a mathematics professor and an
engineer, well-established party members, and it is not hard to imagine why. We
talked on a park bench in Moscow. Like most of the young people interviewed,
despite the greater openness to criticism of the system, he was afraid to have
his family name appear in print.

''I have my own mind on various problems of the modern world,'' he said. ''I
don't agree with the peace initiatives of our country, for example. I think that
nuclear weapons guarantee the peace all around the world. I think that socialism
isn't humane, and capitalism is the only humane system.''

Do you discuss these ideas with your parents? ''Yes, of course, but they don't
agree with me, and of course I don't agree with them. They are children of the
Stalinist years.'' And Gorbachev? ''He is an idealist. He wants to make our
lives better, and so he destroys the structure of our political life. Perhaps it
can lead to real changes. If we can have private businesses, for example, then
we will have people who will fight for their own interests. And I hope they can
beat the Bolsheviks and we will have a normal country. I hope.'' Zhenia, make no
mistake, is exceptional in his political outlook. But in his discontent with the
ideals handed down to him, he is not so unusual.

Igor M. Ilinsky, director of research for the Higher Komsomol School, recently
published an unusually frank report on a poll of 1,500 teen-agers. Ilinsky
detected an alarming ''denial of the material and spiritual achievements of
socialism'' and ''loss of Communist convictions.''

''They are looking for something,'' Ilinisky said in an interview. ''It's in
human nature for people to seek some belief in life. Yes, you could say this
search means there is something missing.''

The search has led in different directions. The Soviet press has begun to
acknowledge a growing drug problem among young people. Two researchers reported
in July that a survey of two high schools found 10 to 14 percent of the students
had tried drugs (generally, opium, heroin or marijuana) or sniffed glue - double
the rate just a year earlier.

Other youngsters have found political outlets for their restlessness. During the
last year, there has been an apparently spontaneous blossoming of environmental-
and historic-preservation groups, involving for the most part university
students in the more culturally advanced cities - Leningrad, Tallinn, Riga. In
Leningrad this summer, a historic-preservation group called Spaseniye
(Salvation) tried to put forward one of its leaders as a candidate for the city
council, an extraordinary effort that was suppressed by the local party machine.

The search for meaning has led some youngsters into their own, decidedly
unofficial, explorations of Communism itself. In Leningrad and Minsk, for
example, there are reports of a budding back-to-Bolshevism movement, with young
people carrying books of quotations from Lenin and Trotsky.

In his native Riga, Podnieks, the director, says a small group of youngsters who
call themselves ''greens'' and espouse a sort of radical egalitarianism has
organized raids on people who have accumulated what they consider unjustified
wealth, burning cars and houses.

There is a crude political undercurrent, too, in the actions of the young toughs
known as lyubers, who have terrorized the city's metallists, punks and other
nonconformists. Lyubers (a generic name taken from the working-class Moscow
suburb of Lyubertsi) combine an interest in self-discipline - many of them go in
for body building or weight lifting, and abjure drinking and drugs -with an
intolerance of the unconventional that becomes, in some cases, an exaggerated
form of patriotism.

''You see, there's this point of view, instilled in us by our fathers, that we
shouldn't engage in stupid things, that we should be normal people and live an
ordinary life,'' explained one 17-year-old weight lifter, interviewed recently
at a body-building contest in Lyubertsi. ''But people like punks, heavy metal
fans . . . these people are not normal.''

Disenchantment with the party line also appears to have fueled a religious
revival among some young people, but it is difficult to measure.

''A lot of young people are sick and tired of the official ideology,'' said
Pyotr, 16, a son of Moscow intellectuals, who is drawn to Russian Orthodox
Christianity. ''Perestroika is just the same ideology, only more cunning.''

In his research for Komsomol, Ilinisky said he discovered a fascination among
young nonbelievers with the rituals of Christianity, Islam and Judaism.
''God-seeking sentiments are especially strong among young people with a higher
education,'' Ilinisky reported. And among that group, he said, the number who
wear crosses or decorate their rooms with icons has doubled in the last five
years.

''Today, like in all times,'' he concluded, ''people are searching not for God,
but for faith.''

A young high school history teacher in Moscow recently conducted a somewhat less
scientific sampling of about 100 students.

''The majority of them -hippies, punks, lyubers, it doesn't matter - are
critical of the existing order,'' he concluded. '' Hippies or Nazis, it makes no
difference, it's just the fashion that is different. At the core, it's the same,
just an abstract feeling of passive protest.''

Outside of the major cities, the sense of indifference is perhaps even more
pervasive. I recently talked to a 25-year-old computer engineer who taught this
year at a vocational school in a provincial city in northern Russia. He seemed
just the sort of young recruit the Gorbachev revolution is looking for
-thoughtful and genuinely worried about the future of his country. But his hope
had already congealed into a sense of futility:

''I ask my students, 'What do you think is going to happen next? Will things
change? Will we live better?' Not an optimistic word from anyone. Already, at
17, they don't believe.''


CASTING ABOUT FOR the sources of this malaise, Soviet analysts have discovered a
general failure of the institutions designed to mold Russian children into
bright-eyed young Socialists. Komsomol doesn't work, school doesn't work, the
army doesn't work, even work doesn't work.

Komsomol, which was Gorbachev's own springboard into the party leadership, has
been widely condemned for lapsing into ''formalism'' and losing the interest of
young people. Increasingly, they have declined to join - a few announcing their
disenchantment in letters to the newspapers.

In the last two years, new leaders have been recruited, many of them bright and
appealing, and in many cities Komsomol has turned its attention from civics
lectures to discotheques in an attempt to ingratiate itself with disaffected
youngsters.

''Komsomol lost its ideals,'' said Zhan, a 20-year-old interviewed at the
Warrior Club. ''Now it is just a form of control. They're giving us rock music
because they can't stop it. They have to support it or things would be worse.''

Recently, the schools have come under assault from academic reformers, who argue
that teaching is regimented and stifling, and does not encourage the creative
thinking necessary if the Soviet Union is to catch up with the age of high
technology. A group of innovators has been urging teachers to step down from
their pulpits and develop greater intimacy with students.

Komsomol's new leaders actively support this, but the idea was hooted down at a
recent meeting of the Russian Federation Teachers Union, where legions of
teachers saw the reforms (correctly) as an indictment of the
lessons-from-on-high approach that is the only one most of them know.

Finally, there is the question of work. That today's teen-agers, unlike their
parents, have not had to work to supplement the family income is a matter of
national pride. But many experts fear the result has been a generation that does
not know the meaning of work or the value of a ruble, that expects to be
supported well into its 20's, and then to find cushy, well-paid jobs.

The Soviet system does not provide teen-agers with after-school or summer jobs,
except Komsomol work camps, and the law generally bars children under 16 from
working.

When Pavel Gusev's 13-year-old son wanted a skateboard recently, he decided it
would be a valuable lesson to let the boy earn the money himself. Gusev, chief
editor of the Komsomol newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets, sent the boy to the post
office to ask for work delivering mail after school. ''They said he was too
young,'' Gusev recalls, throwing up his hands in disgust. ''So I bought the
skateboard, and old women carry the mail.''


EVEN THE MILITARY, the most revered of Soviet institutions, does not command the
universal respect it once did.

Outside the Warrior Club, one 18-year-old with a shaved head and a tiny silver
ax dangling from his left ear explained his options for dodging the draft.
Perhaps he would cut open a vein and spend a little time in a psychiatric
hospital. ''The thing is, the army is a waste of time,'' he explained. ''The
army makes people stupid.''

The war in Afghanistan, though it has not been as intense a shock to Russians as
Vietnam was to Americans, has played a part in this disenchantment.

At least half a million young men have served in Afghanistan, an estimated
12,000 have died, and many more have returned with injuries, drug habits or
deepened cynicism. Millions have listened to the young Afghanistan veteran in
the movie ''Is It Easy to Be Young?'' who muses, ''The feeling will remain with
me that I have been involved in something dirty, something not really human.''
There may be no visible protest, but there is a deterioration of official
credibility.

During the first week of July, newspapers in the Soviet Union published two
remarkable articles about the brutality of the Moscow police. On July 3,
Komsomolskaya Pravda reported the police had hauled off dozens of hippies who
had been loitering in a park and had beaten two of them so badly they had to be
hospitalized.

''The law provides equal protection for those with all sorts of haircuts, or
with no haircut at all,'' the correspondent wrote.

Two days later, Moskovskaya Pravda criticized the police for harassing and
beating young motorcyclists, known as rockers.

The editorial plea for tolerance seemed to represent the prevailing official
view under Gorbachev - that state paternalism should be curtailed in the hope
that young people, given a measure of freedom, will develop a measure of
responsibility. As Gorbachev told the national Komsomol Congress last April,
''We have bored our young people with preaching.''

Talk to the journalists, sociologists and ideologists who shape the official
policy on youth, and you find a general view that the allure of Western fads is
an unavoidable passing phase. Even the clusters of hippies and punks that many
older Russians find so offensive, are welcomed, a bit tentatively, as signs of
incipient ''democracy.''

''These groups represent a transition to political culture from political
illiteracy, from neutrality to activism,'' said Gennadi S. Batygin, a leading
sociologist.


BUT THE NEW OFFICIAL solicitousness toward youth has stirred some resentment.

At a recent meeting of the Russian nationalist group Pamyat (Memory) - a
secretive, xenophobic organization that is believed to have a substantial
following - a worker identified on a tape recording of the gathering as
Alexander Bartashov rose to complain that young Russians know more about rock
music and Sylvester Stallone than they do about the heroes and battles of their
own history.

''All of these things in Western culture substitute for love of the
motherland,'' he said, to a warm response. ''Right now there is a truly
spiritual aggression by the West on our youth. And very often our TV and our
press promote this.''

Soviet authorities are aware that complaints of ''permissiveness'' strike a
responsive chord in conservative parents, and are sensitive to the risk a
serious outbreak of youthful rebellion could pose to the stability of
Gorbachev's regime.

Last spring, without announcement, Central Television decided to cut back on
rock music on television and radio after a deluge of complaints.

''At one point we had a sort of dictatorship of youth music,'' said Eduard M.
Sokolayev, the head of youth programming for Soviet television. ''There was a
fear that it would lead to a devaluation of national values in the culture.''


YURI SHCHEKOCHIKHEN, a commentator on youth affairs at Literaturnaya Gazeta,
recently invited representatives of several youth factions to meet with a group
of journalists, sociologists and psychologists at his office. The specialists
were stunned when one young man arrived wearing a homemade Gorbachev button.

''More shocked, I think, than if he had shown up wearing a swastika,''
Shchekochikhen said, laughing.

Indeed, young people seem to like Gorbachev personally, as a man who has brought
change, energy, international respect to the Soviet Union -not to mention
rock-and-roll to television. He has shaken things up, and young people like
that. And occasionally you can find a flicker of idealism about Gorbachev's
program as well.

''Before, a person could just sit around drinking tea all day and be paid his
full salary,'' said Ilya, a student who hangs out with the break dancers on the
Arbat. ''Now you are paid for the work performed. I think it's good. You work
for yourself and, naturally, you are more interested in what you are doing.''

But among the dozens of young people interviewed for this article, Ilya, the son
of highly educated parents, was the only one who could provide a definition of
Gorbachev's agenda that the General Secretary himself might recognize.

More typical were the three young boxing enthusiasts who talked about their
lives one sultry summer evening in Volgograd. They spoke volubly on life,
sports, and the continuing popularity of Stalin, for whom their city used to be
named. They seemed unaware that Stalin-worship had fallen into disfavor in
Moscow. Asked to explain perestroika, their blank stares were eloquent.

Typical, too, were two teen-agers from Lyubertsi, who enthusiastically explained
that perestroika to them meant official support for the body-building clubs that
used to be underground.

''For them, that's perestroika,'' said Gusev. ''They write us letters: 'Why is
there so little heavy metal? Under democracy, there ought to be more heavy
metal.' Demanding democracy for themselves, they forget about those who do not
like that kind of music.''

That understanding may come, but it is not there yet, and its absence presents
serious difficulties for a leader like Gorbachev, whose program depends not on
passive compliance but on animating a dormant population.

As Volodya, 20, who wears his black hair over his shoulders and a bracelet
engraved with the name of the rock group Led Zeppelin on his wrist, told me
recently: ''We're just observers in this big arena. Understand? We're just
spectators. If things change for the better, we'll be glad, of course. If
nothing happens, then we'll have a good laugh.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Metallisti (Ricki Rosen/Picture Group); Young Communist
'Pioneers' in Red Square (pag1 16); young newlywed couple in Leningrad (page
16); hippies selling 'Jesus Christ Superstar' paintings in Ismailovski Park,
Moscow (page 17); adolescent alcoholic in Moscow treatment center (page 18);
military recruits marching to train station in Moscow (page 19)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JULY 26, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1494 words




An error occurred in the processing of a table at this point in the document.
Please refer to the table in the online document.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ORPHANS: Real and Imaginary, by Eileen Simpson. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $16.95.)
The author, a novelist and psychotherapist, joins her own history (orphaned
before age 7) to an exploration of the painful fate of orphans in history,
literature and the imagination.

HEMINGWAY, by Kenneth S. Lynn. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) A sympathetic and
detailed biography that sees Hemingway as a valiant and moral man and writer of
his own time and place, not the macho freak of his posthumous publicity.

THE HOTTENTOT ROOM, by Christopher Hope. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.95.) Mr.
Hope's characters in his passionate third novel are a befuddled community of
South African exiles in London, his protagonist a South African secret agent,
and his thesis that the world is turning brutal, mad and claustrophobic.

WILBUR AND ORVILLE: A Biography of the Wright Brothers, by Fred Howard. (Knopf,
$24.95.) This comprehensive and readable account of the lives and environments
of the lads from Dayton, Ohio, clarifies why and how they, of all people on
earth, were the first to develop a practical flying machine.

A WORLD BEYOND HEALING: The Prologue and Aftermath of Nuclear War, by Nicholas
Wade. (Norton, $15.95.) A brief but thorough and far from encouraging overview
of the probable upshot of nuclear warfare, by a Times editorial board member.

MEDITATIONS AT SUNSET: A Scientist Looks at the Sky, by James Trefil.
(Scribners, $16.95.) With superb clarity, Mr. Trefil's third book of essays on
physics delivers us the great natural laws that (for instance) make sunsets red
and skies blue.

A SCRAP OF TIME: And Other Stories, by Ida Fink. (Pantheon, $15.95.) The short
stories in Mrs. Fink's first collection, derived from the experience of the
Holocaust, speak in whispers of a world where everyday life was submerged in
unthinkable horrors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A HERO GONE OUT OF FASHION

BYLINE: By STANLEY HOFFMAN; Stanley Hoffmann is the C. Douglas Dillon Professor
of the Civilization of France at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2346 words



SARTRE
A Life. By Annie Cohen-Solal. Edited by Norman MacAfee. Translated by Anna
Cancogni. Illustrated. 591 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $24.95.

ANNIE COHEN-SOLAL, a young teacher of literature and literary critic, had
already published a book on Paul Nizan (a novelist, close friend of Sartre's and
important member of the French Communist Party in the 1930's, killed on the
battlefield in May 1940) when she was commissioned by an American publisher to
write the first full biography of Jean-Paul Sartre. Only then did Sartre's
French publisher get interested. Her book appeared to great acclaim in Paris two
years ago. It took a long time to get it translated into English (adequately
rather than elegantly) by Anna Cancogni, in a somewhat condensed version.

There are different ways of writing biographies -especially those of writers as
monstrously prolific as Sartre. One way is to try to deal both with the events
in their private and public lives and with their writings. In the case of
Sartre, this would require several volumes and an author who would feel
competent to handle philosophy, epistemology, novels, plays, screenplays,
politics, literary and art criticism and psychoanalysis.

Another possibility - and temptation - is to try to find in the works the
expression, explicit or unconscious, of the writer's personal experiences,
traumas and conflicts. In Sartre's case, the links are often obvious. His huge
''preface'' to the works of Jean Genet, which became a book, and the three
enormous volumes on Flaubert are disguised autobiographies, for they deal with
writers who represented aspects of his own personality, and whom he wanted (in
Genet's case) to celebrate for his defiance of bourgeois conventions and (in
Flaubert's case) to vivisect as the very model of the bourgeois writer who,
disgusted by his century, deliberately entombed himself in art. Sartre's hatred
of his own body, as well as of his adolescence, reappears in his novels. His
love for his mother (widowed in 1906 when he was a year old), and his sense of
betrayal when she remarried in 1917, can be connected with his fascination with
incest and his interest in Baudelaire, who also hated his stepfather. Indeed,
his philosophy of being and freedom, his demand that men and women shape their
existence in the form of a project - an attempt to master the future - his
disdain for and frequent repudiations of his past can be seen as the products of
a man whose idyllic early years were abruptly terminated. His adolescence was
both stifling and unhappy, his career - after the happy years at the Ecole
Normale Superieure - was slow and filled with rejections, and he therefore
lived, for consolation and vindication, in the future.

The emotion that dominated his life, hatred of bourgeois mores, ethics and
politics, seems to have been fed by his family background (his father had
already rebelled against the bourgeoisie). The famished and ravenous way in
which he appeared to want to ''possess'' the world through the mind and the
printed word, the concentrated and almost Stakhanovite way in which he threw
himself into writing, especially in periods of intense stress (such as the
''phony war'' of 1939-40), could all too easily be psychoanalyzed as revenges
and escapes. The problem with this kind of an approach is reductionism: whatever
its sources in a writer's nightmares, hang-ups and obsessions, the work has a
life of its own. Many of Sartre's plays are about guilt; they cannot be reduced
to his own feelings of guilt for being, inescapably, a bourgeois, or for having
been indifferent to social and political issues until the war kicked him out of
his cozy existence as a teacher, because they examine also some of the most
compelling moral dilemmas faced by the Europeans of his generation.

Wisely, Ms. Cohen-Solal has avoided the pitfall of reductionism. But there are
two more possible approaches to biography. One consists in discussing the works
at least briefly, and in showing their connection with the author's and the
general public's concerns of the moment, without providing an extensive analysis
of the content or indulging in psychological reductionism. This is Ronald
Hayman's way, whose own recent biography of Sartre relies primarily on Simone de
Beauvoir's many volumes and on Annie Cohen-Solal's book. Ms. Cohen-Solal's
choice is different; she leaves the work aside and concentrates on the life. It
is, of course, a debatable choice. What is Sartre without his books? In her
fascinating and depressing final chapter, she describes the irreparable break
between two generations of Sartrean companions - the generation of de Beauvoir
and of their associates who ran the monthly Les Temps Modernes, and the younger
generation represented by Sartre's adopted daughter (and mistress) and the
fanatical Maoist (later to become a rabbi) Benny Levy, who had become Sartre's
guardian and collaborator during his seven years of blindness and illness and
drafted several interviews in which Sartre took startling new positions. But it
would have been important to know over what intellectual issues the conflict
developed.

Ms. Cohen-Solal's choice to concentrate on the life at the expense of the works,
however, can be defended. First, there is really no satisfactory way of dealing
with Sartre's monumental oeuvre except in depth; no one-volume biography could
do this. Second, as Sartre's first biographer, she decided not to rely only on
what had already been published. She investigated family archives and
interviewed as many of Sartre's acquaintances and associates as she could find.
Her merit is to have been both modest and industrious. Her modesty shows in her
decision to let the facts speak for themselves and to editorialize as little as
possible. As a result, Sartre's political involvements appear more complex and
more futile than in many other more judgmental works about him. Her industry
brings us an intensely human writer with all his contradictions, betrayals,
miscalculations, blinders and fiascoes. Thanks to the new information she has
collected, we have for the first time a clear picture of Sartre's parents and of
their families, which seem to belong in the novels of Francois Mauriac and Roger
Martin du Gard. We also learn a great deal that is new about Sartre's thespian
antics at the Ecole Normale, about his unconventionally informal and successful
methods as a secondary-school teacher of philosophy and about his moral
fortitude as well as his pitiful physical weakness in his last years. THAT
Sartre's account of his childhood in ''The Words'' was both brilliant and
thoroughly unreliable we already suspected. Ms. Cohen-Solal confirms that. His
portrait of his maternal grandfather, who he claimed tried to shape him into a
bourgeois whiz kid, was deeply unfair. (After reading it, his mother declared
that he had understood nothing about his childhood.) Ms. Cohen-Solal also shows
that the icon of the perfect, ''free'' couple painted by Simone de Beauvoir was
far from the truth. Craving affection, Sartre was surrounded by a veritable
harem. He told de Beauvoir about all these women. But what did he tell them
about her? To what extent were his adoption of Arlette Elkaim and later his
cooperation with Benny Levy acts of revenge aimed at de Beauvoir, who had been
his most intimate partner and the longtime critic of his drafts? There is rich
material for a bourgeois vaudeville (and drama) here.

What also emerges from Ms. Cohen-Solal's account is his lifelong fascination
with youth. He always preferred young disciples to equals. In his enthusiasm for
revolutions and revolutionary countries, antibourgeois hatred and the love of
new beginnings blended. One of his earliest (unpublished) novels was about a
triangle: the master (Wagner), the young disciple (Nietzsche) and the master's
wife (Cosima). Later, he wrote about Tintoretto's revolt against his master,
Titian. At the end of his life, Levy played the role of the young disciple, and
if Sartre let himself be manipulated by him (as de Beauvoir has stated), was it
only out of senility, or be-cause he identified with his tough young aide?

Ms. Cohen-Solal also documents his unhappy relationship with the world of
political action. After history had, so to speak, grabbed him in 1940, he wanted
to find an all-inclusive meaning in the sweep of human history. It was an
ambition that he never carried out - and had he taken seriously the writings of
the great Raymond Aron, his classmate at the Ecole Normale, he would have known
why it was futile - but one that explains both his long alliance with Marxism
and the unresolved tension between this quest for a philosophy of history and
his philosophy of freedom. Yet he also wanted to affect events: he needed both
dialectic and praxis; however, he was never successful in praxis either. His two
attempts at clandestine action in the Resistance were amateurish failures. The
revolutionary party he created in 1948 may, as his biographer says, have
anticipated the spirit of May 1968 and many of the themes of the 1980's, but it
collapsed in internal squabbles very quickly.

The only period in which Sartre became a strident fellow traveler of the French
Communist Party and of the Soviet Union was from 1952 to 1956, when many of the
older fellow travelers, revolted by Stalinism in Moscow and by Maurice Thorez's
party in France, were beginning to desert. The Algerian and Vietnam wars, which
Sartre denounced with all his might, were indeed his wars. But his hymn to
cleansing, anticolonial violence and his blindness to the flaws of the
revolutionary forces that were fighting French and American imperialisms marred
even his bravest stands.

The fact is that as he went on, especially in the late 1950's and in the 60's,
what he wrote came more and more out of his head (he was hyped by drugs that
ultimately destroyed his mind, as has already been mercilessly described by de
Beauvoir) and less and less out of either his personal experience or his
research. The scholar's humble submission to data, so essential in the social
sciences Sartre wanted to apprehend, was never his method. Sure of his genius,
eager to embrace the whole world and to expand consciousness as far as it could
go, he left unfinished most of his major projects - his series of novels, ''The
Roads to Freedom,'' his ethics, his critique of dialectical reason, his
biography of Flaubert.

The foe of bourgeois literature and bourgeois humanism, the didactic celebrator
of committed writing, the lifelong seeker of a new relationship between authors
and readers, he ended up being the last great French intellectual guru, in the
mold of a Voltaire or a Victor Hugo. He was the intellectual as conscience and
prophet, whose authority rested on his aura rather than on his expertise and who
was honored as a national asset by the officials and notables (including the
Nobel Prize committee) whose very existence this old anarchist despised. The
triumphant, omnipresent intellectual hero of 1945-55, whose abundant writings,
lectures and stands, whose influential monthly magazine and cultivation by the
news media insured his hegemony, finally became the enfeebled, blind recluse.
TODAY in France, where Marxism has become unfashionable, enthusiasm for the
third world unmentionable and selective sympathy for ''progressive'' regimes
intolerable, Sartre is widely seen as a nefarious influence - a man whose
prestige perhaps delayed by 20 years the advent of an antitotalitarian, liberal
consensus. The prosecution has a strong case. And yet, behind Sartre's political
follies, there always was a faith in individual freedom, a desire for human
emancipation from all the servitudes of established hierarchies and drudgeries,
a nostalgia for those dawns of liberation when Bastilles fall and fraternity
fuses people in a project that they define democratically as self-respecting
citizens - a residue of France's tradition of anarchic socialism that survived
his nasty break with Albert Camus (over Camus's attack on the intellectual's
total commitment to revolution) and reasserted itself in his quixotic support
for persecuted Maoist newssheets after 1968. There will be other biographies,
though there cannot be a ''definitive'' life of Sartre any more than he was able
to write a definitive one of Flaubert. For now, Annie Cohen-Solal's book helps
us understand the man's complexity better, and brings him to life in a
startlingly touching way.

HIS LEGENDARY PRIDE

''My occupation as a writer is completely destroyed. . . . Without the ability
to read or write, I no longer have even the slightest possibility of being
actively engaged as a writer. . . . In spite of everything, this dependence is
hardly unpleasant.'' On June 21, 1975, his seventieth birthday, Sartre agreed to
answer . . . questions for an interview. . . . In typically terse Sartrean
fashion, Sartre gives a flat, cruel assessment of his physical deterioration,
his handicaps, the new challenges he is trying to face. . . . Hypertension,
arterial thrombosis, triple hemorrhages at the base of the eye, weak arteries,
lowering of resistance due to age, numerous excesses of tobacco, alcohol, and
multiple drugs: the diagnosis is clear. . . . But, though he has grown totally
dependent on others for his daily needs, he has yet to tame his legendary pride
before he can fully resign himself to this new situation: ''Don't worry, I can
see. I can see,'' he often protests, either to convince himself or so as not to
be a burden to others. . . .

Indeed, he would always try to elude his blindness by relying on the little
lateral vision he had, looking for the best angle from which to capture light
and perceive forms. One day, in Rome, he quite surprised Simone de Beauvoir: a
cab had picked them up at their hotel to drive them to a restaurant both knew
well. ''This is not the best way to get there,'' Sartre noted after five
minutes, thus showing that he was much more present than anyone would have
thought.

From ''Sartre.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jean-Paul Sartre in Luxor, Egypt, 1967 (UPI); photo of
Jean-Paul Sartre with his mother, Anne-Mrie, 1906

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMORIALS SALUTE VIETNAM VETERANS

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 1, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


MORE than 10 years after the fighting ended, a memorial to Vietnam veterans is
being constructed in Danbury. The memorial is a statue of an infantryman
carrying a Vietnamese child in one arm and his rifle in another.

''The intent is to play up the humanity of the soldier,'' said Richard Cacace, a
member of the Greater Danbury Vietnam Veterans Memorial Committee, and a United
States Marine Corps veteran of the war.

''When we came back we were portrayed as baby killers, and it wasn't that way
for the vast majority of soldiers,'' Mr. Cacace said. Of the memorial he said,
''It's the right thing to do, even if it is late.''

Joseph B. Labbadia, a Middletown police officer who helped organize a memorial
committee in that city, said that damaged national pride delayed the honoring of
Vietnam veterans.

''It was the first war America lost; for whatever reasons, it was the first one
we lost,'' Mr. Labbadia said. ''We were embarrassed, I guess. Only now is it
O.K. to be a Vietnam veteran.''

''It's taken us a long time to come out of the proverbial closet, but we have,''
said Glenn C. Beaulieu, a Manchester Vietnam veteran who helped organize the
drive to establish a memorial in Manchester and is helping similar groups in
other communities. ''We've come of age, and we've become very vocal.''

That attitude is reflected in more than dozens of communities across Connecticut
that are only now putting up memorials to American soldiers who died in the war.

In recent months, monuments have been dedicated in Bloomfield, Colchester,
Meriden, Middletown and Wallingford. Others are planned in Coventry, Milford,
New Haven and Southington. Construction is already under way in Danbury.

Many of the memorials represent cooperative efforts by veterans or committees of
several towns. For instance, the Danbury monument will list the names of the war
dead from Bethel, Brookfield, Danbury, Newtown, Redding, Ridgefield and Sherman.

''The Vietnam veteran is becoming more vocal, letting people know they are here,
whereas before they felt neglected and shunned,'' said Lary Selavka, the new
State Commissioner of Veteran Affairs. ''They're asserting themselves.''

Mr. Cacace said a reason that so much activity is taking place now is that
Vietnam veterans - the most active members of the memorial committees being
formed around the state - were busy with other pursuits.

When they returned home, the veterans were starting businesses, going back to
school or starting new jobs. Also, Mr. Cacace said, it has taken some veterans
more than a decade to learn to deal with some of the memories of that conflict.

Mr. Cacace returned to Connecticut after his stint in Southeast Asia and went to
work for an engineering company in New York. Five years later, he started a
business in Connecticut, which demanded all of his time.

''It's taken 15 or 20 years to get ourselves in a position where we could devote
the time we need to do something like this,'' Mr. Cacace said.

''When we started this committee,'' he said, ''I had to do a lot of research. I
didn't even realize I had some of the feelings that have come to the surface
since I started working on this thing.''

Most of the memorials are being constructed with public and private money,
although in several cases the participation of the towns and cities involved is
limited to providing land for a monument.

In Danbury, Mr. Cacace said more than $121,000 has been raised toward a $130,000
goal, including $75,000 in seed money from the town.

''The city's donation gave us some legitimacy,'' Mr. Cacace said. ''After that,
we went to the larger corporations in the area, and even though a few let us
down, most of them came through.''

Manchester's black granite memorial, with a pole for the American flag and a
prisoner of war flag, cost $80,000, all of it raised privately, Mr. Beaulieu
said. The original memorial committee members have agreed to continue serving,
as a sort of maintenance supervisor for the park.

Mr. Beaulieu said the site, right off Main Street, was chosen for its high
visibility.

''A lot of people wanted to forget we even existed, but we're letting them know
we're still around,'' Mr. Beaulieu said. ''Vietnam veterans are prouder of being
Vietnam veterans today than they were years ago.''

In some cases, the monuments have become memorials not only to those who served
in the Vietnam War, but to the those of the Korean War as well.

''Beyond the far Pacific, to the rim of Asia they went, twice in a generation,
to risk all for honor and freedom,'' is the saying etched into four black
granite stones of the Middletown momument.

In Coventry, the Town Council set up a committee to investigate putting up
separate memorials to Korea and Vietnam on town-owned land, said Thomas J.
Bothur, a decorated veteran of the Vietnam conflict, and a committee member.

Mr. Bothur said he was surprised at the support among all residents, not just
the veterans, after the committee was created.

But he was even more surprised, he said, to find out the number of veterans
living in town. So far, about 125 male and female veterans of Vietnam have come
forward, including some who have kept that part of their lives quiet for many
years.

''As the country as a whole started recognizing that Vietnam happened, rather
than shutting it away somewhere, it's become easier for the veteran to recognize
it,'' Mr. Bothur said.

Many of the monuments are modeled after the Vietnam Memorial in Washington D.C.,
including the monument in Manchester, said Mr. Beaulieu.

''Before I visited 'The Wall,' I think I tried to ignore the fact that I was a
veteran,'' Mr. Beaulieu said. ''But it brought back too much feeling, and I came
back knowing I had to do something about it.''

''It's not a traditional monument,'' said Mr. Bothur of the Washington memorial.
''It's distinctive to Vietnam, and I guess that's what's drawn a lot of people
to imitate it.''

Other memorials have been more traditional, such as the statue in Danbury, which
will consist of an eight-foot soldier holding a baby and a rifle, on top of a
five-foot cube.

On the cube will be three plaques, one listing the 44 men and women reported
dead or missing in action in Vietnam, another showing a relief map of Vietnam
with major battle sites highlighted and a third showing a medical evacuation
scene with boats in the background, jets in the air and infantrymen on the
ground.

''When any individual who served in Vietnam looks at this memorial, he will be
able to relate to some aspect of it,'' Mr. Cacace said. ''And when you look at
this statute, we don't want your head to drop.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnam War memorial in Manchester; Photo of model for Vietnam
War memorial in Danbury (NYT/Stephen Castagneto); Photo of Glenn C. Beaulieu at
the memorial in Manchester (NYT/Stephen Castagneto)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LIGHT AT THE END OF THE NOVEL

BYLINE: By PETER SCHNEIDER; Peter Schneider, a West German novelist and
short-story writer, is the author of ''The Wall Jumper.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2915 words


SINCE the early years of this century, writers have been plagued by fundamental
doubts about their craft. In individual or collective manifestoes, the most
oddly assorted literary types have announced to their startled colleagues that
it's no longer possible to tell stories; that the hero no longer serves as a
focus of the action; that plot, character and psychology belong in the dustbin
of history; that writing should cease altogether.

In general, such programmatic declarations come either before or just after
major historical upheavals - societal mutiny, industrial revolution, war. In the
midst of their esthetic revolt, the Russian Futurists were surprised by the
October Revolution; many were killed in the course of it. During the 20's, the
avant-garde got caught in the crossfire of civil war between Fascists and
Communists. Andre Breton was wild about Stalin, Marinetti about Mussolini. After
World War II, the inventors of the New Novel fought Sartre's ''litterature
engagee'' and declared language the sole object of literature. Their ideas were
the basis of Peter Handke's declaration of war, in 1966, against the
''descriptive impotence'' of West Germany's Group 47. In 1968, the students
revolted. At the time, some of their literary spokesmen - myself among them -
prophesied the end of middle-class literature and argued that political action
must precede writing.

In the main, though, the manifesto writers didn't hold to their creed for long
and, after a period of rejection or experimentation, began to tell stories
again. A cynic might conclude from this pattern that when a writer says we can't
tell stories anymore, he is really, involuntarily confessing that he, this
particular writer, is suffering from writer's block. This interpretation has the
virtue of simplicity, and is even, in some cases, true. But it misses the most
important lesson of such literary debates - namely, that the periodic
declarations of death to the novel haven't done away with it - they've only
fundamentally changed it. Talk about ''the crisis in'' or ''the end of''
narration proves in the long run to be no more than a perhaps necessary detour
in search of new ways of telling stories.

The truth is, these theoretical outbursts, moody and grotesque as they seem,
express an inner drive of literature, the drive to innovation. I haven't got a
terminal outlet for the computer that has apparently shown us how all the
thousands of novels that have been written are variations on a handful of
literary archetypes, but I'm sure the computer is right. Since fictional
narrative deals more with the emotional life of man than with human technology,
the material at its disposal is extremely limited. The number of occasions for
human emotion can probably be counted on the fingers of both hands; and nothing,
not even the fact that we orbit the stars in spaceships, argues against the
assertion that we are dealing with a soul machine that has changed disturbingly
little over the past 500,000 years.

The literature that deals with this soul machine, an incurably old and
remarkably persistent one, is in principle as conservative as nature itself. It
can only save itself from unending repetition by a constant renewal of the way
stories are told. One could even say it is driven to this kind of innovation,
because it is true that the same eternal, archetypal conflicts surface in every
era and are experienced anew and differently by each individual. The unhappy
lover finds no consolation in the admonition that millions of people before him
have suffered the same disease; the theme of Goethe's ''Sorrows of Young
Werther'' hasn't been exhausted by the fact that he wrote the book. It isn't a
fear of plagiarizing, but the search for a contemporary form for the Werther
material that drives writers today to tell the old story in a new way. This
newness expresses itself primarily in the way a novel is composed, its world of
images, the rhythm and melody of its language. The narrative style of a novel
betrays more of an author's contemporaneity than all his plots. One can
formulate the paradox in the following way: just as literature is bound, in its
selection of material, to a handful of archetypes, so it is committed, in its
representations, to a permanent revolution. So the question whether one can
still tell stories becomes a question of how one tells them here and now. THERE
has probably never been a coherent model for the narrative form termed ''the
novel.'' One might conceivably claim this youngest of literary genres resulted
from a degenerative process. It sprang up amid the ruins of the finished form of
the verse epic, and announced to all that the split between individual and
collective history would henceforth be a principle of narrative. But the great
novelists of the 18th and 19th centuries kept a pledge to the epic utopianism of
their ancestor, Homer - to the idea that the history of a people or a society
could be represented by an individual who both acts and feels. Odysseus
experiences and motivates a historical drama called the Trojan War. Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza embody the fate of European chivalry in their foolish refusal
to admit that its fate has long since been sealed. Wilhelm Meister indicates the
rising middle class's pretension to a level of experience that even the elite
couldn't attain under feudalism. All these descendants of Odysseus share a role
as representatives; in their experiences and their passions, they speak for an
age. This is the mission that propels the classic novel: the larger historical
canvas is only of interest if it can be conveyed in the fate of an individual or
a group - history must become the history of the individual, or cease.

The question whether this narrative model corresponds to the way we now
experience history isn't a new one. To put it differently: do the stories we
read or live through still feel like history? Does our experience of history
even have the structure of an experience that can be shared anymore?

Some time ago, together with a Bavarian writer, I went on a trip to the Soviet
Union. My colleague startled me and our Soviet counterparts by constantly
propounding the theory that the great historical events passed down in the
history books either never occurred or were falsified. Some examples: Alexander
the Great never went to Persia; America was discovered by the Vikings, not
Columbus; Christ was born at least 30 years earlier than we estimate, if He ever
existed at all; and so on. The polite if troubled smiles with which our Soviet
hosts greeted the crazy Bavarian's declarations faded altogether, though, when
he took on the most hallowed moment in Soviet historiography and claimed the
October Revolution probably hadn't occurred, either.

I was horrified, and was therefore all the more surprised when his thesis met
with complete - if private - agreement. A writer from Leningrad said it reminded
him of one of his grandfather's tales. According to the story, his grandfather
crossed the square in front of the Winter Palace in his coach on the evening of
Oct. 25, 1917; he was going to a card game with his uncle, who lived on the
other side of the Neva. On the way over, peace reigned in the square - there
were no demonstrations, no pamphlets, no revolutionary clamor. Nor did anyone
hear the shot supposedly fired that night by the Aurora, the legendary ship of
the Revolution (as every resident of the city was aware, the ship only steamed
into port the following day).

On his way home from the card game late that night, the writer's grandfather
again crossed the square. It was still deserted, though a few lights were
shining in the windows of the palace. Then, in the days that followed, the old
man heard the Winter Palace had been stormed and the Revolution had triumphed on
the very night he was there. To this day, he assumes the victorious Revolution
was a hoax. An ingenious propagandist named Lenin simply created a moment in
world history through news reports, leaflets and a deft word-of-mouth campaign,
and then reshaped the whole society to conform to his lie. The writer's
grandfather has waited ever since for the event to follow on the news.

A historian may call the old Russian's story an irrelevant anecdote, but today's
writer will find it has methodological implications. True, every one of us now
comes into unprecedented contact with the events that supposedly make up
history, thanks to the news media. But we experience these events almost
exclusively as spectators watching the evening news with a beer in hand, rather
than as agents or victims.

For me, history is generally as extended and exciting an experience as the daily
news broadcast, and I encounter it most often in the privacy of my own four
walls. That doesn't mean I don't have significant experiences. I cut my finger,
the police pull me over when I'm drunk at the wheel, my car gets stuck in the
desert sand, I'm deserted by my lover. But my actions and feelings have for all
intents and purposes nothing to do with the great events of history that, if I
am to believe the newscasts, occur every day. I once let essential repairs on my
television set slide for an entire year, and then canceled my newspaper
subscription as well. I later realized I had missed quite a bit: multiple
hostage-takings, important negotiations in Geneva, two or three earthquakes and
countless wars, some of which had ended when my back was turned, while others
were just beginning. But if, in all seriousness, I ask myself what escaped me
during that year, it was the fact that I didn't know about any of it. I
concluded, then, that I apparently never land in the middle of so-called events.
God knows I'm not complaining, but I wonder: what is my part in history?

I should add that I'm not indifferent to great historical events; in fact, I
deal with them practically on a daily basis. But I do so most frequently, most
typically, by having an opinion on them. Like Robert Musil's ''man without
qualities,'' I spend the daily newscast fiddling with a new order for central
Europe; like Saul Bellow's Herzog, I compose letters by the trunkful to the
world's great men, letters I never send off, of course, because they never get
written. Time and again I mentally beat up my political opponents, regularly
wire vetoes and protests that never arrive at their destinations all over the
globe because they never get beyond a conversation or monologue in front of the
television.

Now, with the help of a newspaper and my imagination, I could of course make up
the hero of a novel whose destiny was exciting, vivid and full of history - in
short, a representative man. But what would a hero like that represent, other
than my reading habits? I SAY this because I suspect many other television
viewers, maybe even a majority, have the same response. Some of the many people
who can't reconcile themselves to an unconsciousness born of their daily routine
pray for war, which since time immemorial has always meant a more direct
experience of history; a man becomes himself in war. But the only war we can
imagine mattering to us today is not one that we could choose to attend or
avoid. We would deal with that future war in much the same way we deal with most
news items in peacetime - as television viewers - and shortly after the
broadcast, the war would be over. A third world war wouldn't even make the
subject of a short story, let alone a novel.

The fact that the traditional novel no longer corresponds to our experience of
history doesn't prevent it from being, if anything, more successful than ever
before. The great novels of world literature have created not just tastes in
reading, but tastes in history that are shamelessly applied in the products of
mass culture. Not only television mini-series and crime fiction, but campaign
speeches and governmental communiques obey an esthetic whose ground rule is that
the individual makes history. A musclebound Vietnam vet named Rambo can just
about win the war after all; the determined entrepreneur in ''Wings of the
Eagle'' can free his buddy from captivity in Teheran; a vigorous President can
triumph over terrorism by bombing the Libyan capital. It doesn't matter if any
of these best-selling performances meet a standard of truth or probability. The
important thing is, they follow the plot. The public isn't fooled: a large
majority of Americans supported the raid on Libya; but the same majority didn't
believe the attack would deter Colonel Qaddafi from more terrorism. Sometimes it
seems as though the politicians are ghostwriters committed to practicing an
obsolete genre: they stage the novels novelists no longer write.

Robert Musil was one of the first to challenge the conventions of the
traditional novel. In his notes to ''A Man Without Qualities,'' he writes:
''Readers expect to be told about life, not about how life is reflected in
literature or in people's heads.'' Musil had serious doubts about the
possibility of presenting life or reality in the form of a well-told tale:
''Control over unreality - now there's an ambition.'' As early as the 1920's, he
saw his era as ''an essayistic time,'' a time ''without totalizing perspective''
and given over to ''fragmentism.'' He described the narrative method of ''A Man
Without Qualities'' thus: ''The plot of the novel amounts to not telling the
story one was supposed to tell.'' Musil made good on this threat for over 1,000
pages. His hero, Ulrich, does nothing, but he knows and reflects on everything.

This is not the place to discuss to what extent Musil succeeded in meeting his
own challenge. But it is clear to us today that in his man without qualities, a
man who experiences history by observing rather than acting or feeling, he has
given us a contemporary in whom we reluctantly recognize ourselves.

In the last couple of decades, several of our most important authors have picked
up Musil's narrative ap-proach and used it to new effect. It is obvious that
Saul Bellow's Herzog - that lovesick professor who writes incessantly and with
fanatic intensity to newspapers, public figures, friends, relatives and even the
dead - is a relative of Musil's Ulrich. And what, if one stripped away the
hero's intellectual confusion, would be the plot of ''Humboldt's Gift''? From
the other side of the Atlantic, Milan Kundera answers Saul Bellow with ''The
Unbearable Lightness of Being,'' which may be marketed as a novel, but in fact
begins with an essay and is a brilliant essayistic novel. In Mr. Kundera's case,
it isn't the characters who come into an ''essayistic relation'' with the world;
the privilege of reflection is reserved for the omniscient narrator. From a
technical point of view, this approach has the disadvantage that the author is
always smarter than his characters and suffers the temptation to lecture us
about them. But the essayistic tone of the book gives the stories it contains an
unreality closer to our sense of history than a thousand well-told tales.

In German, Gunter Grass is the most recent author to have attempted a narrative
in the style of the essayistic novel. An unusual Christmas gift, a female rat,
becomes the narrator's untiring questioner and plaintiff, mercilessly
challenging his stories, opinions and very existence. What emerges in ''The
Rat'' is an epic dialogue that focuses on the future and the possibilities for
human survival. The difficulty of this book is that the stories and political
and philosophical arguments seem to detach themselves ever further from the
characters. Musil formulated the complaint as follows: ''The main effect of a
novel should be emotional. Thoughts should not be included for their own sake.
Nor can they - and this is a particular difficulty -be set forth the way a
thinker would do; they are aspects of a character.''

Naturally, in making the case for the essayistic novel, I don't mean to single
it out as the only possible narrative form. Other authors have found completely
different literary answers to the crisis in storytelling that has been plaguing
novelists' workshops since the beginning of the century. But perhaps it remains
for the essayistic novel to tell us what, at the end of the second millennium,
has become of Odysseus the mover of history and shaker of stories: an observer
who can't give up his quest for history, but experiences it mainly as a voyeur,
in unending reflection.

Certainly the conjunction of the reflective form called the essay and the form
of storytelling called the novel means a loss in narrative immediacy. It's no
accident that Latin American novels, vibrant with life, fill the bookshelves in
the industrialized world today. But these novels probably owe their best-selling
status in the Old World to the delusions of a self-seeking public: for us, they
offer literary nostalgia as reality. And what if they describe an existence that
is already past for the third world as well? Maybe Ignacio de Loyola Brandao's
''Zero'' - a narrative meditation on 24 hours of loneliness in Sao Paulo - tells
us more about the experience of history in Latin America today than one hundred
years of solitude in the village of Macondo.

A writer who trusts to his curiosity will not be scared off by the dangers and
frequent catastrophes that go with writing the essayistic novel. He will carry
on where the best authors before him have stopped or failed.

Translated from the German by Leigh Hafrey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (page 23)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ARMS AIRLIFT TO ANGOLA REBELS IS SAID TO GO ON

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast, July 26


A secret airlift of American arms to Angolan guerrillas continues through
southern Zaire, two Western diplomats stationed in Zaire said today.

One of the diplomats said the flights were as frequent as four to five a week.

The arms are flown from Kinshasa's international airport in a C-141 cargo plane
marked Santa Lucia Airways to an abandoned Belgian air base near Kamina, in
Zaire's Shaba province, he said. From there, a light blue C-130 cargo plane
shuttles the weapons to areas in Angola, the diplomat said.

Coping With the Heat

A team of Americans, led by a colonel, coordinates the operation in Kamina, the
diplomat said. To cope with Central Africa's heat, the Americans have built a
small swimming pool at the base, he added.

Also at the base is a detachment of about 12 guerrillas of the Union for the
Total Independence of Angola, he said. The rebels, led by Jonas Savimbi, are
fighting to overthrow Angola's Marxist Government.

Zaire's President, Mobutu Sese Seko, has repeatedly denied that his country
allows any American aid for Unita to pass through his country. The rebel
movement is criticized by many African leaders for receiving most of its arms
from South Africa.

'It Is Better to Talk'

In a fresh reminder of the insurgents' South African link, Mr. Savimbi visited
Johannesburg last month and counseled local black leaders, ''It is better to
talk than to fight so that you can identify the common problems and
differences.''

This correspondent visited Kamina in late January and wrote about the arms
shipments. He has since been barred from returning to Zaire, but last week two
diplomats reached there by telephone said the shipments were continuing.
American aid to the guerrillas has in the past included automatic weapons,
ammunition and shoulder-held anti-aircraft missiles, like Stingers. It is not
clear how the arms get to Zaire.  Supply operations at Kamina were reportedly
suspended for two weeks in mid-April when about 65 United States soldiers of the
Rapid Deployment Force, based at Fort Bragg, N.C., conducted counterinsurgency
training for Zairian troops at Kamina.

United States aid to the insurgents has been legal since August 1985, when the
United States Senate revoked an amendment that had barred assistance to Angola's
warring factions since June 1976.

Last year, the Reagan Administration said it gave $15 million of aid to the
rebels. Last month, Administration officials said they planned to give another
$15 million. The money comes out of the Central Intelligence Agency budget and
does not need formal Congressional approval.

Reference by North

In Washington, the Senate hearings on the covert supply of weapons to
anti-Marxist guerrillas in Nicaragua has not investigated possible illegal arms
shipments to the rebels in the early 1980's.

Earlier this month, Sam Joseph Bamieh, a California businessman, testified under
oath before a House subcommittee that Saudi Arabia's royal family provided
millions of dollars to the rebels in the early 1980's at the behest of William
J. Casey, who was then Director of Central Intelligence.

In February 1986, Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North told a group of United Methodist
Church leaders in Washington that he had taken part in two wars - in Vietnam and
Angola. It is unclear whether his Angola assignment took place before, during or
after the nine-year arms embargo.

No Buildup at Kamina

Last Wednesday, Chester A. Crocker, Assistant Secretary of State for African
Affairs, declined to say how American aid reaches the insurgents. Transfer
through South Africa would violate an international embargo on arms shipments to
South Africa.

''There is no buildup at Kamina,'' Mr. Crocker said in an interview conducted by
satellite with journalists in Lisbon and London. ''It is a Soviet line that is
being echoed around the free world for reasons that I cannot quite understand.''

State Department officials have said that the United States aid to the rebels is
small when compared with an estimated $1 billion of aid sent by the Soviet Union
to Angola in the last year.

Crocker Goes to Angola

Two weeks ago, Mr. Crocker spent two days in Angola's capital, Luanda, seeking
to negotiate a withdrawal of an estimated 37,000 Cuban troops from Angola and an
end to hostilities between the Government and Unita, as the rebel group is
known.

''It was a waste of time,'' the diplomat said. Mr. Crocker said he left Luanda
convinced that the Angolan Government is ''still preoccupied and focused on
military solutions in the south and hoping that they can, in just one more dry
season, perhaps, crush the forces of Unita.''

On July 17, two days after Mr. Crocker left Luanda, the United States Senate
voted to repeal Angola's most-favored nation trading status. The bill, which
would affect the sizable level of American oil imports from Angola, needs House
approval before becoming law. Earlier this month, the Senate voted against a
proposed embargo of all American investment and trade with Angola.

Last month, The New York Times received copies of two typewritten memorandums
that refer to the arms supply operation. Both seem to be written by Zairian
intelligence services to President Mobutu in the wake of the Feb. 1 Times story
about the arms airlift.

Times Obtains Memos

Last week, a Western diplomat stationed in Zaire examined the documents, written
in French. The diplomat, who declined to be identified, said he believed them to
be genuine.

''The operation is directed by a white C.I.A. officer with the rank of major,''
said one memorandum, written under the heading ''Information note to the
President.''

The second document, dated Feb. 10, 1987, and headed ''Security Measures,''
said: ''The C.I.A. will regularly furnish information on all the journalists who
ask for visas for Zaire.'' [Kathy Pherson, a Central Intelligence Agency
spokeswoman in Washington, asked about the assertions in the document, declined
to comment. ''There is no way I can respond to that,'' she said late Sunday
night.] Under the heading, ''The airports used for this operation: Kamina,'' the
memorandum recommended: ''Replace Colonel Munga, current head of this air base
because he drinks a lot and regularly steals fuel stocked for this operation.''
According to one diplomat in Zaire, Colonel Munga has not been replaced.

A second diplomat who visited Kamina base last year added another detail in a
recent interview. American technicians installed runway lights to allow the
supply flights to land at night.

Last January, a large number of American military cargo planes could be seen
landing and taking off from Kinshasa's airport at Ndjili. American Embassy
officials said the planes were carrying arms to Chad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows location of Kinshasa, from where Angolan rebels are flown to
Kamina (NYT) (Pg. A2)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

They Are Not Heard On Capitol Hill

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 273 words


To the Editor:

Prospects for peace in Central America are gloomy indeed. For several days, I
observed Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North's testimony at the Iran-contra hearings. I
heard him argue passionately for his view of the situation in Central America.
More disturbing, I heard Congressional panelists speak in basic agreement with
Colonel North's assessment of the Central American reality, disagreeing only on
the means by which he sought to implement policy.

Oliver North spoke of Central America as if the people there had no history, no
memory, no past experience to shape their views and perspectives of the world.
He could always turn back to his Vietnam experience as rationale for his views
and actions. His medals were a reminder that when it came to dealing with
''Communists,'' he knew what he was talking about.

But who speaks for the Central American point of view? What experience with
decades-long American support for a dictator lingers in the memory of a
Sandinista? What personal acquaintance with brutal injustice and oppression
drives the thoughts and actions of the fiery social reformer in Latin America?

We haven't heard this side in the Iran-contra hearings. The Congressional panels
haven't offered it to counterbalance Colonel North's brilliant homiletics. I
wonder if there aren't people of no less sincerity in Nicaragua. I'm afraid they
won't get a hearing. I'm also afraid we're going down that road again, perhaps,
toward slaughtering a people whose history we don't understand.

SAM LOWE
Cambridge, Mass., July 17, 1987
  The writer is the Southern Baptist chaplain at Harvard University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Business's Bottom Line: Ethics

BYLINE: By John S.R. Shad; John S. R. Shad, United States Ambassador to The
Netherlands, was chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission from 1981 to
1987.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Ethical and moral lapses in the business and financial community, academia,
politics and religion fill the daily press. But the rash of insider-trading
cases on Wall Street against recent graduates of top business and law schools
seems particularly disturbing because the cream of the crop, with six-figure
incomes and brilliant careers ahead, is being convicted.

Most appear to have been very bright, highly motivated overachievers, driven by
peer rivalries to win a game in which the score had a dollar sign in front of
it. While there have been a few big fish, most sold their futures for $20,000 to
$50,000 of illicit profits. They missed the point - that life is a marathon not
a sprint.

In fact, most business school graduates become competent executives, managing
people and resources for the benefit of society. The rewards -the titles and
money - are merely the byproducts of doing a good job.

Ethical attitudes are imbued in childhood, but leading graduate schools cannot -
and have not - abdicated their responsibility to prepare their graduates to
contribute to society rather than abuse it. The erosion of ethical attitudes has
heightened the concerns at top educational institutions about ethical issues.

Even as the attention given to the flagrant abuses in the business world has
elevated ethics to a primary responsibility of leading graduate schools of
business, law, medicine and government, most of the 12,000 college and graduate
business courses in ethics are still superficial, according to Management
magazine.

It is not enough for these schools to certify that their graduates have mastered
the fundamentals of their profession. The schools must hone their ability to
certify that their graduates have the character and integrity to use the
knowledge gained for the benefit - rather than the abuse - of society.

Business schools should respond in several ways. First, they can improve
admissions policies by selecting candidates who aspire to the objectives and
concepts that they teach. The schools may not be able to rehabilitate ethical
misfits, but they can do better at keeping out the bad apples.

Next, through case studies and research the schools can test and refine these
and related concepts:

* Executives, investment bankers and lawyers who properly serve their customers,
clients, employees and communities do a better job for themselves, their
companies and partners than those who take unfair advantage of these groups and
the investing public in their drive to maximize immediate gains.

* Those who go for edges - like high rollers in Las Vegas - are eventually wiped
out financially.

* As demonstrated by most successful individuals and companies, the marketplace
rewards quality, integrity and ethical conduct.

* While integrity and ethical conduct are their own rewards, they also make good
business sense.

* In sum, ethics pays: It's smart to be ethical.

The results of such case studies and research should be incorporated into all
courses - finance, marketing, production - not merely in a single course on
ethics.

A recent Roper poll on the attributes we desire in friends - good looks,
intelligence, a sense of humor, common interests and honesty -found that 94
percent of Americans rank honesty above all the other attributes. Nonetheless,
recent polls published in The New York Times indicate that only a third of
Americans believe business does a pretty good or better job of behaving
ethically, and 53 percent believe most corporate executives are dishonest.

By contrast, a study by Johnson & Johnson indicates that 30 companies that were
considered to have above average ethical standards significantly outperformed
the stock market average. While the Dow Jones Industrial Average has risen
fivefold in the last 30 years, the stock value of the 30 companies in the survey
experienced a 23-fold increase.

All of us want to deal with individuals and companies we can trust. A great deal
more research is needed, but there are strong clues that the marketplace does
reward quality, integrity and ethical conduct.

The erosion of ethical attitudes in America since the end of World War II can be
attributed to the dispersion of families, rising divorce rates, the Vietnam War,
the ''permissive'' and ''me'' generations, the drug culture, the affluent
society and, most important, the substitution of television for the family,
church and school as the principal purveyor of social mores.

We should redouble our efforts to induce television sponsors to increase the
ethical content in interesting and amusing television cartoons and other
programming. The business and financial communities also need to inspire and
enforce higher ethical standards.

However, some of the charges and criticisms should be put in perspective. The
problems are immediate and great, and they do not need to be exaggerated. Wall
Street has long been criticized for ethical lapses, but Wall Street's ethics
compare favorably with those of other professions. An astronomical sum - more
than $38 trillion worth of securities -changed ownership last year. Trillions of
dollars of these transactions are executed over the telephone, relying on
nothing more than the other person's word. The paperwork follows in three days.

By the highest conjecture, securities fraud is a tiny fraction of 1 percent of
the enormous volume of securities transactions. Periods of speculative excesses
and serious market reactions will undoubtedly continue, but America has by far
the best and fairest securities markets the world has ever known.

In 1981, business publications reported that insider trading was so pervasive
that nothing could be done about it. Many people apparently took such news to be
a signal to engage in insider trading. If others are engaging in insider trading
with impunity, they reasoned, why shouldn't we?

Since 1981, the Securities and Exchange Commission has brought 125 insider
trading cases, compared with 77 during the previous 47 years. The large increase
is due principally to the increase in tender offers and to improved surveillance
and enforcement systems and techniques.

The surge of indictments demonstrates that it has become increasingly difficult
for perpetrators to hide - at home or abroad. Those who engage in illegal acts
are assuming enormous risks of imprisonment, heavy fines and civil suits,
disbarment from the legal profession and the securities industry, and public
disgrace.

Securities fraud has not been eradicated, but it has been inhibited. And the
many millions of dollars in profits that Ivan F. Boesky and others had been
siphoning off the markets are now flowing to legitimate traders and investors.

Finally, as demonstrated by the negative public perception of the business
community, management still suffers from the image of the robber barons -
caricatured as fat, greedy, old men. The few robber barons who existed were born
more than a century ago and the last of them were buried in the debris of the
1929 stock market crash.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A ROCKING BILLY JOEL BREAKS THROUGH SOVIET RESERVE

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 26


Billy Joel brought his rock-and-roll here today and won the souls of those in a
stony Soviet audience, leaving them cheering, dancing on chairs and looking
around in fearful wonder as they followed the music and not the rules.

''Come on up here closer to the stage,'' Mr. Joel called about an hour and a
half into his two-and-a-half hour concert. ''We like it that way.''

With momentary hesitation and then greater and greater enthusiasm, hundreds in
the crowd - which had responded with barely polite applause to the driving
chords of ''Allentown'' and ''My Life'' - suddenly raised a forest of swaying
arms and pounding hands and crowded in around the musician. They reached up to
him as he reached down to them singing, ''It's still rock-and-roll to me.''

It was apparent that the boisterous reaction was more than the Soviet
authorities had bargained for. The breakdown of order transformed a purely
cultural event into a demonstration of popular will as the desire of the
concertgoers to break out of their fetters overcame the extensive security
controls.

Under Exchange Agreement

''This is the first time in my life this happened,'' one concertgoer said.
''They let us do it.'' One of Mr. Joel's entourage indicated some hours after
the concert that the Soviet authorities were having discussions about the
remainder of the six-concert Soviet tour, but would not say what the discussions
involved.

The tour is under the auspices of a United States-Soviet cultural exchange
agreement signed in Geneva in 1985. The authorities said 22,000 tickets had been
distributed for the concert tonight.

The audience, as is often the case with Soviet rock concerts, was much more
heavily weighted to staid Russian matrons and button-down men in their 40's than
to the young people who predominate in Western rock audiences. But at the end,
the matrons were clapping and gyrating along with their children.

''Back in the U.S.S.R.,'' Mr. Joel sang to them, after the chants of ''Bee-lee,
Bee-lee,'' brought him back for an encore. ''You don't know how lucky you are,
back in the U.S.S., back in the U.S.S., back in the U.S.S.R.''

Soldiers Keeping Time

By the time that Beatles song had ended, even the soldiers were keeping time,
the rhythmic bouncing of their knees looking oddly incongruous below their stern
faces.

''I don't know why my music's popular here - I don't know why it's popular in
the U.S.'' Mr. Joel had said as he did assembly-line interviews for a long row
of American television networks before the show. ''I don't know, because I don't
want to become a formula writer.''

But it was not Mr. Joel's lyrics, which touched on everything from paternal love
to soldiers' long nights of fear in Vietnam, that moved the crowd. There was no
translation of the lyrics, although an interpreter did help the singer with his
occasional remarks to the audience.

Early in the evening, he drew his first loud cheers from the crowd, at the
Olympic Stadium near downtown Moscow, when he said he had visited the grave of
the balladeer Vladimir Vysotsky. He then dedicated the song ''Honesty'' to
Vysotsky.

The evening itself may have been a memorial of sorts to the hugely popular
balladeer, whose lyrics, like Mr. Joel's, cut close to the fears and
frustrations of his countrymen. The demonstration at the concert may have been
the most spontaneous since the day almost exactly seven years ago when thousands
of Muscovites waited for Vysotsky's coffin to pass, spending hours at Taganka
Square and resisting militia efforts to disperse them.

Treated for Sore Throat

Mr. Joel had complained of a sore throat before the concert, an affliction he
and his managers attributed, in part, to an unscheduled performance at the opera
house in Tbilisi, capital of the Soviet Republic of Georgia, late last week.

The singer and his wife, the model Christie Brinkley, who is accompanying him,
had gone to Tbilisi so Mr. Joel could meet some singers from Soviet Georgia and,
perhaps, have a jam session with them.

When they arrived, they found that 1,000 tickets had been sold and that it was
to be more a performance than a jam.

On Saturday, the same day he visited Vysotsky's grave, Mr. Joel visited a
medical clinic where attendants gave him an injection, put electrodes on his
throat, took a huge curved syringe and squirted some soothing liquid down his
throat, and then gave him a box of Tic-Tac candies and told him to use them
every so often.

Mr. Joel's trip to Georgia and his visits to tourist spots around Moscow are
being filmed for a combined documentary-concert film that Mr. Joel's management
concern, Frank Management, hopes to sell to defray the cost of the tour - now
more than $2 million.

Another film, solely of the concerts, is being made and has been sold to the
Home Box Office network.

In Apparent Exasperation

At 8:50 tonight, Mr. Joel, apparently exasperated by the largely perfunctory
response of the audience, first asked some of the parade of people bringing him
flowers to stay near the stage and then invited the others down.

After scores of people had crowded around him, Mr. Joel plunged into the crowd
and walked back yard by yard, all the time motioning people to follow him back
to the stage.

A sea of hands, many of them clutching Billy Joel posters, waved as he spun the
microphone up into the air, sprinkled the crowd with water from his glass, and
finally clambered onto his piano, spinning round on his stomach before jumping
to his feet.

That was during the encore. Then, finally, an obviously exhausted Joel, bathed
in sweat, said a final, ''Spasibo,'' for, ''Thank you,'' and, ''Good night.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Billy Joel on-stage in Moscow (Reuters)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 28, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: THE POLICY WARS;
Those to Whom a 'Battle Royal' Is Nothing New

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1736 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


When Secretary of State George P. Shultz testified at the Iran-contra hearings,
he described life in Washington as a ''battle royal,'' full of bickering,
backstabbing, backbiting and unceasing conflict over policy.

Within the Reagan Administration, he encountered ''a kind of guerrilla
warfare,'' he said, adding: ''Nothing ever gets settled in this town. You have
to keep fighting every inch of the way.''

Some members of Congress expressed surprise or dismay. But to many who have
worked in Washington, such conflict is nothing new. Indeed, they say, it is the
process by which foreign and domestic policy is routinely made, and it is not
necessarily unhealthy, if there is a competent referee at the top of the pyramid
of power.

Richard G. Darman, who taught government at Harvard University, worked in the
Reagan White House and served most recently as Deputy Secretary of the Treasury,
said in an interview: ''Conflict within bureacucracy is exceedingly healthy,
provided there is a fair, orderly process for resolving it. The value of
bureaucratic conflict is that it exposes a decision-maker to a diversity of
opinions, opportunities and risks. You don't want everyone to be a clone of the
chief executive.''

Conflict as 'A Fact of Life'

The tactics used in the latest ''battle royal'' differed in degree - they were
more ferocious and intense -but not in kind from the tactics used whenever
Federal bureaucrats fight.

Richard N. Perle, a former Assistant Secretary of Defense well versed in the
techniques of both nuclear and bureaucratic warfare, said today that he had
''defended interagency conflicts as both a fact of life and a phenomenon that
enables the President to have laid before him a broad range of views.''

''But under this Administration,'' he said, ''the National Security Council has
been weaker than in prior administrations. Its ability to reconcile differences
is less. So the differences persist longer and are fought out with greater
determination.''

Michael J. Horowitz, former counsel to the director of the Office of Management
and Budget, said the type of conflict described by Mr. Shultz ''goes on every
day in every administration.'' Government, he said, is often ''a moving set of
conspiracies among friends,'' with today's allies battling as foes on another
issue tomorrow. To deny the existence of such conflicts, he said, is ''either
naive or self-serving.''

In another interview, Roger Morris, who served on the staff of the National
Security Council under Henry A. Kissinger in 1969-70, said: ''The infighting and
nastiness described by Secretary Shultz are not just an aberration but have
become almost habitual, commonplace and inherent in foreign policy circles for
the last 40 or 50 years. Officials spend more time worrying about bureaucratic
wars in Washington than about any foreign problem or adversary, and that's
tragically wasteful.''

''It reflects a profound institutional problem: the eclipse of the State
Department bureaucracy by the growing power and impatience of the Presidency,''
Mr. Morris said.

Poindexter Parallels Kissinger

Mr. Shultz complained that Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter, as national security
adviser, had excluded him from many aspects of important foreign policy issues:
the sale of arms to Iran, negotiations to free American hostages in Lebanon and
the diversion of money to the Nicaraguan rebels. But Mr. Shultz suffered nothing
worse than one of his predecessors, William P. Rogers, who was made virtually
irrelevant by Mr. Kissinger in the Nixon Administration.

In his memoirs, Mr. Kissinger recalled that when he was national security
adviser and Mr. Rogers was Secretary of State, ''I tried to bypass him as much
as possible.'' By the summer of 1970, a year and a half after Mr. Nixon took
office, Mr. Rogers ''was being excluded from key decisions on almost all issues
except the Middle East,'' according to Mr. Kissinger, who admits to being
''arrogantly convinced of my superior knowledge.''

In any event, Mr. Kissinger says, the Nixon Administration ''turned into an
array of baronies presided over by feudal lords protecting their turf as best
they could against the inroads of a central authority.''

Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security adviser, used a
similar image, saying, ''The State Department is probably more 'turf-conscious'
than any other agency in Washington.''

In his memoirs, Mr. Brzezinski said he was struck by ''how much pressure there
is from one's own subordinates to engage in conflict with one's principal
peers'' to protect the prerogatives and authority known as turf. If an official
shrinks from such bureaucratic battles, Mr. Brzezinski said, ''the loyalty and
morale of one's own staff'' may suffer.

Mr. Brzezinksi was often in conflict with Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, and
he recalls a meeting with Mr. Carter in 1978 where ''Cy startled me with the
sharpness of his attack.'' Mr. Vance complained that Mr. Brzezinski was sending
cables to American ambassadors without Mr. Vance's knowledge and that the
national security adviser had failed to keep the State Department fully informed
about negotiated to establish diplomatic relations with China.

In time, Mr. Vance says in his memoirs, Mr. Brzezinski's public statements
''became a serious impediment to the conduct of our foreign policy'' because
they diverged increasingly from the positions articulated by the State
Department.

Such disputes sound like those in the Reagan Administration, but they differ in
two important respects. Mr. Brzezinski says he had Mr. Carter's explicit
approval for what he did, while Admiral Poindexter only assumed that he would
have Mr. Reagan's approval for diverting money from the Iran arms sales to the
contras.

In addition, the disagreements between Mr. Brzezinski and Mr. Vance were argued
out in front of the President. But in the Reagan Administration, the Secretary
of State says he did not learn about some actions taken by Admiral Poindexter
until it was too late to affect the course of policy.

Mr. Shultz said his conflicts with the staff of the National Security Council
differed from his predecessors' because the covert operations undertaken by
Admiral Poindexter and Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North were, ''in a sense, not
knowable.'' In a systematic way, he said, the staff of the council ''deceived
me.''

Haig as 'Vicar' Of Policy

While campaigning for the Presidency in 1980, Mr. Reagan vowed to reduce
conflict between the Secretary of State and the national security adviser. But
Richard V. Allen, his first security adviser, said that such harmony was
difficult to achieve when Alexander M. Haig Jr. was Secretary of State. ''Mother
Teresa could have been national security adviser, and she would have had
conflict with Al Haig,'' Mr. Allen said in an interview.

On Inauguration Day in 1981, while still suited up in formal attire, Mr. Haig
tried to get Mr. Reagan to sign a directive specifying that Mr. Haig would have
the pre-eminent role in deliberations affecting foreign affairs.

Mr. Haig's efforts to establish himself as the ''vicar'' of foreign policy led
some Presidential aides to suspect that he was making ''an attempt to grab
power,'' he later recalled.

'Anguish and Nostalgia'

Mr. Haig resigned in June 1982 after a series of fights with the White House
staff. Disagreements over policy had been exacerbated by a multitude of petty
disputes involving such matters as Mr. Haig's seat assignment on Air Force One
and his place in receiving lines on a Presidential trip to Europe.

Mr. Haig said today that Mr. Shultz's testimony last week was ''replete with
anguish and nostalgia for me.''

George W. Ball, a former Under Secretary of State, recalled in an interview
today that he had repeatedly advised President Lyndon B. Johnson to ''cut your
losses and get out'' of the Vietnam War. But, he said, he was ''regularly shot
down'' by McGeorge Bundy, Robert S. McNamara and Dean Rusk, who were,
respectively, the national security adviser, Defense Secretary and Secretary of
State.

It is Mr. Ball's opinion that President Johnson ''welcomed this kind of dissent
because he was genuinely troubled by the escalation of the war.''

Mr. Shultz's distaste for bureaucratic combat is surprising because he is hardly
a novice, having served as Secretary of Labor and Secretary of the Treasury in
the Nixon Administration.

In between those jobs, he held a position virtually guaranteed to put him at
odds with every other senior official in the Government: director of the Office
of Management and Budget.

'Effrontery of Bloated Egos'

The budget director is in the business of saying no to officials who want more
money and more resources for their own programs. Through such confrontations,
David A. Stockman, Mr. Reagan's first budget director, learned the reality of
life in Washington.

''Governance was not a realm of pure reason, analysis and the clash of
ideologies,'' Mr. Stockman said in his memoirs. ''It really did involve the
brute force of personality, the effrontery of bloated egos, the raw
will-to-power.''

When he tried to cut foreign aid, Mr. Stockman recalled, he ''got rolled by Al
Haig,'' who whipped up opposition to the cuts on Capitol Hill and ''instructed
U.S. ambassadors'' to generate protests from foreign governments.

Mr. Stockman experienced his biggest frustration in trying to cut the growth of
military spending. ''I thought of it as a kind of jujitsu,'' he said. ''I would
present my case in such a way as to get the top White House people to use their
weight'' against the Defense Department, and the Pentagon to ''use its weight
against itself.''

But, he said, it did not work. The military men ''put on full battle dress and
dug in deeper.'' After several such fights, Mr. Stockman said, he and the
Defense Secretary, Caspar W. Weinberger, were ''hardly on speaking terms.''

Among the Quieter Lot

Not all bureaucrats are so bellicose. Many are quietly effective professionals,
and Elliot L. Richardson, who has held four Cabinet positions, gave an insight
into how they think.

''Quite a lot of effort goes into the avoidance of confrontation,'' Mr.
Richardson said in an interview. ''People try to anticipate problems, line up
support, create trust and disarm their opposition.

''Nothing important in this city has ever been done except by consensus.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Henry A. Kissinger, national security adviser and William P.
Rogers, secretary of state, during the Nixon administration (UPI; AP); Photos of
Cyrus R. Vance, secretary of state, and Zbigniew Brzezinski, national security
advisor, under President Carter (NYT; Jupp Darchinger); Photo of former
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig, former National Security Advisor Richard
V. Allen, Sec

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS HEARS REPORTS ON IMPOTENCE OF U.S. MISSILES AGAINST SOVIET TANKS

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 29


With representatives of American and European missile manufacturers watching
uneasily from the sidelines, experts at a packed Congressional hearing asserted
today that American infantry missiles might be virtually useless against the
latest generation of Soviet tanks. But an Army spokesman said that the
seriousness of the problem had been exaggerated.

The meeting was convened by Representatives Charles E. Bennett, Democrat of
Florida, and Tom Ridge, Republican of Pennsylvania, co-chairmen of the informal
140-member Congressional Military Reform Caucus.

Participating civilian and military experts were asked to address the question,
''Can we stop Soviet tank armies?'' in light of recent reports that Soviet tanks
in central Europe now carry ''reactive armor'' that explodes when hit by a
missile, thereby deflecting the destructive force of the missile's own
explosion.

U.S. Installs Exploding Armor

Maj. Gen. Wilson Shoffner strongly defended current Army infantry weapons. Not
only are they effective, he said, but North Atlantic Treaty Organization
infantrymen in Europe could also count on the support of aircraft and artillery
capable of so disrupting Soviet supply lines and command centers that a Warsaw
Pact armored thrust would soon run out of steam.

General Shoffner said, however, that an American version of the new explosive
armor was being installed on M-60 tanks stationed in Korea. NATO officials have
not disclosed whether they plan to install the new armor on tanks in Europe.

The Army also expects to begin shipping an improved version of its best antitank
missile, the TOW 2A, to American forces in Europe this fall, General Shoffner
said. Experts believe the TOW 2A will be more effective than existing missiles
against reactive armor.

Sample of Congressional Wit

Asked whether American infantry could defeat Soviet tanks, he replied: ''Yes.
But you may not like the cost or risk involved.''

A dummy of the TOW 2A, made by Hughes Aircraft Company, and other advanced
antitank missiles were on display in the hearing room. One missile, the powerful
European Milan 2, made by a consortium of French and West German companies, was
set up on a balcony of the Rayburn House Office Building, and several
Congressmen tried aiming it at the Washington Monument.

The effectiveness of all Western antitank missiles was called into question by
Pierre M. Sprey, a leading civilian designer of Air Force and antitank weapons.

''Our infantry antitank missiles simply do not work,'' he said. ''Since 1942
until very recently, the Army hierarchy has consistently refused to conduct
firing tests against real tanks. The weapons we do have at present are so slow
and so vulnerable to enemy fire as to be useless. Our main infantry antitank
missile, the Dragon, can't be aimed and its a hopeless mess.''

'No Closer to a Solution'

E. Michael Lynch, a retired brigadier general who fought in Korea and Vietnam
and whose antitank platoon was the last to fight a major armored battle in World
War II, agreed that American infantrymen would face desperate odds in fighting
Soviet tanks.

''We're no closer to a solution to the antitank problem than we were 45 years
ago,'' he said. A major mistake, he contended, has been a tendency to rely too
much on technology and not enough on tactics and strategy. ''Without adequate
strategy, and with the antitank weapons now at our disposal, we would be
compelled very early in any European battle with Soviet tanks to start using
unconventional weapons, including nuclear weapons.''

Phillip A. Karber, a consultant on national security issues to the Departments
of State and Defense, acknowledged that the new TOW 2A missile may be more
effective than earlier versions of the missile. The TOW 2A is armed with a
tandem charge, the first part of which is meant to set off explosive tank armor
before the main charge explodes.

Defense Industry Sanguine

''The new TOW 2A may be 60 or 70 percent effective,'' Mr. Karber said. ''But TOW
2A's are not yet in the hands of our troops, and meanwhile, the Russians are not
standing still.''

Meanwhile, representatives of the weapons industry sought to catch the ears and
eyes of congressmen, military officers and journalists attending the hearing.

''You needn't worry too much about our antitank missiles,'' one industry
spokeman said outside the hearing, asking that his identity be withheld. ''We're
developing better and better warheads, and we believe the next generation will
be able to wipe out all the reactive armor on a Soviet tank, and do it all at
once..''

Civilian and military critics, including the recently retired chief of Army
armored doctrine, Gen. Donn A. Starry, have argued in recent weeks that the
American military establishment is far slower than its Soviet counterpart in
translating innovations into practical battlefield devices.

''Even now,'' an Army weapons specialist who requested anonymity said, ''the
armed forces are not doing the tests they should, nor are they testing in
realistic ways. We have not yet applied live-fire tests to our own M1 tanks,
much less to captured Soviet T-62s.''

Representative Bennett noted that live-fire tests of all new and existing
weapons became mandatory with an amendment to this year's National Defense
Authorization Act. Another amendment in the 1988 bill would require even more
stringent weapons tests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Repr. Charles E. Bennett looking through sights of Milan 2
Eruomissile at hearing (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Heard but Unseen, Seven Actors Share 'Talk Radio' Roles

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words


Eric Bogosian's new play ''Talk Radio,'' about a nighttime phone-in-show host
teetering on the edge of dementia, could just as well be called ''Voices Off.''

The reason is that the most crucial interactions do not take place onstage, but
occur between Mr. Bogosian and 28 offstage callers telephoning in to Barry
Champlain's fictional ''Nighttalk.'' The voices are not taped. They belong to
seven actors who chatter away in several roles apiece every night, rotating
among three makeshift telephone booths backstage.

The setting of ''Talk Radio,'' now playing at the Public Theater, is a
broadcasting studio in Cleveland. There is a control booth at stage right. Mr.
Bogosian as Barry Champlain - ''Barry'' or ''Bare'' to his callers - sits
jittering at a table at stage left, ready to open his headphones to the next
call or punch the cut-off button if the caller displeases him. He is linked
electronically to the actors backstage, who hear Mr. Bogosian over phones in
each backstage booth, and whose own voices are amplified for the audience by
microphones built into the telephone mouthpieces.

The unseen actors manage to populate the air with almost palpable characters - a
mixed bag of weirdos and loners. Barry Champlain savages almost all of them in a
sado-masochistic dialogue that usually ends in a verbal slap.

'Not Interesting!'

A transvestite named Francine is saving money for a sex-change operation. ''What
possible interest do you think your personal adventures in surgery would hold
for my listeners?'' bellows Barry. ''Not interesting!'' he snaps, and cuts the
caller off.

Denise, a paranoid hysteric frightened of everything on earth including her
garbage disposal, talks of running into the Boston Strangler. ''Sounds like a
fun date,'' says Barry. Click.

There is Henry, protesting a nearby nuclear power plant. ''I got news for you
pal - we all gotta die,'' sneers Barry. ''Did I hurt your feelings, pal? Go tell
it to your shrink.'' Click.  The invisible characters include an anti-Semitic
heavy breather, a lonely young widow, a relentlessly cheerful but somehow
sinister Vietnam amputee, a sobbing 15-year-old who is pregnant and has been
abandoned by her boyfriend, and an old silly who dotes upon his cat, Muffin.
''You and Muffin sound pretty intimate,'' croons Barry. ''You're not into
anything funny are you? She's fixed, isn't she?'' Indignant sputterings from
Muffin's owner. Click.

The Unseen Seven

Only two callers seem quick enough to get a shot off at Barry. ''Are you as
ugly-looking as you sound?'' begins one. ''Uglier,'' Barry ripostes. Another
says, ''I think you do believe in God.'' Barry falls for it and asks why. ''It's
simple,'' says the caller. ''You think you are God.''

These and many other characters are all bent in some way. The seven actors who
portray them are Linda Atkinson, William DeAcutis, Susan Gabriel, Zach Grenier,
Michele M. Mariana, Peter Onorati and Michael Wincott.

Only Mr. Wincott has a solid onstage role, as a young caller named Kent, totally
unhinged by drugs and media bilge, who turns up in person on the Barry Champlain
show. Three others have fleeting parts, but Ms. Gabriel, Ms. Mariana and Mr.
Onorati, like the corpses in ''Arsenic and Old Lace,'' are visible only when
they take their bows at the end of ''Talk Radio.''

In interviews, the mostly Unseen Seven called their backstage acting chores in
''Talk Radio'' very difficult. ''It's undeniably harder,'' said Mr. Grenier.
''It's all in the voice - in your mind, too. All the physical work has to be
done vocally.''

Ms. Mariana called it ''incredibly challenging.''

''We don't see the actor we're working off of,'' she said. ''There's no eye
contact, no physical business we can do to bridge the space between us.''

Yet Ms. Atkinson said she felt like ''bread dough that's being kneaded'' by Mr.
Bogosian's voice.

Body Language

Despite the lack of eye contact, the backstage actors employ a good deal of body
language as they whisper, shout or sob through the phone to Mr. Bogosian out
front. The most physical of them are Mr. Wincott, as the crazed drug addict, and
Mr. Onorati.

The heavily muscled Mr. Onorati, who works out three times a week on Nautilus
machines and does knee-bends and stretching exercises before making each call in
''Talk Radio,'' said, ''I try to get everything into my body.'' He is often on
his feet in the backstage telephone booth, swaying and bobbing, sometimes
petting his arm as if it were Muffin the cat.

''My coach at Boonton High School in New Jersey used to say of me, 'One hundred
seventy-two pounds of blue twisted steel, tempered to perfection,' Mr. Onorati
recalled with a laugh, ''and then I'd go out on the field and trip over my
shoelaces. But no doubt about it, I'm very physical.''

Ms. Gabriel's most athletic performance comes while she is playing Denise, the
paranoid recluse. In the booth, she moves incessantly, pounding her fingers into
the little table that holds the phone, shaking one arm, ducking her head.

A Full Life

Every one of the actors has made up a little life for each character, down to a
job, a home and an ethnic background. Mr. Onorati bases his characters on real
people he has known.

There is no ad-libbing in this nonstop, 90-minute-long production. Everything is
in the script. One reason is that the lines have to be synchronized throughout
the play with images flashed on a screen behind Mr. Bogosian.

Even the playwright-star, in full view of the audience at all times, found his
role ''definitely more difficult than I thought it would be when I wrote it,''
he said.

''I have to have all their lines memorized as well as mine,'' Mr. Bogosian said.
''I have to do several things at one time - I have to react to the caller; I
have to show the audience how I really feel about the caller; I have to push
buttons, light cigarettes, drink coffee.

''I'm thinking, 'The show should be getting easier. Why do I have to listen so
hard?' I'm listening to a whole pile of sound coming down on me. I know they
can't see me. But I can't see them, either.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 31, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption yesterday with an article about the new play ''Talk Radio''
incorrectly described the situation shown in the picture. The picture did not
show a scene from the play, but rather actors offstage telephoning to an actor
onstage. Also, the actress at the right was misidentified. She is Susan Gabriel.

GRAPHIC: Photo shows scene from Eric Bogosian's ''Talk Radio.'' From left: Zach
Grenier, Peter Onorati and Linda Atkinson. (NYT/Angel Franco)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


THE BOYS OF WINTER. By Wilfrid Sheed. 280 pages. Knopf. $16.95.

THE CURIOUS CASE OF SIDD FINCH.

By George Plimpton. 275 pages. Macmillan. $14.95.


THIS time Wilfrid Sheed has found a perfect target for the self-loathing that
the heroes of his novels - ''The Hack,'' ''Max Jamison,'' ''Transatlantic
Blues,'' among others - sometimes vent upon themselves. This time Mr. Sheed's
persona is ''the writers' natural enemy, a publisher.'' He is Jonathan
Oglethorpe, editor in chief and junior partner in Williams & Oglethorpe, with a
weekend house on Long Island in the Hamptons. Even in the off-season -
especially in the off-season - he likes to hang out with a bunch of his writers
at the back tables of Jimmy's.

Here, in January, ''the heart of the suicide season,'' they dream of forming a
softball team next summer, the Nether Hampton Friendlies, women to be included.
They dream and plan: ''You be the front office, Billy. Like when they say 'a
member of the Yankee official family' - that's you. Waldo can be the greedy
owner who actually thinks he knows baseball.'' Hence, ''The Boys of Winter.''
Actually, Jonathan is a publisher who is writing a novel. ''Having played the
courtesan to'' his writers ''too long, curtseying to their pretensions . . . I
would like to show them who's got the royal blood around here, by beating them
to the great regional book - roofing, siding, and all.'' One of its main
purposes will be to score points against Waldo Spinks: ''Routine case, no
complications. Acclaimed first novel sucked out of his youth and the Korean War.
Nothing much since. Terminally overpriced.''

Unfortunately, Waldo is also writing a regional novel, partly to get Jonathan.
Jonathan will raise the stakes by offering to publish it for a cut-rate advance.
Waldo has his resources, too. Other victims get caught in the cross fire: summer
visitors to the Hamptons, year-round residents of the Hamptons, painters,
writers, publishers, movie people, liberals, conservatives and amateur athletes.

It all gets extremely complicated, with twists and doublecrosses that culminate
in a vicious softball game. When the final pitch gets thrown, nothing is as it
seems to have been. With many a witty phrase and cutting apothegm, Mr. Sheed has
not only dissected artistic pretension but also revealed the profound human need
for masks. With the scalpel of satire, he has sliced away the shell that covers
up the shell.

There are masks and ball players in ''The Curious Case of Sidd Finch'' by George
Plimpton, too, but here the point isn't satire but a dream of glory. What if a
baseball player came along with some superhuman skill? What would it do to the
game's delicate balance between offense and defense? And how, if one were having
this dream, could one plausibly wake up from it?

The dreamer of this novel - Mr. Plimpton's first after more than a dozen
reportorial books - is one Robert Temple, a freelance journalist whom the stress
of flying helicopters in Vietnam has blocked. Recuperating in Florida, he
befriends a shy rookie pitcher who is trying out with the 1985 New York Mets
baseball team. The rookie's name is Sidd Finch. He can throw a baseball at
speeds up to 170 miles per hour, or over half-again as fast as the greatest
fast-ball pitchers ever timed. His pitches can barely be seen, let alone stopped
by a catcher's mitt.

What this does to the delicate balance of the game, and how Mr. Plimpton's
dreamer awakens, we must leave to readers of the inventive plot of ''Sidd
Finch'' to find out. The real pleasure of Mr. Plimpton's novel is threefold.
There is the character of Finch, an English aristocrat turned Buddhist monk
(Sidd is short for Siddhartha) whose passions are the Zen of hurling
projectiles, the art of playing the French horn, and the knack of mimicking
everyday sounds. This curious combination of skills contributes charmingly to
the plot's complicated outcome.

Another pleasure of the book is by now a commonplace of George Plimpton's
writing - the room the story allows for obscure exploration of its subject's
lore, which ranges from the adventures of certain fastball pitchers to the fate
of a famous French horn player to a history of how baseball has tried to keep
the balance between offense and defense.

But perhaps the greatest charm of ''The Curious Case of Sidd Finch'' is seeing
Mr. Plimpton go from reportage to fiction. He is almost finicky in taking the
leap. He supplies an introduction explaining Robert Temple. In turn, Mr. Temple
explains Mr. Plimpton, referring to a piece Mr. Plimpton actually wrote for an
April Fool's (1985) issue of Sports Illustrated, on Sidd Finch. These mechanics
may seem overelaborate. But they have liberated Mr. Plimpton to blend his
unusual public imagination with his own private fantasies. The combination is
not only entertaining; it offers further, deeper insights into a type of
American experience as well.

One's only regret is that the New York Mets should have been the occasion for
Mr. Plimpton's inspiration. As far as taste in baseball teams is concerned, Mr.
Sheed, with his references to the other New York team (even though they are acid
ones), is clearly the deeper writer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Wilfrid Sheed and George Plimpton (Sandra Beall; NYT)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Issues With a Tenacious Hold;
The Politics of Hope on Americans Missing in Vietnam

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1305 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 30


The ghosts of Vietnam haunt Senator John McCain and Colleen C. Shine. And they
are not alone.  ''There is no way, absolutely no way, that we'll ever close the
chapter on that unhappy part of America's history, the Vietnam War, unless we
have a full accounting for those who are still listed as missing in action,''
said Senator McCain, a leader in Congress on the issue. The Arizona Republican,
a former Navy pilot who was shot down over Hanoi in 1967, spent nearly six years
in a prisoner-of-war camp and knew ''a couple of guys'' still listed as missing.

For Colleen C. Shine, the issue of the missing is more wrenching. ''My father,
Lieut. Col. Anthony C. Shine, was shot down on the border between North Vietnam
and Laos on Dec. 2, 1972,'' she said quietly. ''I was eight years old then. I
have a memory of him. He's still unaccounted for.''

The Vessey Mission

From this vantage point, Senator McCain and numerous Congressional colleagues,
as well as Ms. Shine, the public affairs coordinator for the National League of
Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, gaze with wary
hope at one of the highest-level efforts by the Reagan Administration to discuss
the issue of missing American servicemen in Southeast Asia.

From Saturday through Monday, a mission headed by Gen. John A. Vessey, and
including senior Defense and State Department officials, will be in Hanoi to
discuss the United States servicemen who are still listed as missing in action
or failed to return from prisoner-of-war camps.

Few issues have stirred more frustration and - to families involved -despair,
and few have had a more tenacious hold on politicians.

Legislators as ideologically apart as Senators Jesse Helms of North Carolina and
Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts have called for a ''full accounting'' from
Vietnam of the fate of the so-called ''M.I.A.'s.'' On Tuesday, the Senate and
House endorsed overwhelmingly, and without objection, proposals that supported
General Vessey's visit to Vietnam.

''The issue has taken on a sort of mythic character,'' said one key Senate aide.

Underneath the resolutions and ringing words, though, are only unanswered
questions.

''There's much fuzziness about what the words 'full accounting' really mean,''
the aide acknowledged. He and others said privately that no member of Congress
would ever deny the possibility that, more than 12 years after the war,
Americans are being held in Vietnam. But few actually believe it, the aide said.

''What happened on this issue were two things,'' the Senate aide explained.
''When Reagan was elected he took a strong profile in '81 that the P.O.W.-M.I.A.
issue was not resolved - a view that he expressed even as Governor of
California. And you had the spate of Rambo movies which perpetuated the idea
that there are living Americans held against their will there. Of course, the
Vietnamese didn't help with their attitude involving the return of American
remains.''

The Vietnamese have denied knowing of any remaining American prisoners, and they
have denounced as fabrications refugee reports of caches of American remains
that have not been returned to families.

''We do have solid reason to believe that the Vietnamese have been less than
forthcoming in the return of the remains of those serivcemen who died,'' said
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the
House panel on Asian and Pacific Affairs. ''Why? I suppose they may feel there's
a certain amount of mileage in doling them out. It's a ghoulish business, very
cynical, but we have good reason to believe they could be more forthcoming.''

Diplomats believe the M.I.A. issue is sometimes involved in internal Vietnamese
politics.

Thanh Bham, an attache at the Vietnamese Mission to the United Nations, said his
country had tried many things in the last 14 years to resolve the problem,
including returning all military and civilian personnel taken prisoner in the
war, repatriating others who had remained in Vietnam and ''devoting great
efforts for seeking information'' about Americans still missing.

''I think that all these facts demonstrates the efforts and the sympathy of
Vietnam towards the American people and American concerns on this issue,'' he
said, ''although Vietnam has hundreds of thousands of its own soldiers missing
in action.''

According to Ms. Shine's group, Vietnam has returned the remains of 170
identified servicemen since 1974. Most of them, 94, have been returned during
the Reagan Presidency.

Like other legislators, Mr. Solarz is doubtful about the possibility of
Americans still held captive in Southeast Asia, but he refuses to rule it out.
He said ''a substantial number of live sightings'' by refugees, some of whom
passed polygraph tests, had led him to conclude that it was ''not
inconceivable'' that American prisoners remain in Vietnam.

Senator McCain was more categorical. ''We have to assume that there are
Americans still alive in Southeast Asia,'' he said. ''I have no hard evidence of
that and I base it on two factors. The first is the reports of unresolved live
sightings. The second are what some highly experienced and highly respected
peeople have said about this.''

He cited the comment last October by Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr., a former
director of Defense Intelligence, who concluded after a five-month review of
intelligence files that there was ''a large volume of evidence,'' mainly ''live
sightings'' by Vietnamese refugees, that pointed to the likelihood that
Americans are still imprisoned in Vietnam.

It is widely believed in Washington that some Americans willingly stayed behind
in Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City.

Complicating the issue, both politically and emotionally, is the position of the
Vietnam veterans.

''A lot of Vietnam veterans are fed up and don't want to hear about it,'' said
Mike Leaveck, communications director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, which
says it represents 30,000 former servicemen and women. ''There's a lot of
craziness on this issue.''

He pointed out that after World War II, a total of 78,000 American servicemen
were unaccounted for. After the Korean War, the figure was 8,000. The figure for
Southeast Asia is now 2,413. ''The tragedy is that certain fringe groups have
discredited this issue and have exploited the pain of many families,'' he said.

Senator McCain agrees: ''This entire issue has been exploited very badly by some
people, including those trying to get funds for so-called Rambo efforts, people
trying to inflame passions unnecessarily, charlatans, in some cases, who see
this as a profit-making opportunity.''

On the other hand, Ms. Shine's group, known familiarly as the National League of
M.I.A. and P.O.W. Families, maintains strong relations with Congress, the White
House and the Vietnam veterans. Its executive director, Ann Mills Griffiths,
whose brother is missing in Vietnam, routinely attends White House and State
Department meetings on the issue and went along on General Vessey's mission to
Hanoi this weekend.

Praise for Reagan

Ms. Shine said the organization has a membership of 3,500 families. She said
that previous Administrations had responded with ''apathy and non-effort'' to
the issue but that Mr. Reagan had brought it to the forefront. ''As Governor of
California he wore a P.O.W.-M I.A. bracelet,'' she said. ''He has made this the
highest national priority.''

Ms. Shine remarked that 20 years after the Vietnamese war against the French,
non-French legionnaires who had been held prisoner were returned. What advantage
would the Vietnamese have in keeping American prisoners, she asked.

''I don't have the answers,'' she said. And then, after a moment, the young
woman who last saw her father when she was 8, added: ''You have to believe in
blind faith.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Representative Solarz, Senator McCain and General Vessey
(AP); Photo of Colleen Shine of National League of MIA and POW (NYT/George
Tames)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 1, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRITAIN REBUFFS A REQUEST BY U.S. FOR MINESWEEPERS;
U.S. Sending Small Craft

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 334 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 31


The United States has decided to send some of its smallest naval vessels to the
Persian Gulf because it is unable to obtain more suitable minesweeping vessels
from its allies, Government officials said today.

The United States has seven of the 57-foot minesweeping vessels, which carry a
crew of six enlisted men, resemble leisure fishing boats and were used to clear
the maze of rivers during the Vietnam War.

Minesweeping experts say the vessels are less than ideal for the gulf waters,
but the Navy says this is the best of several bad choices.

The Navy has only three ocean-going minesweepers in active service, in addition
to 18 used to train reservists, but these larger ships are not considered
suitable for the gulf because of they are obsolescent and would take too long to
put in place.

Other Europeans Also Said No

In addition to Britain, the United States has asked France, the Netherlands,
Italy and West Germany if they would be willing to give varying degrees of
support in sweeping mines from the gulf. But thus far none have agreed to help,
according to Administration officials and Western diplomats.

One reason that the American minesweeping force is so small is that the NATO
allies are expected to carry out this mission during wartime.

''Consultations are still ongoing, but so far our minesweeping consultations
have not met with overwhelming and instant success,'' a State Department
official said today.

Moving on another diplomatic front in the Iran-Iraq war, the United States
announced today that it would ban the export to Iraq, Iran and Syria of eight
chemical compounds that can be used in chemical warfare.

The decision was made because of the increased chemical warfare capability of
the three countries and information that they were seeking to enhance their
arsenals, the State Department spokesman said.

Despite the limited capabilities, the small minesweepers would be useful to
augment the eight minesweeping helicopters being airlifted to the gulf.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 1, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LEUKEMIA VICTIM IN U.S. AWAITING ACTION BY HANOI

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 422 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 31


A medical team's fight to save the life of a Vietnamese-American student dying
of leukemia in California has become mired in Vietnamese bureaucracy, a New York
physician said here today.

The story of the 20-year-old immigrant, whose name has not been made public by
his father, illustrates the kind of problem Vietnamese officials themselves say
they have with layers of decision making that must be streamlined if the country
is to develop.

The young man in California is in urgent need of a bone marrow transplant,
according to Dr. Arnold Schecter, a professor of preventive medicine at the
State University of New York at Binghamton.

Dr. Schecter, who has been conducting joint research on dioxins with Vietnamese
scientists, was asked to help Dr. Ann von Gehr of the Permanente Medical Group
in San Jose, Calif., find the student's mother and five sisters in Vietnam and
collect a blood sample for compatibility testing. The leukemia victim's father
and one brother are with him in the United States, but have not proved to be
suitable donors.

Two weeks ago in Bangkok, Dr. Schecter was told by United States Embassy
officials that the family he was seeking in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon,
was already on the list for the orderly departure program. The program, which is
resuming after a six-month break by the Vietnamese, allows legal emigration from
this country.

In Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnamese officials said they knew where the family was
and could see no problem with collecting a tissue sample. Dr. Schecter also
asked both Americans and Vietnamese that the emigration process be speeded up in
this case for humanitarian reasons.

''Whether the boy lives or not,'' Dr. Schecter said, ''at least the family can
be reunited, and he can see his mother and sisters again.''

Dr. Schecter hoped to draw blood samples and possibly bring one or more family
members with him when he left Vietnam. But the process of making multiple
applications at local and national level for even the collection of the tissue
stymied his plans.

He was leaving Vietnam today with no resolution of the case.

As a final gesture, Dr. Schecter has left a message for President Reagan's
special envoy, John W. Vessey Jr., who is due to arrive in Hanoi Saturday to
reopen talks on Americans still missing from the Vietnam War. Both sides have
said they want to move ahead on solving human problems.

Dr. Schecter is asking the Vessey party to raise the subject with the Foreign
Ministry, whose officials he has been unable to meet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 1, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND VIETNAM TO TALK ON M.I.A.'S

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 31


A special envoy of President Reagan and a new Vietnamese leadership are to open
talks here Saturday on resolving the issue of Americans still missing in Vietnam
14 years after the withdrawal of United States forces.

Vietnamese officials are declining to comment publicly on what they hope to
achieve in their talks with the special envoy, John W. Vessey Jr., the retired
Army general and former head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Hanoi put off
receiving him until a sweeping leadership change was completed in June.

But Western European as well as East bloc diplomats in Hanoi say there has never
been a more opportune moment for Hanoi and Washington to start anew on the
process of building a relationship. The first step would be to make real
progress on the issue of what happened to more than 2,400 missing Americans -
1,776 of them lost in Vietnam or off its shores, the others vanished in Laos or
Cambodia.

A Special Shared Experience

The Vessey mission will also include Richard Childress, the National Security
Council's director for Asian affairs; Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of
the the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in
Southeast Asia; Gen. Robert Kingston, former director of the Joint Casualty
Resolution Center in Hawaii; David F. Lambertson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asia and the Pacific, and several aides, according to the
Vietnamese Foreign Ministry.

The sense of a special shared experience with America is very strong in Vietnam,
foreigners in Hanoi say again and again. American visitors uniformly get a
poignantly warm welcome.

A diplomat remarked this week that it was almost as if the war with the United
States was the catharsis that allowed the Vietnamese to find their own
self-image.

''America is part of Vietnamese life,'' the diplomat said. The dollar is also
the most important medium of exchange.

This diplomat and others say that the new leadership under Nguyen Van Linh, the
Communist Party General Secretary chosen last December, must expand its links
with the West if it is to head off even worse economic problems.

Mr. Linh's appointment was followed in June by the naming of a new Prime
Minister, Pham Hung, who replaced Pham Van Dong. Vo Chi Cong became President at
the same time, replacing Truong Chinh, the last party leader and head of state
drawn from Ho Chi Minh's inner circle.

Vietnam is among the world's poorest nations. Its inflation rate is somewhere
over 600 percent by most estimates. There is serious, widespread malnutrition
and disease. In a risky political gamble, the new leaders are trying to tackle
all these problems at the same time they begin a purge of corrupt party
officials.

Vietnam receives large amounts of Soviet assistance, possibly $2 billion a year.
This has sustained the army and provided a start on large-scale energy
development, but has produced little or no visible improvement in day-to-day
life.

Many Vietnamese, unhappy at their lot, have begun to display ''negative
phenomena,'' the Government says. These include passive resistance to orders,
draft-dodging and sabotage of an already weak economic structure.

Washington, leading an effective embargo, holds the key to Western aid, and the
Reagan Administration has made the resolution of the missing Americans issue a
condition for recognizing Hanoi.

Withdrawal of Vietnamese Troops

The United States, following the lead of China and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations - Thailand, Malasia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the
Philippines - has also demanded the withdrawal of about 140,000 Vietnamese
troops from Cambodia, more soldiers than Moscow has in Afghanistan.

Vietnamese officials and diplomats note in this context that Hanoi's leadership
has just met this week for the first time in a year with the Asean spokesman on
Cambodia, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja.

Diplomats and other foreigners in Hanoi and other Southeast Asian capitals say
that over the last year, almost imperceptibly, the Cambodia war has become a
bigger burden for the Vietnamese leadership, politically, economically and
strategically.

The Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, who is now also a Deputy Prime Minister
and will lead the Vietnamese delegation in talks with the Vessey mission, has
been reviving his pleas for a greater American participation in un= tangling the
problems of Indochina left behind by the war.

Hanoi is abuzz with rumors about whether or not the Americans and Vietnamese
will agree to the opening of an American ''technical'' office in Hanoi - in a
building the Vietnamese openly set aside for this purpose some years ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 1, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, AUGUST 1, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1088 words



Internationa   2-7

 Caspar W. Weinberger testified that he repeatedly thought he had stopped the
Iran arms sales but that he learned later he had failed because White House
officials resorted to deception to keep the deal going.   Page 1

 Mr. Weinberger helped provide the final pieces of the Iran-contra puzzle, a
puzzle that now appears to be warped with contradictions and may never fit
together properly   1

 The Iran-contra affair prosecutor has granted full immunity to Lieut. Col.
Richard B. Gadd, a key participant who helped direct the private network
supplying weapons to the Nicaraguan rebels, officials said.    7

 A chronology of Israeli activities in the affair will be turned over to the
Congressional investigating committees. The chronology was put together in the
last two months.   7

 A request for British minesweepers from the United States to assist in
protecting oil tankers in the Persian Gulf was rejected. Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher said that Britain was wary of an increase in tension there.   1

 In Sri Lanka, Tamil guerrillas have refused to surrender their arms to an
Indian peacekeeping force as a cease-fire went into effect, the Indian commander
said. The agreement calls on the guerrillas to surrender their arms by Monday.
   1

 Social satire in the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev is not as easy as it
used to be for one of the country's most beloved comics. Although he can now say
anything he wants, ''the newspapers are already saying it,'' Arkady Raikin said.

   1

 Moscow presented a draft arms plan that would cut the two superpowers'
long-range nuclear arsenals by half. The United States said the draft was
helpful but contained no concessions on major issues.   3

 U.S.-Vietnamese talks will begin in Hanoi on resolving the issue of Americans
still missing 14 years after the withdrawal of United States forces. A special
envoy of President Reagan will meet with a new Vietnamese leadership.   2

 A tornado in Canada killed at least 31 people and injured more than 150 in
Edmonton, Alberta, officials said. One and perhaps more twisters hit the western
Canadian provincial capital.    36

 Leukemia victim in U.S. seeks Hanoi aid on transplant   2

 Pretoria to pay damages   3

 Helms yields on Manila envoy   3

 Cairo journal   4

 National   8-10, 12, 32

 A Supreme Court Justice endorsed Judge Robert H. Bork's fitness for the Court
in a little-noted speech two weeks ago. Justice John Paul Stevens likened Judge
Bork's philosophy to that of himself and two other moderate centrists.   1

 The Vice President was confronted by the brother of Benjamin Linder, the
American slain in Nicaragua. The encounter sparked an exchange in which Mr.
Linder accused the Nicaraguan rebels of murder and Mr. Bush defended American
aid to them.    1

 The President had a skin cancer removed from the tip of his nose by military
surgeons but did not require skin grafts to cover the wound for cosmetic
purposes, the White House announced.   10

 News analysis: An anti-abortion plan of the Administration appears vulnerable
to legal challenge. The proposal would restrict federally funded family planning
clinics from giving their patients information about abortion.   8

 Detroit's monorail began working above the business district. The much maligned
system, the People Mover, was nearly two years late and tens of millions of
dollars overbudget.    12

 Calls to clean up the Miami River have been renewed. But Miami has always
treated the ribbon of water that opens into Biscayne Bay at the foot of downtown
skyscrapers with little respect, even disdain.   8

 A budget balancing law change that provides a new mechanism for automatic
spending cuts was approved by the Senate. But the Government could avoid major
spending cuts or tax increases until after the 1988 elections.   10

 Automobile workers' negotiations with the two largest American automobile
companies completed their first week. Both sides focused on general, rather than
specific issues in the labor contract discussions.    32

 Woman, 65, and cane to rescue   8

 Mixed prospects for Democrats   10

 Babbitt calls for sales tax   10

 Panel warned of mismarked bolts   10

 Government ordered to expunge files on reporter   12

 Regional   33-35

 An inquiry into Andy Warhol's death found insufficient evidence to bring
criminal charges over the artist's medical care, partly because of poor medical
records and uncertainty about the effects of other treatment, officials said.
1

 A homeless shelter in the suburbs of Long Island is the focus of growing
tension. In Lake Ronkonkoma, two incidents between residents of the shelter and
neighbors resulted in five injuries and four arrests.   33

 The sites for two new prisons in Connecticut were chosen, ending a seven-month
search. Newtown, in northern Fairfield County, and Suffield, near the
Massachusetts border, were selected. Officials of the two towns reacted angrily.

   34

 Recent remarks by Benjamin Ward, the New York City Police Commissioner, have
left some police officials perplexed and angry. Some of his top aides say that
even they cannot understand some of the statements.   33

 Something is killing dolphins off the Atlantic coast from New Jersey to
Virginia, and marine scientists are still looking for clues. Seventy-three of
the mammals have washed ashore this month, 30 on New Jersey beaches, one
scientist said.   33

 In negotiations, sanitation workers are seeking more money from New York City.
But unlike most of the other municipal unions, they have presented an unusual
array of facts and figures to bolster their case.   35

 An operator was found to rebuild the 110th Street Boathouse in Central Park and
run it as a restaurant. The Parks Department wants new structures for a
restaurant and boathouse to serve the park's north end.    35

 A $250,000 bribe was sought by a public-relations consultant, ''acting as a
henchman of Donald R. Manes,'' from the president of a cable television company
seeking a franchise in the borough, a Queens prosecutor said.   35

 Boarder babies in Flushing   33

 Water main bursts in Manhattan   33

 Scholarships offered in Brooklyn   35

 Requests rise for city report   35

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Envoy in Hanoi

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 18 words


Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. is meeting with Vietnamese officials on missing
Americans. (U.S. Army) Page 5.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: CAPTION

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, AUGUST 2, 1987


SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 902 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-21 More than 400 Moslems died when clashes erupted Friday in
Mecca, Islam's holiest site, Saudi Arabia announced. Upon hearing reports of the
deaths, Iranian mobs stormed the Saudi and Kuwaiti embassies in Teheran.
Page 1



The Saudi-Iranian crisis that erupted after the clashes in the holy city of
Mecca is a consequence of considerable political and religious frictions between
the two largest countries on the Persian Gulf.     1



When the Iran-contra hearings end,the Congressional committees will confront a
hearing record riddled with conflicting and contradictory testimony. Some
committee members said some witnesses must have lied under oath.    1



In West Germany, pessimism and anxiety are a national mind-set. They have led to
a renaissance in the search for an acceptable homeland in a restless place that
by all indicators should be content, but is not.    1



In Kenya, competition for land between man and animal is mounting. Less than 20
percent of Kenya's land is available for low-technology agriculture.
Nonetheless, the population is one of the fastest growing in the world.    12



Indian and Sri Lankan troops moved to take up new positions in attempts to quell
resistence in the north and south of the country, officials said. Off Colombo,
two Indian frigates were a signal of the military presence.    4



A U.N. conference was deadlocked by a dispute over steps to ease the developing
world's debt burden. The dispute matches the United States and most of its
Western allies against indebted Latin American nations.    36



Japan's plans to conduct whaling in the Antarctic for what it describes as
research purposes will not be abandoned, Tokyo has made clear. The plans have
been attacked by the International Whaling Commission.     6



U.S. opens talks with Vietnam      5



Ministry to stay in Louvre     8



Nova Scotia and the lawless     11



Bolivians back coca growing      17



NATIONAL/22-30



The importance of political debates is growing in 1988 as never before. The 15
candidates pursuing the two nominations are already scheduled to take part in
about two dozen debates by next March.    1



The impact of AIDS on minorities is the focus of a campaign to deal more
directly with the threat of the disease among black and Hispanic people. Leaders
say minorities have been slow to address the problem because of fears that it
would stigmatize them.     1



Campaign contributions from PAC's may become an issue in the 1988 Presidential
campaign. Several Presidential candidates are shunning contributions from the
political action committees.     28



In a poll of the nation's judges, fifty-percent of the 405 state and Federal
judges questioned said that if they were in the Senate, they would vote to
confirm Judge Robert H. Bork as a Supreme Court Justice.     22



An airborne anticollision system wiil be tested by the Navy. The decision to
make the flight tests for Navy training planes could have important implications
for civilian aviation.  be,su1:22



George Bush's campaign in Iowa is portraying him as a caring and concerned
generalist while his top rival stresses farm policy. He suggested ''no
spectacular new initiatives'' to further assist farmers.    28



Violence in divorce courts      22



Hispanic program on leadership      24



Advice on the terminally ill      27



Plan for Green Mountain forest      32



REGIONAL/32-39



A Queens State Senator was arrested by the F.B.I. at the Plaza Hotel after an
agent posing as a shady international financier gave him $150,000 to smuggle out
of the country in violation of currency laws.    34



A wider inquiry into a Harlem fire that killed seven people in a high-rise
apartment building was called for by Representative Charles B. Rangel. He said
Federal, state and city officials should work together.     34



A single-engine airplane crashed and burst into flames in a wooded area near
Lake Mohawk, N.J., killing at least four people, Federal authorities said. The
plane, a Cessna, crashed about half a mile from the Sussex County resort lake.
    34



A unionization bid was rejected by dealers at the Claridge Casino Hotel in an
election held in Atlantic City. The rejection delivered a blow to labor's
efforts to organize workers at all 12 of the city's casinos.  be,su1:38



The Met's rooftop sculpture garden was seen for the first time by the public. It
offered one attraction that outshone the modern sculptures: breathtaking city
views of Central Park and the surrounding skyline.     32



A campaign by Hispanic residents in the metropolitan region has been mounted to
kill legislative proposals to declare English the official language. The
campaign has met its goal only in Connecticut.     32



Plans to create a second commission to review the New York City charter have
been dropped by a coalition of politicians and civic leaders because of a lack
of support.     35



Political notes      32



Anti-racial violence unit formed      33



Plans end for 2d charter group      35



18 reported injured on Rikers I.      39


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'No Illusions' as U.S. Talks With Vietnamese Start

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 1-


A long-sought meeting between President Reagan's special envoy on Americans
missing in action in Vietnam and newly installed Vietnamese leaders began here
today, but with scant hopes of real progress on either side.

''I have no illusions,'' the Foreign Minister Deputy Prime Minister, Nguyen Co
Thach, told reporters this afternoon at the French-built palace that is the
Government guest house. He was waiting to greet the envoy, Gen. John W. Vessey,
Jr. General Vessey, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was an
officer in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Thach said there was no chance the United States would be permitted to open
a technical office in Hanoi to speed up the process of searching for missing
Americans unless Hanoi gets an office in Washington. The two countries have no
diplomatic relations, or interest sections in each other's capitals.

'Two-Way Traffic'

Mr. Thach said an American request for such an office would mean that he would
''have to reciprocate.''

If such a request were made, he said: ''I will raise my desire to have an office
in Washington. So you see it is a two-way traffic.''

General Vessey declined to answer when asked if he was authorized to make such a
request.

At the same time, Vietnamese officials said today that they were intending to
broaden the talks to include ''humanitarian issues'' of their own.

The opening session lasted barely an hour today, and recessed until Sunday
morning, when the meeting may end, or be adjourned to Monday, if there is enough
reason for further talks.

Diplomats here from both Western and Soviet-bloc nations are virtually unanimous
in saying that Vietnam attaches a very high priority to gaining American
recognition. They say they are watching the talks for signs of whether or not
communication between Washington and Hanoi can be improved under the government
of a new Vietnamese communist party general secretary, nguyen van linh.

Hanoi has sent conflicting signals to Washington in the last few years.
Discussions on resolving the cases of more 2,400 Americans missing in action in
Indochina, 1,776 of them in Vietnam, began to make substantial progress in 1985
under the American leadership of Richard Childress, the National Security
Council's director for Asian affairs. In January 1986, when joint excavation of
crash sites had almost become routine, Vietnam said it had ''Started the clock''
on a two-year deadline to resolve the issue once and for all.

But within a few months, while in the throes of preparing for leadership changes
and scrambling to institute economic reforms, Vietnam suddenly turned negative
toward the United States. By the fall of 1986, when remains were last returned
to the United States, all but superficial communication had stopped.

Hanoi's Conclusion

Southeast Asian diplomats familiar with developments in Vietnam say that Hanoi
had concluded it was getting nothing in return for its cooperation, despite its
protests that this was a strictly humanitarian gesture.

President Reagan, under pressure from a lobby calling for action on the issue of
the missing, appointed General Vessey his special envoy in January. It took
until the end of may for Vietnam to agree to this visit.

General Vessey came to Hanoi today with Mr. Childress, Ann Mills Griffiths,
executive director of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and
Missing in Southeast Asia, David Lambertson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for Asia and the Pacific, Robert Kingston, former director of the Joint Casualty
Resolution Center in Hawaii, and Stephen Croker, an aide to General Vessey.

Diplomats here say the visit can be used by the Vietnamese as a demonstration of
American interest, whether or not anything is achieved in the talks. Who comes
to whose court is traditionally of great importance in many Asian societies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Is It Prime Time for Vietnam?

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2478 words


IT'S BACK - NAPALM, FIREFIGHTS, BODY BAGS, Hueys, rice paddies, Victor Charlie,
search-and-destroy, the quagmire, the Living Room War.

After 16 years, the Vietnam War returns to American television. This time, it's
playing prime time, and the enemy is Bill Cosby.

This fall, CBS will attempt something that some of its executives believe the
network has no business trying and little chance of succeeding in: Sensing a
Vietnam vogue, CBS means to make a weekly entertainment of the Vietnam War with
a series called ''Tour of Duty'' and to use the show in a counteroffensive
against NBC's hugely popular Thursday-night lineup, headlined by ''The Cosby
Show.''

It is a high-risk, high-cost undertaking for CBS, appropriately framed in
contradiction. ''Tour of Duty'' means to tell the story of a politicized war
without being political; it will try to draw a portrait of American foot
soldiers, ''grunts,'' without employing foul language or dope or graphic
violence; it means to depict war with only a sparing use of costly battle
scenes; and although it's one of the most expensive new series ever mounted by
CBS - the pilot alone cost $2 million - it's being thrust into the most
difficult time period CBS has ever faced.

But ''Tour of Duty'' is a kind of crucible for a young CBS program executive
named Earle H. LeMasters 3d, the Vietman-generation vice president of CBS
Entertainment who is pressed to develop some hits. He is convinced that the
Vietnam drama can work, and that if it does, it could be the most important
television series of its time. Some Vietnam veterans who have seen the pilot
find balm and redemption in a network series seen from their perspective, and
hope that Mr. LeMasters is right.

''Tour of Duty'' looms as the biggest bust or the biggest breakthrough of the
coming season. It is certainly the most interesting programming gamble.

''Tour of Duty'' is on the CBS fall schedule for the most practical and
compelling of television reasons -desperation. After two seasons of being
roundly trounced by NBC in the prime-time ratings, after a year in which the
network's profits dropped precipitously, CBS needed to make a bold move. The
network is traditionally conservative in its programming approach, but this
season, CBS is trying to attract a new, younger and more urban audience, not
only to combat NBC but in the hope of winning back some viewers from cable. When
network program executives consulted with the producers of ''Tour of Duty,''
they would frequently mention that a third of CBS's viewers are cable viewers,
the very people (mostly men) who have been abandoning the networks for the
unrestricted fare of pay TV.

But more immediately, ''Tour of Duty'' is a direct assault on the hitherto
unassailable allure of ''The Cosby Show,'' NBC's enormously successful family
sitcom that has turned Thursday night into a quagmire for the other two
networks. The strategy of positioning ''Tour of Duty'' directly opposite
''Cosby'' and its new spinoff, ''A Different World,'' is a drastic departure
from the meeker approach tried by both ABC and CBS last season. Essentially
conceding the time period to ''Cosby,'' ABC scheduled a news-magazine program
(''Our World'') and CBS went with a waning detective series, ''Simon and
Simon,'' to lead off the night. This year, that changed. ''We are not
comfortable with being No. 2,'' said B. Donald Grant, president of CBS
Entertainment, when he announced his network's new schedule.

Mr. LeMasters, who is starting his second season as vice president of
programming at CBS, became intrigued with Vietnam as television material when he
was the CBS executive in charge of television movies, and worked on the
abandoned attempt to make the book ''Saigon'' into a CBS mini-series in 1985.
Mr. LeMasters, who as a U.C.L.A. student in the late 1960's and early 70's had
been a antiwar protester, perceived a shifting of attitudes toward Vietnam,
almost a kind of nostalgia. ''I began to notice that the country was undergoing
a change about Vietnam,'' Mr. LeMasters said recently, ''a revision of it,
especially its attitude toward the grunts.'' The success of the feature film
''Platoon'' last year confirmed that instinct. The former protester responded as
a network executive: ''I wondered if there might be an application for
television.''

Mr. LeMasters' idea for a weekly series about the war was not warmly recieved
inside CBS. ''I was roundly told that it was idiotic,'' Mr. LeMasters said. His
boss, Mr. Grant, thought that too many Americans still felt too strongly about
the war to accept it as a weekly entertainment (William S. Paley, the founder
and chairman of CBS, said that his feelings about the Vietnam War remained so
strong that he withdrew from offering an opinion on the series). Mr. LeMasters
himself worries that women will not watch a war drama. But there remained that
pressure for innovation, to get CBS moving, and Mr. LeMasters was allowed to
commission a script.

At each step - from script to pilot to series commitment - there was opposition
from within the network, but revisions were made, and the storyline that CBS and
the series' producers finally agreed upon is remarkably similar to that of
''Platoon'' - the one-year Vietnam tour of a platoon of Army ground troops.

That would seem to have become the storyline of choice in the new Vietnam
nostalgia, the grunt's-eye-view approach that considers the political and moral
questions of the war implicitly and only secondarily to the first purpose, which
is capturing the ''feel'' of the war. HBO is also producing a series about the
war, ''Vietnam War Story,'' whose theme, as put by producer Edward Gold, is an
apt description of ''Tour of Duty's'' vision, as well: ''Why everything happened
has been hashed out. Now I think it's time to learn about the 'hows.' How did
the boys get in these positions? How did these boys die? How did these young
guys get in the middle of a jungle halfway around the world and become what some
people believed to be brutal killers, when they were not brutal killers?''

It may be the most dramatic approach, which is convenient, because it is
probably the only approach safe enough for commercial network television to
consider. A network aims for the broadest possible audience, which means
offending the fewest viewers.

That points up the particular difficulty that ''Tour of Duty'' presents to CBS.
On the one hand, the network needs to win cable-wise viewers, who have grown
accustomed to unrestricted programming on pay television; on the other hand, CBS
still has to answer to affiliates, Government agencies and all manner of
interest groups just waiting to pounce on graphic violence, relaxed portrayals
of drug use or a political point of view to which they object.

''We're not going to shy away from any story possibility,'' Mr. LeMasters has
said, and yet, he acknowledges that the writers on the show began to bump into
the boundaries of network rules almost from the beginning, often on what seemed
to them the most mundane matters. ''Writers keep saying, 'Why can't we have guys
sitting around smoking a joint after a firefight, because that's what we did,
that's how we relaxed,' '' the executive recalled. ''Well, we'll deal with a
story about a guy being high in battle. That may not be the completely accurate
texture of Vietnam, but it certainly gives it a recognition.''

Giving ''a recognition'' to the drugs and foul language and the terror of
violent death, as opposed to graphic depictions of those aspects of the war, is
the concession ''Tour of Duty'' makes to its place on a network schedule in the
heart of what used to be considered ''the family hour.'' ''That will be the
cat's cradle on this thing, giving recognition without actually showing it,''
Mr. LeMasters said. ''We don't need to show guys being decapitated.''

Bill L. Norton, the co-executive producer of ''Tour of Duty,'' who wrote and
directed some of the early episodes, said that ''of course'' he was bothered by
the restrictions imposed by the network. He vowed that he and his writers will
engage CBS in a weekly battle ''to push them as far as we can'' to avoid
presenting a sanitized picture of the war.

Mr. Norton said that he found especially ''bizarre'' a ruling by the CBS
standards and practices department - the network censor - that ''if you blow
somebody up, you can't show them going up. You can only show them coming down.''

But violence and drugs and vulgarity can be written around; a more vexing
problem may be the cost of reproducing a war every week. By network standards,
the hourlong ''Tour of Duty'' pilot was enormously expensive, costing more than
$2 million to produce, and was complete with artillery rockets and firefights
and all the loud and spectacular mayhem of war. But there is no way that the
costly pyrotechnics of the pilot could be reproduced on a weekly basis.

CBS is paying only $875,000 for each of the 12 episodes of the series that it
has ordered from New World Television, and New World, in turn, has budgeted each
episode at $1.2 million (the studio hopes to recover the weekly deficit, enough
to finance a sitcom, if and when ''Tour of Duty'' is sold into syndication). So,
''Tour of Duty'' will only deal in firefights and other noisy stuff every third
episode.

This presents the interesting concept of a war series without war scenes two out
of three weeks. ''The other two episodes will always have the threat of death,''
reassures Zev Braun, the series' executive producer. ''One of our guys will get
captured. And you know what? People are going to die. If you tell a war story
and the heroes don't die, you're false.''

Mr. Norton said that he plans to shoot the series with 16-millimeter film, to
suggest the slightly grainy look that American viewers saw on their television
sets when Vietnam was playing the evening news. In the pursuit of realism, Mr.
Norton said, the series will try to humanize the enemy when it can. ''After
all,'' he said, ''they won the war.''

But the pursuit of realism presents certain problems. Vietnam had its less-proud
aspects for the American soldier, such as drug use and atrocities and a
breakdown of military discipline. A realistic depiction of those matters would
seem to run counter to the slightly optimistic tenor of the nostalgic mood that
spawned ''Tour of Duty'' in the first place. ''I don't want to do a downer,''
said Mr. Norton. ''We aren't going to make down, negative shows. We aren't going
to wallow in grimness and negativity.

''We're very lucky with this groundswell of interest in Vietnam. I think it
stems from the time of the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial, then 'Platoon.' We're
lucky that they paved the way.''

Some veterans may find fault with the accuracy of some details in ''Tour of
Duty'' (at least one has been heard to groan about the anachronistic
''pineapple'' grenades of Korean War vintage that are seen strapped to the
fictional soldiers), but few who have screened the program so far have found
fault with its spirit. Nor are they likely to; CBS and the producers have been
unusually solicitous to veterans, seeking their advice, arranging special
screenings, encouraging their support. Their opposition could be disastrous.
''Tour of Duty'' is their story, its sympathies are entirely with the American
grunt.

''When we read those stories back in the 60's and 70's about My Lai, or having
to shoot a child, or saw pictures of that napalmed little girl running down the
road,'' said CBS's Mr. LeMasters, ''there was an outrage from the political
point of view and the American idea of conducting war. But we never heard from
the soldier's point of view of what it was like to sit there and break into
tears as a suspected 10-year-old Vietcong boy strapped to explosives walks
toward your group. It can be a release. If we can do that, it's a release,
understanding what they went through.''

The leaders of some veterans' groups are hopeful that, given the power of
television, ''Tour of Duty'' will bring Vietnam veterans out of solitary
introspection in a way that even ''Platoon'' and Stanley Kubrick's recent
acclaimed feature film ''Full Metal Jacket'' have not. ''This is network
television,'' said Robert Muller, president of the Vietnam Veterans of America.
''Forty million people are going to see this thing.''

Mr. Muller and his group have been extremely supportive of the CBS effort so
far. ''What I've seen,'' he said, ''is accurate.''

There is some worry, though, about the series aggrandizing the war experience.
Senator Larry Pressler, a South Dakota Republican, attended a screening of the
pilot that CBS arranged last week for Congressmen and Senators who have been
active in veterans' issues; he commented afterward, ''These are the same
pictures which, when shown in 1967, made people angry at the war. Now, they make
them feel patriotic. Now, when there's no chance of being drafted, it's a very
pleasant, glorious thing to be patriotic and march off to war.''

Mr. Norton allowed that he has worried about that effect, too. ''What bothers me
is that with any movie, no matter how good its intentions, the ultimate effect
is that you're creating an enthusiasm among young people,'' Mr. Norton said. ''I
hope that doesn't happen, or if it does, that it happens in a responsible way.''

In the end, that is one of the many risks of making a prime-time entertainment
of what many consider the most divisive and difficult war in American history.
''The responsibility is huge,'' said Mr. LeMasters. ''We're aware that as a
network we'll be open to attacks from the right on the one side, and, who knows,
the Vietnam Veterans of America, who are currently on our side, on the other.
Who knows? ''This is the one where a lot of people internally along the way said
that I was missing a vital sparkplug to be doing this thing. But I just
basically kept saying, 'Guys, it's there. This is the right kind of thing for
network television to tackle.' ''

CALL TO ARMS

CBS's ''Tour of Duty'' will not be the only project on television this year that
uses the Vietnam War as a backdrop.

Beginning Aug. 29, Home Box Office, the pay television service, will present a
90-minute trilogy called ''Vietnam War Story'' in its ''HBO Showcase'' series.
The three segments are fictionalized accounts of experiences of American troops
who fought in Vietnam.

The Fox Broadcasting Company is reportedly considering its own Vietnam series,
and ABC's programming chief, Brandon Stoddard, recently said that he may
commission a lengthy mini-series about the Vietnam War.

And the Arts and Entertainment cable channel is currently rebroadcasting the
critically lauded documentary series ''Vietnam: A Television History.'' The
27-episode British-made production, which originally had been shown on PBS in
1984, is now in its 17th week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bill L. Norton directing an early episode of CBS's forthcoming
''Tour of Duty,'' a weekly drama set during the Vietnam War. (B. Tepper); photo
of terence Know in scene from ''Tour of Duty'' (R. Tepper) (page 16)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY BRADLEY ISN'T RUNNING

BYLINE: By Randall Rothenberg; Randall Rothenberg is an editor of this magazine
and the author of ''The Neoliberals: Creating the New American Politics.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3931 words


SPOTTING THE BIG GUY STANDING unceremoniously outside the visitors' center at
the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area in northwestern New Jersey, the
two sixth-grade teachers make their move - would he address their students? Of
course.

Tossing off his aged, olive-green suit jacket and rolling up the sleeves of his
blue, button-down shirt to just below his elbows, Bill Bradley - senior United
States Senator from New Jersey, the champion of tax reform, scholar of the
third-world debt crisis - does what he likes to do best: grill little kids about
geography.

''What are some of our national parks?'' he asks, standing close to the
children, the top half of his 6-foot-5 frame stooped at a five-degree angle. He
rapidly picks off the raised hands as a little girl yells ''Yellowstone'' and a
little boy follows with ''Yosemite.''

''Anybody know how this place was formed?'' he continues.

''The land moved!'' shouts a youngster from the increasingly lively throng.

''Right,'' answers Bradley. ''Who moved the land?'' ''A Senator,'' quips a boy
in the back. ''A Senator?'' responds the Senator. He pauses, laughs. ''No. The
glacier.'' He concludes with a brief lecture on the formation of the Delaware
Water Gap. The 40-odd youngsters applaud and begin to disperse. One lingers and
looks up at him.  ''You have any Presidential aspirations?''


THE ANSWER IS YES . . . AND NO. FOR more than two decades, people have thought
Presidentially of William Warren Bradley. In 1964, when he was Princeton's
all-American basketball star and the publicly acclaimed model of the
scholar-athlete, a New York newspaper columnist wrote: ''In 25 years or so, our
Presidents are going to have to be better than ever. It's nice to know that Bill
Bradley will be available.'' Even during his 10 years with the New York
Knickerbockers, his teammates teased him with the moniker ''Mr. President.''

The denials that marked his earlier responses are now pointedly absent.

''I got in the habit of putting it in the category of 'I don't want to deal with
this,' '' says Bradley. He looks back from the passenger seat of the car taking
him to an inner-city school in Paterson, N. J. His left eyebrow, permanently
arched, lends him a whimsical cast, but his cat's green eyes are as direct as
can be. ''But I'm not embarrassed anymore. I'm 44. I've been in the Senate 8 1/2
years. I can accept it.''

But not right now. ''I'm not running because the time is not right for me,'' he
says. Despite his disavowals - apparently honest, and certainly devoid of the
Hamlet-like indecisiveness of Governor Cuomo of New York or the
introspectiveness of Georgia Senator Sam Nunn - the entreaties have grown more
insistent. The desire, even desperation, for a Bradley Presidential bid is
almost palpable in Washington.

In an extraordinary editorial appeal, Albert R. Hunt, Washington bureau chief of
The Wall Street Journal, wrote in June that Bradley ''seems more ready to govern
in these difficult times than any other aspirant of either party.'' Michael
Kinsley, editor of The New Republic, followed with a nationally syndicated
column in which he asserted: ''Now is the Democrats' best opportunity in years .
. . and Bill Bradley is the Democrats' best hope.''

A Democratic polltaker, who expects to align himself with one of the seven
contenders, privately confirms that ''this feeling is pervasive among the entire
community of party activists and leaders.''

Bradley's appeal transcends traditional ideological and demographic boundaries.
As gritty an urban, ethnic pol as Democratic Congressman Dan Rostenkowski of
Chicago, the powerful chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, has
referred to him as ''my candidate for President.'' Even New Right political
consultant Roger Stone, who in the past has called Bradley ''slow on his feet, a
lightweight,'' today concedes: ''I have never misjudged anybody the way I
misjudged Bill Bradley.''


CLEARLY, SOME OF BRADLEY'S appeal is based on the simple fact that he is not
running this time around. Whether he would continue to tower over the field of
declared Democratic candidates as figuratively as he does literally is doubtful,
if conjectural. Still, most of his allure stems from a tangible factor: his
emergence as the Democrats' ''bench mark'' in financial matters, a reputation
gained through his current work on the third-world debt crisis (his
controversial plan would cut interest rates and cancel some payments on
principal owed by some debtor nations), and by his successful efforts last year
to turn into law the radical tax-simplification scheme he developed in the early
1980's. Moreover, many analysts point to his popularity in New Jersey - he won
re-election in 1984 with 65 percent of the vote - as an indication of his appeal
to the middle-class, suburban voters the Democrats have been losing in recent
years.

But there is something naggingly odd about the pervasive support for Bradley.
Tax policy and international debt evoke little visceral excitement, and his
reputation for hard work and integrity, while impressive, does not set him apart
from other political figures.

What is more, the backing exists where one would rightly expect opposition.
Bradley's economic savvy has made him a darling of the financial community - yet
it was his tax-reform activism that took away Wall Street's capital-gains
preference. Liberals still by and large adore him, despite his surprising 1986
vote to send aid to the Nicaraguan contras.

Even his continuing demurrals do little to quell the breathless reports that
continue to circulate in Washington that Bill Bradley is eagerly, secretly
courting support for a late entry into the 1988 race - reports without a shred
of hard evidence.

In this courtship dance lie two stories, fables really, one of a political elite
that sees in Bill Bradley an image that transcends the man, the other of a
politician who is continuing a long and painstaking preparation for leadership.

''When I was in high school, everybody said, 'You ought to go to a big
basketball school like Kentucky or Duke.' I went to Princeton instead,'' Bradley
says, the flat tones of his native Missouri now disguised by a husky Jersey
slur. Likewise, he went to Oxford on a Rhodes scholarship when friends told him
to play professional ball, and to the Senate when the experts suggested a run
for a lower office.

''The point is, at each of these junctures, people I respected, even loved, were
urging me to do the opposite of what I did,'' says Bradley, who couches his
political calculations in terms of personal development. ''The point is, you
develop a sense. I will run when I have that explicit sense of where I'd take
the country. People ask me, when will that be? October? Next year? Year after?
The answer is, I'll know it when I'm there.''


JOHN MCPHEE, THE NEW YORKER magazine writer, entitled his 1965 biography of Bill
Bradley ''A Sense of Where You Are.'' But more than the extraordinary peripheral
vision that contributed to his greatness at basketball, Bradley has always had a
seemingly preternatural sense of where he will be.

The summer before his senior year in college, the same year he won his gold
medal at the Tokyo Olympics, Bradley went to Washington as a political intern.
''I was sitting in the Senate chamber the night the 1964 Civil Rights Act
passed,'' he recalls. ''Watching the vote being cast and knowing something
significant happened there that night that made America a better place, it made
you think, maybe someday. . . .''

Such obvious forward motion has contributed to the belief among Bradley watchers
that there exists a single, undeviating master plan that will carry him to the
White House, if not in 1988, maybe someday.

His political habits underscore this impression. Coleman S. Hicks, one of
Bradley's Princeton roommates and now a Washington attorney, recalls visiting
his Senate office when another roommate was in town. ''We were talking to him
between calls to the Senate floor for votes,'' says Hicks. ''Each time, he knew
not just how he was going to vote, but exactly what he was going to do: say
'Nice job' to Metzenbaum, talk to Kennedy. He wouldn't ever think of going down
there without an agenda.''

One hears echoes of the high school kid in Crystal City, Mo., methodically
dribbling a basketball between chairs, hour after hour, day after day, 10 pounds
of lead slivers weighing down his sneakers, a piece of cardboard taped to the
bottom of empty eyeglass frames so he could not see the ball - his agenda for
becoming a great basketball player.

Through the prism of basketball, one can see the two sides of Bradley's
character, the guarded individual and the organization man. In his 1976
autobiography, ''Life on the Run,'' Bradley wrote of the ''conflict'' he felt
because ''I have to interact with others to accomplish my goal of team play. My
problem is that my aspirations demand that I create something I cannot control
completely.''

But those who interpret Bradley's basketball background as implying
single-minded intent miss the complexity of his character. ''Bill never has just
one possibility,'' says McPhee, still a friend. ''He sees that there may be six
or seven options before him, and he turns over each one before he moves to the
one that's most appealing. Basketball enhanced that ability, and that's why he
was great at it.'' Understanding all the options underlies his ability to see
beyond the immediate.

A Japanese journalist stops by Bradley's office to discuss trade policy. ''Your
name has been mentioned in connection with the Presidency, even in Japan,'' says
the scribe. ''But you haven't said anything.''

''I've said,'' says Bradley, his voice betraying only a hint of frustration,
''that 1988 is not my time.''


BRADLEY'S ABILITY TO sense and pursue a variety of possibilities was evident in
his crusade to enact tax reform in 1985. When the House Ways and Means Committee
picked up President Reagan's reform bill - based on legislation originally
developed by Bradley in the early 1980's - the Senator presented himself to
Chairman Rostenkowski with an offer of aid. At first suspicious - the cultural
gulf between the House and the Senate is wide, and rarely if ever does a member
of the upper body deign to lobby the lower - Rostenkowski gave Bradley lists of
House members to call on.

''I'd send him to see a member. He'd do it, and then he'd call and say,
'Anything more, coach?' '' says Rostenkowski, beaming with the memory of the
beginning of what has since become a fast friendship. ''When I was fed up during
House-Senate conference, and was about to leave the room, Bill would grab me and
say, 'Dan, wait a minute, lemme talk to you.' And he'd come up with solutions.
He always had ideas.'' Bradley's willingness to defy custom in a town where
procedural and social rules are as firm as they are Byzantine inspires much of
the admiration for the man. ''He doesn't rely on the Holy Writ on how to do
things,'' is how the Democratic polltaker Geoffrey Garin puts it.

The source of Bradley's unconventionality is a strong anti-elitist impulse that
marks his entire history. Growing up as a rich kid in a small, middle-class town
about 30 miles from St. Louis, he felt ostracized by his peers. ''They would not
judge me for what I was,'' Bradley complained retrospectively to John McPhee.

Prejudice born of elitism or convention riles Bradley to the core. During his
playing days, racial attacks against his black teammates led him to refer
repeatedly to the United States as a ''racist society.'' Marcia Aronoff,
Bradley's administrative assistant, recalls having seen her boss truly angry
only once: when North Carolina Senator Jesse Helms tried to prevent the passage
of the bill creating Martin Luther King Jr. Day. And Bradley has in turn angered
Senate colleagues from the West by working strenuously on behalf of the rights
of American Indians, a cause he took on as a ball player.

Bradley's moral high-mindedness has a downside. ''The minus is a degree of
naivete,'' says a participant in the tax-reform battle. ''He relies on an
intellectual method of conciliation. But in the real world, people aren't
interested in the intellectual means to square a circle.'' A few Washington
insiders go further, accusing Bradley, in one Democratic Congressman's words, of
''intellectual intolerance.''

His personal aloofness dates back at least to his basketball days. So studious
has been his desire to separate public life from private life that when Bradley
married Ernestine Schlant in 1974 his Knick teammates did not find out until
after the wedding.

Bradley has revealed a great deal of himself in his autobiography, an
introspective chronicle of loneliness, sex, racism and rock-and-roll on the
road. Yet he resists questions about his family and the depth of his Protestant
faith because he fears ''exploiting'' them for political purposes, according to
friends.

In fact, his pride in his wife's accomplishments often overcomes his sense of
privacy. ''Did you see her last book?'' he will ask with excitement. A tenured
professor of German language and literature and comparative literature at
Montclair State College in New Jersey, Ernestine Schlant Bradley is the author
and co-author of five books, the most recent an acclaimed study of Hermann
Broch, the Austrian-born mystical novelist.

For the most part, the Bradleys' lives revolve around their dual careers and
their 10-year-old daughter, Theresa Anne, who last year lived full-time in
Washington. Her father ''didn't want to miss the primary parenting experience,''
according to a family friend; her mother commuted down to the capital from their
mountain home in Denville, N.J., after completing her four-day-a-week academic
stint in New Jersey.

Generally unknown to the public is Bradley's deadpan, frequent and unexpected
humor. Recently, while talking to a reporter, his office telephone buzzed.
Putting it to his ear, he coughed and wheezed into the phone, listening with a
perfectly straight face for some three minutes before saying, ''No, Mr.
Gorbachev, I do not believe your economic reforms will work unless accompanied
by social reforms.'' He then hung up, drummed a rim shot on his desk with his
hands, and left for a vote on a cloture call. Crowded into one of the Capitol's
internal subway cars with Bradley, Louisiana Senator John B. Breaux asked him,
''Hey, Bill, you gonna use this occasion to announce your candidacy?''


WHAT CRITIcisms there are of Bradley do point to the most basic aspect of his
character: his intellectualism.

Bradley bridles at the notion that he searches for ''intellectual methods of
conciliation.''

''What the hell does that mean?'' he asks. Still, he does admit that ''the part
of the work that is most interesting to me is the analytical side of the
business.''

Bradley exercises this part of his self by obsessively collecting facts,
information, details. Recently, returning to Washington after a full day and
evening in Boston, he hopped into a cab with two aides and Michael Kaye, his
political media consultant and one of his closest friends. As the three others
bantered, Bradley kept trying to engage the cabby in conversation about the
situation in her native South Korea. How often did she call her family? What did
they say? The tidbits he collects, the facts, impressions, names and thoughts,
often find their way into the tiny, flip-top notebooks he carries with him
wherever he goes.

In this way, Bradley also collects people. Investment banker and Democratic
policy maven Felix Rohatyn called Bradley recently to tell him he was about to
visit the Soviet Union. ''He gave me, offhand, a list of six people I should see
when I was there,'' says Rohatyn. ''Two were theoretical economists. One was a
writer on the environment.''

This acquisition of information, the piling of fact upon fact upon fact, is not
only consistent with the methodical and deliberate way Bradley practiced
basketball, but reveals also the formative influence of John F. Kennedy and the
legacy of ''the best and the brightest.''

Princeton has always prided itself on inculcating its students with a sense of
service to community and country. At no time, perhaps, was this notion stronger
than in the early 1960's, when the young President called forth the idea of
service that was part of the school's unofficial motto, ''Princeton in the
nation's service.''

Equally significant was the sense that problems could be solved pragmatically.
''We really believed that brains and analysis could solve the problems of the
day,'' says Richard H. Missner, a classmate of Bradley's and now a venture
capitalist who has raised some funds for him in Chicago.

It is now a commonplace, of course, that the technocratic approach led
inexorably to the failures of Vietnam and the excesses of 1960's liberalism.
Bradley dismisses the charge. ''To me, '60's liberalism' has the positive
connotation of fighting for civil rights,'' he says. ''Through civil rights, we
purify ourselves. The excesses were exaggerated.''

Still, it may be this obsessive pragmatism that led Bradley into his first
damaging political controversy: his 1986 vote to provide $100 million in aid to
the Nicaraguan contras. It was not a completely anomalous decision -Bradley
advocated sending light arms to the Afghan rebels as far back as 1981, and
supported the United States invasion of Grenada -but he had opposed aiding the
contras during his 1984 re-election bid. His turnaround tarnished him in the
liberal community and produced the first real political protests he has ever had
to endure, including a full-page ad attacking his vote in Daily Variety, placed
by the Hollywood Women's Political Committee on the eve of a Bradley
fund-raising visit to Los Angeles.

By all accounts, Bradley, a member of the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, approached contra aide with the same painstaking analysis he gives
other issues, virtually ignoring the deleterious political ramifications. His
staff aide on the intelligence committee, John Despres, is considered by several
observers one of the best-informed Central America experts in the Congress.
(Despres and his wife, Gina, Bradley's counsel and top aide for finance, are the
Senator's closest policy advisers.) One liberal Senator told Ann F. Lewis,
former director of Americans for Democratic Action, the liberal policy
organization, that Bradley became so consumed by the inside reports to which he
was privy as a member of the intelligence committee that ''the facts and details
made seem overcomplicated for him what is basically a simple situation, that the
Sandinistas may be bad guys, but you don't hurt them by arming the contras,''
said Ms. Lewis.

''A lot of energy goes into the contras on both sides,'' Bradley says. ''Not a
whole lot of energy goes into alleviating the circumstances out of which
revolution and counterrevolution result - poverty and debt.'' He voted the way
he did, he says, because he became convinced that the Sandinistas present a
long-term destabilizing threat to the region. Financing the contras is a way to
pressure the Sandinistas into negotiations. Bradley rejects the notion that his
vote on future aid would be influenced either by the post-Oliver North opinion
polls indicating rising public backing for the contras or the Iran-contra
scandal, which ''outraged'' him. ''I review the situation every two weeks on the
intelligence committee and with outside experts,'' says Bradley. ''I'm guided by
my review and that's how I'll make my call.'' He does, however, caution the
rebels' advocates that ''my support for the contras is not a blank check.''


FRIENDS AND COLLEAGUES who have talked to him in detail about his reluctance to
seek the Presidency in 1988 say that Bradley's real reasons for holding back are
far from vague. ''The one negative he keeps coming back to is the need to
govern,'' says the investment banker Kenneth Lipper, a former Deputy Mayor of
New York. ''His exact words were, 'Winning is not enough. We have to govern,
too.' ''

His intelligence committee work certainly seems a concerted effort to gain the
kind of expertise in foreign affairs necessary to exercise national leadership,
a thesis Bradley appears to validate when he says, ''It allows you to ask
yourself how things should work. You begin to see the Executive Branch's options
and where they may have fallen short.''

But his desire for command over the subject of leadership is even more specific
than a quest for knowledge. According to Ken Lipper, Bradley has ''said he feels
that with more time, he will meet more people to help him staff a government.''

Neither his firm refusal to enter the 1988 race nor his vote for contra aid have
deterred Democrats from pressing Bradley. To understand why they persist,
perhaps it is better to look not at the man and his accomplishments, but at his
image. A public figure his entire life, Bill Bradley may be a latter-day
political myth, a larger-than-life figure who represents traditional American
values in a modern cast.

Classic American themes, primarily hard work and patriotism, underlie the
well-known tales about Bradley at Princeton, Bradley with the Knicks and now
Bradley in Washington that are passed around the capital, secondhand, like
rumors. Surrounding these tales is a distinctly contemporary aura. Bradley
represents a postwar generation unconstrained by geography or economics, a
mobile generation, able to choose its own destiny. The years Bradley spent
running up and down basketball courts from coast to coast with men fundamentally
unlike himself have lent him the image of a truly national man, neither of
Missouri nor of New Jersey, a man rooted in a sort of classless egalitarianism.
As Christopher J. Matthews, who was an aide to former Speaker of the House
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., says, ''There are no more war heroes anymore. There are
only jocks.'' More than any other public figure today, Bill Bradley is not a
person, but a story.

To the extent that people are looking not to the man but to the myth as a
Presidential candidate, they are asking Bradley to violate one of the
fundamental elements of that mythology - Bradley's superhuman willingness to
prepare, his desire to know it all, to have control of the territory. ''If
people understand Bill's modus operandi,'' asks his friend Mike Kaye, ''why,
when the really big one comes along, would they expect him to change the way he
does everything else and do it shorthand?''

Maybe, just maybe, Bradley underestimates his own capabilities. In June, Bradley
went to Maine for a fund-raiser for Senator George J. Mitchell. Driving through
Bangor after the event with three others, he spotted four kids shooting baskets
through a hoop on the side of a garage.

The driver suggested they stop and take a couple of shots. Bradley resisted, but
finally acquiesced.

''Hey look, we're taking this ball away from these kids, let's put some money on
the line here,'' he recalled saying. ''If I can get two out of five, each of you
cough up $10.''

Bradley exceeded his expectations: he sunk four out of five.

His next appointment arrives - a woman whose father, a museum director in Peru,
wants guidance on some pending legislation on the import of historical
artifacts. ''My father says, 'Bring my regards to the next President of the
United States,' '' she says. Bill Bradley gives an almost imperceptible half
smile, as his left eyebrow arches toward the sky.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Sen. Bill Bradley outside Capitol (Benno Friedman); Bradley
chairing Senate hearing (page 31); Bradley confers with aides John and Gina
Depres (page 38)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: AUGUST 2, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1474 words




An error occurred in the processing of a table at this point in the document.
Please refer to the table in the online document.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BECOMING A DOCTOR, by Melvin Konner. (Elisabeth Sifton/ Viking, $19.95.) To
understand them, join them; Mr. (now Dr.) Konner, an anthropologist, went
through medical school and produced this engaging account of the long,
difficult, sometimes painful initiation that turns ordinary young people into
physicians.

SARTRE: A Life, by Annie Cohen-Solal. (Pantheon, $24.95.) Published two years
ago in France, this modest, industrious biography is full of suggestive detail
about Sartre's odd, unhappy life but steers clear of psychological reductionism.


SPILLVILLE, by Patricia Hampl. Illustrated by Steven Sorman. (Milkweed, Cloth,
$25; Paper, $9.95.) A collection of intelligent meditations, in words and
pictures, on the little Iowa town where the composer Anton Dvorak lived for a
while in the 1890's.

ELLEN TERRY: Player in Her Time, by Nina Auerbach. (Norton, $22.50.) Ms.
Auerbach portrays the immensely popular English actress as an angry subversive,
paralyzed in her emotional life by the humiliating patriarchy that governed her
public existence.

ORPHANS: Real and Imaginary, by Eileen Simpson. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $16.95.)
The author, a novelist and psychotherapist, joins her own history (orphaned
before age 7) to an exploration of the painful fate of orphans in history,
literature and the imagination.

HEMINGWAY, by Kenneth S. Lynn. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) A sympathetic and
detailed biography that sees Hemingway as a valiant and moral man and writer of
his own time and place, not the macho freak of his posthumous publicity.

THE HOTTENTOT ROOM, by Christopher Hope. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.95.) Mr.
Hope's protagonist in his passionate third novel is a South African secret agent
in London; his thesis is that the world is turning brutal, mad and
claustrophobic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHERE HE DIDN'T FAIL

BYLINE: By STEVE NEAL; Steve Neal, the political editor of The Chicago
Sun-Times, is the author of ''Dark Horse: A Biography of Wendell Wilkie.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 500 words



THE WORLD AND RICHARD NIXON
By C. L. Sulzberger. 269 pp. New York: Prentice Hall Press. $18.95.

AFTER more than a decade in the political wilderness, Richard M. Nixon is
staging another remarkable comeback. This one is for his place in the history
books. Because of Watergate, there will always be an asterisk next to Mr.
Nixon's name. But as C. L. Sulzberger demonstrates in ''The World and Richard
Nixon,'' a revisionist study of the former President, Mr. Nixon left a record of
major accomplishments in foreign policy.

Mr. Sulzberger, a former chief foreign correspondent for The New York Times, has
known Mr. Nixon for 30 years and had extensive dealings with the statesmen with
whom the former President worked. From his firsthand experiences, including
numerous interviews with Mr. Nixon, as well as from other fresh source
materials, Mr. Sulzberger has produced a thorough, fair-minded, vividly written
portrait of one of the more fascinating characters of modern times.

Having lived abroad for half a century, Mr. Sulzberger confides that he never
understood the bitter passions that Mr. Nixon aroused among a wide range of his
countrymen. Mr. Sulzberger says that Mr. Nixon failed as a domestic leader as a
result of Watergate. At the same time, he argues that ''to denigrate Nixon's
foreign policy because it was flawed by the Vietnam inheritance and overshadowed
by the dirty Watergate mess is to misread Nixon's historical importance. It
would be like dismissing General and President Ulysses S. Grant as only an
alcoholic.'' Mr. Sulzberger suggests that Mr. Nixon enjoyed more foreign-policy
triumphs than most American Presidents because he had a much richer background
in world affairs than all but a handful of the men who have held the nation's
highest office. Mr. Nixon also worked harder at it than most Presidents,
traveling to more countries and meeting more heads of state that any other
American chief executive.

It is one of the ironies of the Nixon Presidency, Mr. Sulzberger notes, that the
man who rose to national prominence as an outspoken anti-Communist was more
effective in his dealings with the Soviet Union and other Communist nations than
any other President. Mr. Nixon told Mr. Sulzberger that the Soviet leader Leonid
I. Brezhnev once proposed to him that the two superpowers should split the world
and rule. Brezhnev was seeking to undercut Mr. Nixon's historic friendship with
the Chinese leaders Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai.

Of the scores of world leaders Mr. Nixon has known, his personal favorite, he
told Mr. Sulzberger, was Sir Robert Menzies of Australia. But Mr. Sulzberger
suggests that France's Charles de Gaulle may have had the biggest influence on
Mr. Nixon's diplomatic style and statesmanship. Andre Malraux, de Gaulle's
longtime ally, once told Mr. Sulzberger that de Gaulle felt a bond with Mr.
Nixon, ''which was probably based on the fact that Nixon also had his 'period of
exile' . . . and de Gaulle knew what he had suffered.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EMPTYING A CITY, KIDNAPPING A COUNTRY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE; Barbara Crossette is chief of the Bangkok bureau
of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 804 words



TO DESTROY YOU IS NO LOSS
The Odyssey of a Cambodian Family. By Joan D. Criddle and Teeda Butt Mam. 289
pp. Boston: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $17.95.

A DECADE after Cambodia was captured and ravaged by the band of fanatic
Communist levelers the world came to know as the Khmer Rouge, more and more
survivors, sustained by new lives, are telling us what happened to them during
that extraordinary mass kidnapping of a nation. Their writing not only sears
into history the daily horror of life at the frontiers of human endurance, but
also adds valuable details to the sketchy, often politically selective, material
available to those who seek to record accurately if never explain fully the Pol
Pot years.

''To Destroy You Is No Loss'' - as the Khmer Rouge repeatedly told the
intellectuals - the latest of these personal accounts, appears as campaigns are
beginning in this country and abroad to have the Khmer Rouge leadership, still
largely intact along the Thai-Cambodian border, brought to the International
Court of Justice on charges of genocide. This book, though one family's story,
might serve as a primer to the suit.

In 1975, Teeda Butt Mam (who is now an American citizen working in computer
software in California and who wrote the book with Joan D. Criddle, her sponsor
as a refugee in the United States) was a pampered teen-ager in a comfortable
home in Phnom Penh. Suddenly the Khmer Rouge - known to Cambodians simply as
Angka, ''the Organization'' - entered the capital and proceeded to empty the
city. But her father, a well-educated former legislator, had taught his extended
family to be circumspect and analytical.

''While we were camped in the cucumber patch,'' his daughter recalls, ''my
father, a cautious man, evolved a rule that we would follow thereafter; we would
watch and listen carefully to see what results others had when they tried
something new or asked a favor. If those results were good, we followed suit. We
lost opportunities by not taking the initiative, but we were saved from fatal
mistakes. Our family's guiding rule became 'Never do anything first.' 'Only a
fool tests the depth of the water with both feet,' says the Chinese proverb.''

Although Choun Butt was soon led away to his death, his example continued to
guide his family to an almost miraculous survival and has permeated his
daughter's recollections. ''To Destroy You Is No Loss'' is a more intellectual
book than many of its type; some may find it too rational and dispassionate in
parts, as Mrs. Mam seeks to explain what was happening around her and relate it
to the confrontation building between Cambodia and Vietnam. When Hanoi, having
lost control of a Communist movement it once supported, eventually invaded at
the end of 1978, it was not for humanitarian reasons.

More complexity, ambiguity and unpredictability attended the rule of Angka than
the popular history of the 1975-79 period allows. The leading historians of the
period, Michael Vickery (''Cambodia 1975-1982'') and Ben Kiernan (''How Pol Pot
Came to Power''), have both documented, for example, the gradations and
variations in hardship and terror from one region or district to another. Mrs.
Mam and her family saw this firsthand as they traded news with relatives and
friends in other villages, or when they survived the annual monsoon ''killing
times.'' Then, people promised new homes were clubbed to death with hoes and
thrown into swollen reservoirs and wells.

For the Butt family, and tens of thousands of other Cambodians, the suffering
and terror did not end in 1979. Fleeing, weakened and ill - her mother had to
carry a prolapsed uterus as she ran - Teeda Butt, her new husband, Vitou Mam,
and her closest relatives met a hostile reception in Thailand, 200 long miles
away. Several of them became part of a forced repatriation of more than 40,000
refugees.

Incredibly, they had to escape Cambodia a second time. By then, a horrified
world had reacted to their first encounter with ''freedom.'' Mrs. Mam calls
their expulsion from Thailand ''the worst night of my life.'' As she describes
the incident, the helpless Cambodians were bused from the safety of a refugee
camp to an outcropping along the border several hundred miles to the northeast,
where they were forced over the precipice into a wild and inaccessible part of
Cambodia from which it would be almost impossible to return to Thailand. Many
who resisted, including children, were shot by Thai troops; food bundles were
abandoned or lost in the confusion; mines exploded; hundreds defecated, vomited,
died, adding to the stench of already bloated bodies. ''I thought the nightmare
I had lived through for years and the trauma of our escape had exposed me to all
the suffering and horrors this world had to offer,'' Mrs. Mam remembers. ''I was
wrong.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Teeda Butt Mam; her father, Choun Butt; mother, Ean Bun;
sisters Mearadey and Rasmei (Courtesy Teeda Butt Mam)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME IN EVERY HAMLET

BYLINE: By MARILYN STASIO; Marilyn Stasio writes Mystery Alley, a nationally
syndicated column of mystery fiction reviews.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2791 words


BACK in 1929, in ''Red Harvest,'' Dashiell Hammett sent his San Francisco
shamus, the Continental Op, to a town in Montana called Personville. (Among the
locals, ''Poisonville.'') In this adventure - considered to be the first of the
so-called ''rotten town'' novels of the period - the detective describes the
place as ''an ugly city of forty thousand people, set in an ugly notch between
two ugly mountains that had been dirtied up by mining.'' Even his client feels
compelled to apologize for her unprepossessing city. ''You'll find it a dreary
place,'' she says. ''I suppose all mining towns are like this.''

Today, a writer of crime fiction in search of literary inspiration would leap at
a town like Personville. Once he exposed the industrial criminality of strip
mining and illegal land grabs, he could turn his attention to the social crimes
bred by industrial blight and wholesale unemployment among the miners. Then,
when real-estate developers started building condos on those ''two ugly
mountains,'' he could make more hay out of the environmental havoc.

True, Dashiell Hammett got to Personville more than a half-century before the
current generation of crime writers. But for much of that time there was little
incentive for flushing out crime in the boondocks. With Prohibition and after
World War II, especially, urban shifts in the national crime pattern had most
people convinced that all the best raw material could be found in growing urban
crime centers like Los Angeles, New York, Chicago and Miami. It is only in
recent years, with the re-emergence of the old trend in fiction we've been
calling ''the new regionalism,'' that writers have been moving en masse beyond
the big-city limits of the American crime novel and rediscovering burgs like
Personville.

The new regionalism has tapped into the current and widespread belief that
serious crime has spun out of control in the cities and that evil is now abroad
in every hamlet in the land. You pick up a crime novel today, it's as likely to
be set in Seattle, Denver, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Houston, St. Louis, Jersey
City, Laguna Beach or Benavides, Tex., as in one of those high-density
concentrations of corruption like New York. This new strain of detective fiction
makes no bones about its local roots; speaking in pungent native accents and
pleased to tell a stranger all about the town history, these books wave their
regional eccentricities like a flag. THE authors of these private-eye novels and
police procedurals aren't just dredging the terrain for local color, either.
Looking beyond the hometown boosterism, they are also broadening our perceptions
of what constitutes crime around the country. In the border states, that could
mean bloody gang wars among drug merchants, or the body trade in illegal
immigrants. In the Pacific Northwest, it's often environmental issues.
Crime-conscious Southern writers are sick of old traditions nurtured by class
snobbery, political corruption and racism. Those from the Plains regions see
crime's source in the economic collapse of independent farming. And in the
Northeast, we're watching ugly new forms of violence breeding in small,
economically depressed industrial cities.

Hard-boiled private eyes like Hammett's Continental Op no longer stride into a
''rotten town'' like Personville with the cool confidence that they will be able
to root out the bad apples responsible for the blight in their local barrels.
But unlike so many of their big-city counterparts, the new breed of detectives
seem less cynical and less desperate about their work. If they can block one
drug-trade route in Houston or kick one crooked politician out of office in New
Orleans the heroes of the new fiction can reassure themselves - and us - that
crime in this country isn't totally beyond human control.

Now that the detective story has outgrown its old, all-purpose plot about a guy,
a girl and a gun, it's up to the local heroes to avenge the kinds of crime that
matter in their neck of the woods. In the Pacific Northwest, for instance,
environmental issues figure prominently in mystery fiction.

''This is the great American West. Where men come to get away from laws,'' says
Chester Milodragovitch 3d, a private investigator who serves as the author's
mouthpiece in James Crumley's flamboyantly original mysteries about that region.
''Almost everything in this state is legal,'' according to Milo, ''and a lot of
things that are illegal are done in spite of the law.'' In keeping with this
philosophy, ''Dancing Bear'' finds this soured idealist single-handedly
defending his patch of wilderness from the ravages of a sinister multinational
corporation working in cahoots with the Environmental Protection Agency.

Other writers from the region echo Mr. Crumley's distrust of the Federal
Government's policies on local environmental issues. Richard Hoyt, for one,
hands his Seattle-based detective a controversial case in ''Fish Story.'' A
tribe of Cowlitz Indians takes the Government to court over fishing rights to
the Columbia River, in a story that hinges on the ferocious local competition
between the commercial-fishing and sports-fishing industries. Mr. Hoyt also uses
the genre novel to air his outrage over a massive Federal dam project that
destroyed what used to be the largest salmon run in the world.

Detectives from Western states take fierce pride in the natural beauty of their
open spaces, which genre writers often render in an austere style that might be
described as ''laconic realism.'' Rex Burns, in particular, is a master of this
regional idiom. ''It's an empty country,'' observes his Denver detective, Gabe
Wager, while working on a case that takes him into the wild country of western
Colorado. ''I like it.''

Although he may not be given to oratorical eloquence over the land he loves,
this straight-arrow cop listens up when people talk about forces that imperil
his native region and its rugged way of life. In ''Ground Money,'' Wager meets a
cattle rancher who draws him a desolate picture of a once-thriving industry,
squeezed on all sides by ''high interest rates and low market prices -
compounded by trade restrictions and imports, an unfavorable dollar, price
supports for the steel industry which pushed equipment sky-high, chicanery in
the oil markets, and reduced federal support to agencies that still had to be
supported by local tax dollars.'' Having gone into the wild country on a little
vacation, Wager is properly stunned by this sophisticated anticapitalist
diatribe from a backwoods rancher. So, too, are readers raised on the notion of
detective fiction as mindless escape literature.

No writer of Western detective novels examines the social issues of his region
with more sensitivity than Tony Hillerman, whose evocative police procedurals
are set on Indian reservations in Arizona and New Mexico and feature officers
Jim Chee and Joe Leaphorn of the Navajo Tribal Police. Like his latest,
''Skinwalkers,'' Mr. Hillerman's books are commonly cited for their brooding
desert landscapes and for their authentic rendering of tribal life and customs.

Mr. Hillerman is indeed fascinating on such native lore as Hopi initiation rites
and secret Navajo burial practices, but he is equally compelling on contemporary
tribal matters: drug abuse on the reservation, unemployment among adult males,
the alarming state of the tribe schools and hospitals, the grim conditions at
the state prisons where so many of the young men wind up. In typical fashion,
''Skinwalkers'' opens with an intriguing glimpse of local witchcraft practices.
But Officer Jim Chee, who declares himself a skeptic on the subject,
acknowledges a more potent form of malicious evil ''in those who sold whiskey to
children, in those who bought videocassette recorders while their relatives were
hungry, in the knife fights in a Gallup alley, in beaten wives and abandoned
children.''

Moving into the Midwestern states, the detective story tends to become more
concerned with moral issues. ''We never used to have this kind of stuff - this
child abuse, this incest, and stuff - when I was younger. You never heard a
thing about it, now it's all you do hear.''

That cry of outrage is raised, in William J. Reynolds's ''Moving Targets,'' by a
character who is scandalized by a case of incest in Omaha. Other writers from
the region have examined similar cases of moral depravity in their home states
of Indiana, Iowa and Ohio. ''Morally, it's a very interesting place,'' Jonathan
Valin has said of Cincinnati, his ''puritanical'' birthplace. ''I felt a sense
of repression, keeping a lid on things. It's a German, Catholic, very sedate,
very conservative, very hard-core decent kind of place.'' MR. VALIN'S private
eye, Harry Stoner, confronts the contradictions of such decency in ''Day of
Wrath,'' when he comes upon a peculiar ornament on a suburban lawn. ''I stared
at the plaster Negro and felt a little embarrassed,'' the detective says. ''Even
in Cincinnati, that sort of thing had gone out with the Civil Rights Act,
although I'd have been willing to bet that there were thirty thousand little
Negro jockeys sitting in dark basement corners from Delhi to Indian Hill, like a
race of imprisoned elves, waiting to be returned to daylight. . . . Racial
prejudice didn't die in this city; it just got stored in the basement.''

Stephen Greenleaf, who grew up in a small farming community in Iowa, encounters
more overt racial strain when he sends his San Francisco-based detective, John
Marshall Tanner, back home to the Hawkeye State in ''Fatal Obsession.''
Discovering many families of East Asian refugees living in his hometown,
Tanner-Greenleaf is struck by the antagonism their presence incites among the
local farmers.

''What a cultural wrenching that must have been for those families, finding
themselves in the cornfields of Iowa,'' said the author, who met such
transplanted families on a visit home. He developed his fictional murder case
out of the conflicts he sensed between the new immigrants and the hometown boys
who had known them in a different context as soldiers in Vietnam. ''My
thought,'' he said, ''was to take this little town, all churning with emotions,
and show that solving a murder would not resolve the tensions in the town or
alter the passions within its families.'' SOME of the most perceptive
observations on Middle America, in fact, have been made lately by writers who
have sent their big-city detectives home for a visit. Ross Thomas's suave sleuth
Benjamin Dill normally works on political cases in Washington. In
''Briarpatch,'' Dill returns home to a Sunbelt city (probably Oklahoma City,
where Mr. Thomas grew up) to investigate his sister's murder. Feeling the
disorientation of a stranger ''wandering through a vast and largely uncharted
land,'' he uses his fresh perspective to uncover widespread civic corruption in
his hometown.

The new regional detectives who were born in the South and never left it
encounter the same drug-related crimes and politically motivated corruption that
plague their counterparts in other areas of the country. But to the Southerners,
as well as writers from other regions, these evils often come wrapped in social
and racial discrimination.

John W. Corrington and Joyce H. Corrington's black detective, Capt. Ralph
(''Rat'') Trapp, heads up the homicide division of the New Orleans Police
Department. In ''A Project Named Desire,'' this blunt-spoken cop broods on the
ironic street names conferred by the city on its most crime-riddled and hopeless
black ghetto, where he himself was born.

''There's Treasure Street, and Abundance and Benefit,'' goes his litany,
''Humanity, Industry, and Pleasure Streets - all these in the midst of
hopelessness and squalor and stone meanness. . . . Maybe some fool put names
like that on those miserable streets to give us black folks inspiration. Or to
make fun of us.''

In an earlier crime novel by the Corringtons, a self-designated ''redneck''
sleuth from ''the hills and piney woods around Shreveport and the Texas border''
encounters a more subtle form of social ostracism when he takes on a case for
members of the old gentry. ''I knew I would always be an alien in New Orleans,''
he says bitterly, after opening the family vault and finding evidence of
centuries' worth of corruption. In disgust, he takes himself back home to Huey
Long country.

Social divisions of race and class are even more pronounced in Daniel Woodrell's
''Under the Bright Lights,'' which introduces a Cajun police officer from the
bayou country of Tennessee. Det. Rene Shade wades into a swamp of racial
tensions between the black community and its French and German neighbors when he
investigates the murder of a black city official. ''Shade had once felt that
this was his turf, that he knew it well,'' muses the narrator, as he steers his
boat deeper into the bog. ''But he knew he was a visitor to it now.'' To Shade
and Trapp and other Southern detectives, the ultimate crime seems to be their
own alienation - by race, economic class or social antecedents - from the place
they want to call home.

In the smoke-blackened towns and small cities of the industrial North, local
crimes run to murder, theft and drugs, just the way they do in the bigger
cities. But the conditions in which such crimes flourish are commonly identified
by regional authors as the neglect and betrayal of the working classes on the
part of government and industry.

The pseudonymous author who calls himself K. C. Constantine writes what are
probably the most poignant studies of post-Industrial Age depression in modern
crime literature. His fictional setting of Rocksburg, Pa. (near Pittsburgh), has
the idiosyncratic distinctiveness of your own thumb. But Rocksburg could be any
economically battered town in any coalfield state where industry has fled,
leaving behind an exhausted ecosystem, double-digit unemployment rates and no
hope. ''You dummy,'' a barroom philosopher counsels Chief of Police Mario
Balzic, the everyman hero of Mr. Constantine's plainsong detective series. ''You
worry too much about stuff you can't do nothin' about.''

Balzic's appeal, of course, is that he does care about his hometown, whose local
brand of crime -brawls at the V.F.W., domestic violence, juvenile drug use and
petty larceny by the elderly - is just about what you'd expect from
working-class people who haven't worked in a long time. Keeping his watch on the
''organized desolation'' of Rocksburg's blue-collar precincts, this
compassionate cop forgives the town sinners and saves his anger for the economic
system that has abandoned them.

The new regionalism has taken such a firm hold on American detective fiction
that it has even surfaced in major cities. Loren D. Estleman (from Detroit), Joe
Gash (Chicago), Lawrence Block (New York) and Arthur Lyons (Los Angeles) are
only a few of the city slickers who now routinely send their hard-boiled
detectives out of town, or at least out of the inner city and into
self-contained ethnic neighborhoods and suburbs. Det. Sgt. Hoke Moseley, the
working-stiff hero of Charles Willeford's Miami police procedural series, gets
so depressed by the criminal climate of his city that he quits the force in Mr.
Willeford's latest, ''Sideswipe,'' and moves to a retirement community. A GOOD
many of the new regional detectives, in fact, are self-exiled burnout cases from
major urban areas, looking for the small-town character that crime and violence
have destroyed in their own cities. Those who stay behind usually become
''sentinels of outrage'' over the relentless disintegration of their hometowns,
like the Miami newspaperman in Carl Hiaasen's ''Tourist Season.'' Enraged by the
regional overdevelopment of what used to be a livable town, this half-mad
idealist starts feeding tourists to a giant alligator, while calling for ''a
killer hurricane, sudden and furious, an implacable tempest that would raze the
concrete shoreline and rake away the scum and corruption.''

At the heart of it, then, the new regionalism is really about the territory
every person calls home. In this sense, the industrial crimes that figure in
East Coast detective fiction are not so far removed from the ecological concerns
of West Coast writers. The moral issues that divide communities in Midwestern
novels have the same disruptive impact as class and race conflicts in Southern
cities.

For all its regional variety, crime still appears in genre fiction as a
universal force of evil that destroys the local social order. And despite their
distinctive regional differences, the private eyes and police detectives of
popular fiction all share the same objective - to restore order at home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH-TECH NAVY AT RISK IN AN IRANIAN LAKE

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN some ways, the hot and shallow waters of the Persian Gulf are coming to
resemble, in military minds, the rice paddies and river deltas of Vietnam.

As a growing flotilla of powerful warships crammed with the latest technology
escorts Kuwaiti oil tankers flying the American flag, the United States is
realizing that it is up against a form of guerrilla warfare in which the enemy
is ubiquitous and unidentifiable, with all the advantages of operating in home
waters.

Iran withdrew virtually all its forces from the Strait of Hormuz as an American
naval convoy prepared to move, at full alert, through the gulf 11 days ago. But
''invisible hands,'' to use Iran's phrase, placed a mine that damaged the
Kuwait-bound supertanker Bridgeton. (The reflagged tanker Gas Prince, beginning
a voyage to Japan, joined American escort ships in the gulf yesterday,
apparently leaving the Bridgeton behind.) And as if to thumb its nose, Iran last
week launched a large naval maneuver in the gulf, practicing hit-and-run attacks
by patrol boats and small craft.

Nothing better illustrates the kind of adversary the United States Navy is
facing than the use of mines, one of the simplest forms of naval warfare, to
entangle a superpower in an operation of increasing complexity, adding danger
and frustration to the Navy's task.

A Helicopter Crashes

Last week, the Pentagon sent eight large Sea Stallion minesweeping helicopters
to the gulf. Because Kuwait and other gulf countries declined to provide bases,
they will work from the deck of the Guadalcanal, a large amphibious ship.
Experts said the helicopters' task is immense. Even if no additional mines are
found in waters where at least seven more mines were observed last week, the
helicopters will face grueling hours of sweeping the shipping channels. American
requests to Britain, the Netherlands and other countries to send mine-hunting
vessels were turned down. The Navy then decided to try 57-foot boats it had used
to clear rivers in the Vietnam war but did not consider ideal for the gulf.

Flying helicopters at low altitude while they drag heavy equipment through the
water will be dangerous and difficult. Heat and wind-borne sand are expected to
take their toll of equipment, and pilots and maintenance crews are expected to
grow weary on the job, which might last indefinitely. A Navy Sea King helicopter
ferrying supplies from Bahrain crashed into the water Thursday as it attempted
to land on the command ship La Salle. One man was killed and three were missing
and presumed lost. The helicopter was not the type used to clear mines, nor was
it attacked; but the crash underscored the dangers of even routine military
operations.

In Washington, Everett Pyatt, the Assistant Secretary of the Navy in charge of
shipbuilding, admitted that the Navy's effort to rebuild its obsolete force of
minesweepers is more than two years behind schedule and hundreds of millions of
dollars over budget. The Navy has only three minesweepers on active duty and 18
used to train reservists. None are suitable for the gulf.

Meanwhile, Iran - whose irregular forces, the Pasdaran revolutionary guards,
have small bases within easy reach of the main shipping channels, from the
Strait of Hormuz to Kuwait, a 600-mile trip - remains free to choose the time
and place for laying the next minefield -or to adopt some other form of attack.

Many military analysts believe Iran is preparing for a protracted struggle with
Washington. By striking only occasionally, in ways that create ambiguity about
who is responsible, Iran could put the Navy in a position reminiscent of the
American infantry's dilemma in Vietnam. The Persian Gulf, notwithstanding its
status as an international waterway, remains largely an Iranian lake. Iran has
fortified islands like Farsi, from which boats were suspected of sailing to lay
mines in the channel. And Iranians, notably their fishermen, are throughly
familiar with the gulf's shallow waters.

During a recent escort operation, a fisherman's wooden dhow, anchored on a still
night in the Strait of Hormuz, seemed an absolute mystery from the cruiser Fox,
steaming less than 50 yards away. The Fox blew its foghorn but elicited no
response. There was no sign of hostile intent, but the big warship's crew
fidgeted until darkness and distance enveloped the fishing boat. There was no
way to tell if the dhow was dangerous.

In the gulf, the most technologically advanced nation does not necessarily have
a clear advantage. Military experts call this type of confrontation
''low-intensity conflict'' and have belatedly begun to search for ways to deal
with it. If Iran presses ahead with potentially deadly tactics by, for example,
sowing additonal mines, the Pentagon will have to decide whether to respond
defensively or to mount a reprisal. And if retaliation is ordered, should it be
carried out with overwhelming force by, for example, artillery or an air raid?
Or should the United States use commando tactics and stealth of its own?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Iranain gunners on patrol boat (Sygma)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS;
DAWKINS MEETING FUND-RAISING TEST

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 1, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


WHETHER former Brig.

Gen. Pete Dawkins can unseat Senator Frank R. Lautenberg will not be known for
another 16 months, but he is meeting his first test: raising money for the 1988
campaign.

The Dawkins campaign advised the Federal Election Commission last week that it
had raised $756,146 by the end of June. That is far short of the $5 million or
more that campaign officials say will be needed to mount a credible campaign
against the wealthy Democratic incumbent; however, considering it was raised in
less than two months, it is noteworthy.

When anticipated financial help from the national Republican Senate Campaign
Committee is added to the balance sheets, Mr. Dawkins already can count on more
money than another Republican, Mary Mochary, spent in her unsuccessful bid to
defeat Senator Bill Bradley, the state's other Democratic incumbent.

Mrs. Mochary spent $965,000 on her 1984 campaign, and Millicent Fenwick, the
former Representative from New Jersey, spent $2.6 million in losing to Mr.
Lautenberg in 1982.

Mr. Lautenberg, the former head of Automatic Data Processing, spent $6 million
that year in his primary and general campaigns, most of it coming from his own
pocket in the form of loans to his campaign.

Mr. Lautenberg has set the benchmark for spending in a statewide Senate campaign
and, now that he has the advantage of the incumbency, the Republicans know they
face a formidable task in trying to defeat him.

''The rule of thumb is that a challenger trying to unseat an incumbent must
spend one and a half times as much as the incumbent, but I don't think that will
be possible,'' said Robert G. McKelvey, the treasurer for the Dawkins campaign.

Senator Bradley has said it is a mistake to think that all Mr. Lautenberg has
going for him is his wealth.

''Frank has a story to tell, and I think he'll do fine once the campaign
starts,'' he said.

Actually, Mr. Bradley is the inspiration for the Republicans' high hopes for Mr.
Dawkins. Both men not only were Rhodes Scholars, but also well-known athletes -
Mr. Bradley as a basketball star at Princeton and with the New York Knicks, and
Mr. Dawkins as a Heisman Trophy-winning football player at West Point.

The Republicans hope that this background, coupled with Mr. Dawkins's service in
Vietnam and his success as an investment counselor with Shearson Lehman
Brothers, will make him an attractive enough candidate to win the Senate seat
from Mr. Lautenberg without outspending him.

The Dawkins campaign report to the Election Commission showed that 2,062 people
had contributed to the campaign and that the average contribution was $366.

About 83 percent of the contributions, 1,719, have come from New Jersey
residents, but Mr. McKelvey said that 51 percent of the money thus far had come
from out of state.

''When friends heard that Pete was running, they volunteered to hold
fund-raisers for him,'' Mr. McKelvey said.

Such events have been held in Texas, California, Michigan and New York, he said.

There is still some confusion about how much the Republican Senate Campaign
Committee will contribute. Its money is allocated according to a formula tied to
voter turnout in previous elections.

Mrs. Mochary's campaign received $512,000, and the Dawkins campaign should get
at least that much.

But during one meeting in New Jersey with the Dawkins campaign staff, the
committee's representatives mentioned $900,000, and the staff hopes it will
receive the more-generous gift.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 49 words




Woman to Lead Veterans

Mary R. Stout was elected president of the Vietnam Veterans of America, the
first woman to head a national veterans' organization. Page A12.

Pola Negri Is Dead

The green-eyed silent-screen vamp died Saturday in San Antonio at the age of 88.
Page D11.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pola Negri, silent screen vamp (Eugene Robert Riches)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, AUGUST 3, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words




International    A2-8



The Iranian-Saudi crisis continued, with Iran vowing vengence for the deaths of
hundreds of its Shiite Moslem pilgrims in a riot in Mecca, raising the specter
of religious war in the already tense Persian Gulf region.

    Page A1



U.S. policy in the Persian Gulf will stay the same despite the heightened
tensions in the region, officials said. The nature of the Iranian military
threat to shipping in the Gulf has not changed, they said.    A1



Price rise in oil futures seen

    A8



The French Prime Minister denied an assertion by the Speaker of the Iranian
Parliament that he had urged Iranian leaders to put off freeing French hostages
held in Lebanon until his conservative coalition had come to power.    A8

Moscow will reconsider arms plan to resolve differences over West Germany's
short-range Pershing 1A missiles, a senior Soviet official said. He appeared to
invite the United States to suggest a compromise.    A1



A British ban on newspaper excerpts from the memoirs of a retired secret service
deputy director was met with mockery and opportunism by the British press. Many
Sunday newspaper articles and editorials implied defiance.    A1



In the Philippines, gunmen killed Jaime Ferrer, a member of President Corazon C.
Aquino's Cabinet. The assassination of the Secretary for Local Government is the
first of a major Government official since Mrs. Aquino became President.    A3



News analysis: The investigators of the Iran-contra affair have not determined
conclusively who authorized the diversion of funds. But the hearings developed
important information about abuses of the American system of government.    A2

In Sri Lanka, Tamil separatists who had resisted a peace agreement signed in
Colombo last week agreed to surrender arms to an Indian peace-keeping force, the
Minister of National Security said.    A3



U.S. and Vietnamese negotiators met briefly twice, looking for ways to resolve
the issue of Americans still listed as missing in Vietnam. Vietnamese officials
were more optimistic after the talks than they were Saturday.    A3



A U.N. economic conference in Geneva wound up a debate with agreement on a
strategy for tackling some of the third world's pressing economic difficulties,
including an offer of more flexible treatment for indebted developing nations.
    A5



Striking copper miners dismissed in Namibia

    A3



Wiebelskirchen journal

    A4



A chronology of the outburst of violence in Mecca

    A8

  National    A12-15, B6, B8



The illegal alien amnesty program is gaining momentum, operating last month with
more than 40,000 applications a week, officials said. But it is still operating
at just half its capacity, they said.    A1



The bull market in stocks, which five years ago this month began a climb that is
still breaking records, has changed the face of corporate America.    A1



The effort to get delegates' names on primary ballots has become intense.
Political aides say that the hunt for petition signatures and delegates is
perhaps more important than public appearances and poll ratings.    A14



Arab-Americans are starting to build a grass-roots political organization,
partly to seek a greater voice in foreign policy. A major goal of the effort is
to stir debate on the Mideast.    A14



In the Wedtech affair, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said that he was ''not
going to be indicted'' because of his involvement with the military contractor
and insisted that he had ''done nothing wrong.''    A12

The Vietnamese refugee community in San Jose, Calif., is torn by the legacy of
the Vietnam war. For some refugees, support of resistance against the Communist
government is a top priority. But some fear that with it comes intolerance.
A12

A poor city's chance for a turnaround may lie along the Mississippi River. The
riverfront of East St. Louis, Ill., is slated for redevelopment. Mayoral
candidates are competing to parcel out the business in the plan.    A12



Treasure hunt under Puget Sound

    A12



Salaries for teachers are up

    A15



Anniversary for strip mining law

    B8



Press notes

    B8



Washington Talk    B6



Veto strategy irks Congress

An archive of ideas for amending the Constitution

Regional    B1-5



The deregulation of milk sales in New York has meant a new battle for survival
for milk dealers - forcing down prices, fueling intense competition, and
threatening a once-complacent industry with bankruptcies.    A1

Since the disappearance of a child on July 9, friends, relatives and strangers
have joined Karen and Kenneth Schweiger as they search the swamps and woods of
Staten Island for their 12-year-old handicapped daughter.    B1



Suburban doctors with AIDS patients are struggling not only to treat them, but
also to find places for them to live, buses to take them on errands, and
neighborhoods to welcome them home.    B1



Newark's proposed arts center may pay high dividends in the redevelopment of the
city's downtown area. But the impact of the $200 million center is not likely to
be felt for at least a decade, officials caution.    B1



Trying to attract minority students to medical schools in New York State, a
group of medical schools has sent letters to some students who have left New
York to attend medical schools, urging them to return for residency training.
    B3

Six tourists were robbed at two mid-Manhattan hotels, and the police suspect a
team of well-dressed thieves in both cases. More than $29,000 in cash and
jewelry was taken in the robberies on Saturday night.    B3



A census of plant life has begun at the New York Botanical Garden.
Horticulturists there are trying to determine just how many kinds of plants
there are in the 250-acre garden in the northern Bronx.    B1



The weak surf on Long Island Sound has been empty even when the beach has been
crowded. The reason this year, as in years past, is a matter of esthetics. ''The
water is dead,'' said one person on the beach. ''It's boring. No waves.''    B3

Koch warns Albany of jail crisis

    B3



Abrams reviews Farmland bids

    B5


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam More Optimistic About U.S. Talks

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 395 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 2


United States and Vietnamese negotiators looking for ways to resolve the issue
of 1,776 Americans still listed as missing in this country met briefly twice
today.

Vietnamese officials were more optimistic after the talks this morning than they
were on Saturday at the outset.

At a break between the sessions today, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach told
reporters the two sides had reached ''a better understanding'' on the issues.

Diplomats here say the talks will indicate how a new Vietnamese leadership under
Nguyen Van Linh, the Communist Party general secretary, will be able to deal
with Washington.

Mr. Thach, now also a Deputy Prime Minister, is thought to be one of the more
influential members of the new administration.

The American delegation, led by John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general and
former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, declined to comment on any aspect
of the talks, except to say there was more work to do.

This morning, when asked if a planned news conference would still be held on
Monday, General Vessey, who is President Reagan's special envoy, brushed aside
the question.

''I don't know if you can expect one,'' he said brusquely. He also canceled
plans for sightseeing in Hanoi today.

A previously unscheduled meeting of technical advisers was called for this
afternoon. Technical meetings have in the past usually planned crash-site
excavations or the returns of war dead.

There has been no decision about whether the higher-level talks will continue on
Monday, when the American team is due to leave Hanoi.

''The talk will resume when we are ready to resume,'' General Vessey said.

Remains of American war dead were last returned to the United States last fall.
A resolution of the issue was interrupted, in part, by preparations for the
change in Vietnam's leadership.

Many American officials, including most, if not all, on the team now in Hanoi,
believe that Vietnam is holding several of the American war dead to be doled out
as talks move toward what the Vietnamese hope will be eventual diplomatic
recognition.

Few United States officials - and no Hanoi-based European diplomats -believe
that any Americans are being held captive in Vietnam. But the Reagan
Administration is under pressure from those who claim to have knowledge of such
captives and say the Government is doing nothing to free them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WOMAN TAKES COMMAND

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 246 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 2


Mary R. Stout, a former Army nurse, was elected president of the Vietnam
Veterans of America on Saturday night, marking the first time a woman had been
selected to head a national veterans organization.

Ms. Stout, a 43-year-old resident of Arlington, Va., defeated William
Stillwagon, a former marine, by a ratio of three votes to one in balloting by
400 delegates at the organization's annual convention here. She previously held
a number of high offices within the group and is regarded as a leading expert on
issues involving female veterans.

''I think this is really significant,'' she said today, ''because for the first
time a national veterans association has acknowledged that there are women who
are veterans, and 'veteran' is no longer a male word.''

Robert O. Muller, retiring as the president of the organization, which he
founded, called Ms. Stout ''a truly remarkable person'' and added, ''The old-boy
network is truly a club for the old boys, and that's one reason why we're proud
not to be a member of that club.''

The Vietnam Veterans of America, which has 35,000 members, 300 of them women,
provides a variety of legal and social services to Vietnam veterans anf their
families.

Its new leader joined the Army in 1964 and was a lieutenant in the Nurse Corps
at the Second Surgical Hospital in An Khe and Chu Lai, South Vietnam, from late
1966 to late 1967. She spent most of her Vietnam tour caring for patients in
intensive care and recovery units.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mary R. Stout (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A Family Grieves As Many Search For Missing Girl

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words


Twice a day, every day since July 9, friends, relatives and strangers have
joined Karen and Kenneth Schweiger as they search the mosquito-infested swamps
and woods of Staten Island for their 12-year-old handicapped daughter.

In the 24 days since the child disappeared, the volunteers have scoured the 384
acres of Willowbrook, now called the Staten Island Developmental Center, where
Jennifer, who has Down's syndrome, was last seen, walking hand in hand with a
neighborhood vagrant.

They have also fanned out, under the direction of police investigators, to the
Travis area, bordered by a wildlife refuge and a network of creeks, and to the
Staten Island Industrial Park, a huge wooded tract at the western tip of the
island, near Arthur Kill.

Searching for a Sign, or Something

The volunteers, some from as far away as Suffern, N.Y., or Monmouth County,
N.J., poke the ground looking for freshly turned soil or for articles of
Jennifer's clothing - a yellow vinyl pocketbook with her confirmation money
inside, a pink Sesame Street T-shirt, a pair of plastic flip-flops.

''You're always expecting somebody to bring something back,'' said Mr.
Schweiger, who searches by day with the volunteers and often throughout the
night with a handful of Vietnam buddies. ''Then, you see the expression on their
faces when they come in. As the day closes to an end, it gets more depressing.''

Mrs. Schweiger wonders what an article of clothing would mean to her after so
many sleepless nights of imagining the unimaginable. ''I don't even know what
we're looking for at this point,'' she said, her face stretched tight by the
effort to contain her grief. ''A child, still intact, alive - of course, that
would be the best. But a shirt - I don't know how I'd feel if we found a shirt.
Is that a good sign? Is that a bad sign?''

Alongside the volunteer effort is a police investigation. Led by Lieut. Louis
Fiori, 10 detectives each day pursue any and all tips, the latest involving a
suspected sighting of the child in the Travis section, about five miles from the
Schweiger house. Meanwhile, 25 police officers and 5 sergeants from the
Emergency Service Division continue their ground and aerial searches, aided by
bloodhounds and helicopters.

''I really can't fathom the amount of support, civilian and official,'' Mr.
Schweiger said.

Jennifer is the fourth child to disappear without a trace on Staten Island:
Tiahease Jackson, last seen in 1983; Holly Ann Hughes, missing since 1981, and
Alice Pereira, who disappeared in 1972. ''For a very small island, that's a lot
of missing children,'' said Donna Cutugno, a neigborhood woman who was a
stranger to the Schweiger family until three weeks ago, when she volunteered to
coordinate the search.

Hybrid Group Lends Support

''I have small children of my own,'' said Mrs. Cutugno. ''It could have been
me.''

Yesterday, as usual, Mrs. Cutugno dispatched the volunteers from the parking lot
of the Holy Family Parish Center, a few blocks from the Schweiger house on
Wardwell Avenue. In her Hagstrom atlas, the map of western Staten Island was
marked with neat grids: The area from Graham Avenue to South Avenue was to be
searched starting at noon, while the 7 P.M. group would work from South Avenue
to the expressway. Mrs. Cutugno reminded newcomers to use bug spray and watch
out for poison ivy.

The searchers are a hybrid group -housewives, parents of Down's syndrome
children, vacationing firefighters, a disk jockey from the Jersey Shore, a city
worker from Brooklyn -all of whom say they were moved by reports of Jennifer's
disappearance on television or in the newspapers.

''I got tired of seeing these kids on milk cartons and on TV,'' said Ron Riker,
a disk jockey in an Asbury Park nightclub. ''If people out there are taking
kids, I want them to know that people like us will be out there looking.''

While some concerned people have donated time, others have offered services or
equipment. Mr. Schweiger's employer, the New York Telephone Company, provided
maps of the underground passages beneath Willowbrook, as well as insect
repellent and flashlight batteries. A printer who has a child with Down's
syndrome donated 2,500 fliers that hang in store windows, on telephone poles and
on community bulletin boards. Senior citizens answer telephones at the volunteer
headquarters in the church rectory, telling callers when search parties are
leaving. A Red Cross mobile canteen follows the volunteers from site to site,
with free coffee, doughnuts and first aid.

'Trying to Get Through'

Jennifer was in the tiny backyard of the Schweiger house on the steamy afternoon
of July 9, restless as her mother vacuumed the family's above-ground swimming
pool. Mrs. Schweiger told the child to take a walk, assuming that Jennifer would
stay within the three-block radius where she was allowed to wander unsupervised
but was well known to all the neighbors. Her parents never saw her again.

The Schweigers, who also have a 17-year-old son, said they encouraged Jennifer
to be as independent as her condition allowed. ''We tried to treat her like a
normal child,'' said Mr. Schweiger.

Jennifer had just graduated from a special education program at Public School
22, took dancing lessons and attended religious instruction. She always carried
money in her purse, and shopkeepers along Jewett Avenue and Victory Boulevard
near her home were accustomed to Jennifer portioning out the correct change for
her sodas and politely asking for a straw. Mr. and Mrs. Schweiger said Jennifer
knows her address, her telephone number and how to use a public telephone.

''A couple of times the phone rang once, and when we picked it up there was no
one there,'' Mrs. Schweiger said. ''I kept thinking it was her, trying to get
through.''

While the search continues, ordinary life has ground to a halt for the Schweiger
family. They recently bought a new house in Lakewood, N.J., and had posted a
''For Sale'' sign near the flagpole on their front lawn on Staten Island. Now,
the sign has been pulled from the dirt and leans against the back of the house.
Moving seems unthinkable as long as there is a chance Jennifer might come home.

''We've been way up and way down,'' Mrs. Schweiger said, describing the
emotional roller coaster of the last few weeks. ''And now there's a section of
your brain that won't let you go any further, a protective mechanism. Part of
you is prepared for the worst - you have to be - but part of you still has that
ray of hope.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Donna Cutugno, holding maps, briefing volunteers before they
started out on a search for Jennifer Schweiger. (The New York Times/Sara
KrulwichZ); photo of Jennifer Schweiger (page 2)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Despite Gains, Many Vietnamese Refugees Are Refusing to Let War End

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words

DATELINE: SAN JOSE, Calif., July 29


Despite their pride in noteworthy social and economic gains and the reality of
rapidly growing political influence, the war has not ended for many Vietnamese
refugees here.

''I have a responsibility and a duty as an American,'' said Ho Quang Nhut, a San
Jose insurance agent who was a philosophy teacher in Saigon before he became one
of the first ''boat people'' to escape to Malaysia with his wife and children in
1976. ''But in my heart, my family and friends are still there. How can I
forget?''

Support of resistance movements against the Communist Government of Vietnam
remains a top priority for many of those who fled the country after the ''Day of
Shame,'' April 30, 1975, when Saigon fell to the forces of North Vietnam. Some
express concern, however, about the growth of intolerance among refugees for
anything short of outspoken anti-Communism and support of covert United States
military aid to guerilla forces. #80,000 Registered Voters The role that the
Vietnamese refugees should play in United States politics is a pervasive subject
of debate in ''Little Saigon,'' where the opening of more than 300 businesses
over the last five years has transformed a downtown neighborhood once dotted
with vacant storefronts. The number of Vietnamese in the city is now approaching
10 percent of the population.

Mr. Nhut, now 48 years old, is one of three co-chairmen nationwide of the League
of Vietnamese Voters in the United States. Of the more than 500,000 Vietnamese
living in this country, approximately 80,000 are registered to vote, most of
them as Republicans because that party is perceived as more stauanchly
anti-Communist, Mr. Nhut said. The organization expects to add another 60,000 to
that total in the next four years.

Mr. Nhut said that his group recently lobbied some Republican members of
Congress for military aid to the ''freedom fighters'' they believed were poised
to attempt an overthrow of the Vietnamese Government from within the country
with the assistance of troops training along the border regions with Laos and
Cambodia. It was their ''bad luck'' to have raised the issue at the time of
controversy over aid to the Nicaraguan contras, he said.

Scooped Local News Media

In recent years a number of incidents in recent years have galvanized the
anti-Communist sentiments of the refugee community. In 1985, a group of
militants attacked a San Jose bookstore run by the Socialist Workers Party.

The most recent occurred in June, when a news program on Vietnam Liberty
Television, which had begun broadcasting the first privately produced half-hour
nightly news program in Vietnamese from a small office in nearby Santa Clara,
scooped the local news media.

The story involved Tom Hayden, a State Assemblyman and former anti-war protester
who had traveled to North Vietnam in the war, who had been asked to give the
commencement address at San Jose City College, a two-year community college with
a large number of Vietnamese-American students. As chairman of the subcommittee
on higher education, Mr. Hayden was scheduled to speak on the topic of the
future of the community college system.

The speech was canceled after Vietnamese-language newspapers editorialized
against it, saying that Mr. Hayden and his wife, Jane Fonda, were partly
responsible for the Communist victory. Some militant leaders threatened a
demonstration, saying they would not guarantee it would be nonviolent.

Hayden Is Assailed

Nguyen Tiep, a San Jose attorney who is considered a moderate and whose name is
frequently mentioned as a possible candidate for political office from the
community, was one of the leaders in the protest. Mr. Tiep, a 41-year-old former
captain in the legal research department of the Saigon police, was the first
Vietnamese-American on the Santa Clara County Republican Central Committee.

''This is not a freedom of speech issue,'' he said. ''He is a traitor.''

Mr. Tiep also led a group advocating a total boycott of the college by
Vietnamese students who he said made up more than 20 percent of the students, a
formidable prospect in a time of declining enrollment in this state's community
colleges.

While the threatened boycott was called off after college administration
apologised, Mr. Tiep said that Vietnamese students would still boycott classes
taught by faculty members who assisted Mr. Hayden in making a brief surprise
appearance at the ceremony.

Mr. Hayden, who said he believed his right to free speech was violated in the
college incident, has also expressed concern in interviews about reports of
resistance activities by former generals of the South Vietnamese military. ''I
think that they have a clandestine network that is not monitored and for all
anyone knows is operating outside the law,'' he said.

Often Meet at Restaurant

About 30 former generals living in the area form an association known as the
Dien Hong, which meets regularly for activities that its members say are are
strictly social. The Dien Hong includes such members as Do Kien Nhieu, a former
brigadier general and the last mayor of Saigon, and Bui Dinh Dam, a former major
general in Vietnam and now a social worker in San Jose.

They often meet at a Vietnamese restaurant in nearby Mountain View, which is
owned by Dr. Nguyen Ton Hoan, who was vice premier of the Republic of Vietnam in
1964 under Gen. Nguyen Khanh and a leader in the Dai Viet or ''Greater Vietnam''
party. He is not a member of the Dien Hong.

''We are organizing an international movement to support the idea of a free
Vietnam,'' Dr. Hoan, 70, said. ''But it is too early to talk about the
resistance. It's not the right time.''

Lai Duc Hung, a former captain in the South Vietnamese Army who now lives in San
Jose and serves as the general secretary of the Coalition of Nationalist
Vietnamese Organizations of Northern California, a group representing 52
organizations, said the Dien Hong was part of the coalition.

''Some of the organizations are secret,'' Mr. Hung said. ''There are a lot of
things we cannot talk about.''

Representatives of three of the four resistance groups in Vietnam are part of
the coalition, Mr. Hung said. ''We try to create a chain for people to contact
them,'' he said, ''but we don't collect money. They have an account to send
money to.''

While acknowledging that there are some ''radical views'' within the community,
most leaders appear to regard them as inevitable.

''The wounds are so deep they cannot forget and cannot forgive,'' said Nguyen
Manh. ''It will remain with them a long time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 142 words




Seoul's Volatile Students

Some politically dissatisfied South Korean students are planning for a fall
offensive that they hope will bring down the Government. Page A13.

Vietnam-U.S. Meeting Ends

An American special envoy left Hanoi with no progress reported in three days of
talks on Americans missing since the Vietnam War. Page A2.

Senate Confirms Greenspan

Approved by a 91 to 2 vote, Alan Greenspan will become head of the Federal
Reserve on Thursday, succeeding Paul A. Volcker. Page D1.

Roadblock Against Bees

The United States and Mexico detail plans to stop the march of aggressive bees,
but doubts abound. Science Times, page C1.

Sports, Round the Clock

A New York radio station has become the first in the nation to offer sports news
24 hours a day, including late scores every 15 minutes. Page D1.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam-U.S. Meeting on Missing Ends With No Progress Reported

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 473 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 3


An American special envoy left Hanoi today with no progress reported in three
days of talks on Americans missing since the Vietnam War.

Without some forward movement on the issue, the Reagan Administration has said,
there can be no hope of improving relations between the two nations. Washington
continues to refuse diplomatic recognition to Hanoi 14 years after United States
forces withdrew from Vietnam and 12 years after the fall of the south.

A five-paragraph statement issued at the end of the talks indicates that
cooperation between Hanoi and Washington on accounting for the missing has not
recovered even the momentum it had achieved two years ago, when the two sides
had begun to meet regularly. Talks were interrupted last year while Vietnam went
through a leadership change.

Today's closing statement, read by a Vietnamese interpreter, said only that two
technical-level meetings would be held ''in the near future'' - one to discuss
how to step up accounting for missing Americans and the other to address
''certain urgent humanitarian concerns of Vietnam.''

The leader of the American delegation, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., a former
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, refused to answer questions from
reporters.

Vietnamese officials also declined comment, leaving the impression that this was
the wish of the American side. Repeated recesses called by the Americans this
morning for private consultations indicated that there was trouble with even the
wording of the final statement.

No Linkage of Issues

In what may have been a concession to the Americans, the joint statement said
both sides agreed that humanitarian issues ''should not be linked to broader
political questions such as normalization or to economic aid.'' There had been
speculation among foreign embassies here that Hanoi was considering reviving
demands for war reparations.

Two years ago, the United States won agreement from the Vietnamese to hold at
least six meetings each year on the missing-in-action issue. In January 1986,
Hanoi followed that with a promise to begin a two-year program to resolve the
issue once and for all. The deadline is now five months away, and officials on
both sides refuse to comment on what will happen when it passes.

More than 2,400 Americans are still missing in Indochina, 1,776 of them in
Vietnam or off its shores. While most if not all are presumed to have died,
there has been no final accounting of their cases.

More than a million Vietnamese are still thought to be unaccounted for. Among
other problems left behind by the war are war widows, orphans, the children of
Vietnamese mothers and American fathers and people said to be suffering from
chemicals for defoliation of forests and and other purposes. There are also a
large number of handicapped people, both civilian and military.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, AUGUST 4, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words




International    A2-13



Arab rulers supported the Saudis in the country's dispute with Iran over rioting
in Mecca in which more than 400 people were killed. The leaders rejected Iranian
calls for the ouster of the Saudi royal family.    Page A1



Petroleum prices posted gains along with the stocks of oil companies as traders
and investors speculated that the rift between Iran and Saudi Arabia could lead
to a disruption in the supply of crude oil.    A1



The Administration blamed Iran for the riots and praised Saudi Arabia for
bringing the clashes under control. The United States rejected renewed charges
by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini that that the United States instigated the riots.

    A9



In the Iran-contra investigation, the scheduled public hearings ended with the
chairmen of the Congressional investigative committees calling the 11 weeks of
testimony ''chilling'' and ''depressing.''    A1

News analysis: The investigation of the Iran-contra affair by the Senate and
House committees has completed the public phase, and the capital has turned to
the sport of identifying winners and losers.    A1



A U.S. Army official objected to some of the Central Intelligence Agency's
requests for support from the military and was growing increasingly
uncomfortable with others as early as 1983, documents released by the
Iran-contra committees show.    A7

A U.S. special envoy left Hanoi with no progress reported after talks on
Americans missing since the Vietnam war. Without some movement on the issue,
there can be no hope of improving relations, the Administration has said.    A2



In Seoul, students are planning new demonstrations. Their refusal to give up
center stage suggest that they will be critical to whatever arrives in the next
few months, be it democracy or a military crackdown.    A13

 Tamil guerrilla leader in Sri Lanka conferred with his regional commanders,
delaying a surrender of weapons that is a key element in a peace agreement
signed last week, officials said.    A3



Reporter's notebook: Panama press

    A3



Jerusalem journal

    A4



Iranian says Saudis provoked riots

    A10



National    A14-19



A new Air Force rocket's production began, marking a milestone in the nation's
recovery from a two-year launcher crisis. The 56 new rockets ordered by the Air
Force will loft military satellites into space.    A1



A mass of hot, sticky air has been in a holding pattern for 17 days, subjecting
millions of people to unrelenting temperatures that have hovered around 100 or
more in some areas day after day.    A1



Public higher education in California has been found by a two-year study to have
let teaching deteriorate because of an overemphasis on research. The system has
been one of the most admired in the nation for years.    A1



The growth of large-scale farming is spreading through many segments of
agriculture, concentrating production among a small group of farm operations.
But there is disagreement about what the farms may mean for consumers.    A14

Members of the banking committees of Congress who drafted legislation to aid the
ailing savings and loan industry collected nearly $3.5 million in 1985 and 1986
from political action committees with a stake in the legislation, a study shows.

    A16



The Louisiana Governor's campaign for re-election is falling back on the
populist arguments that proved successful in the past. ''I'm committed to
expanding and continuing state services,'' Gov. Edwin W. Edwards said.     A16



A Government plan on strip mining would send a Federal-state enforcement team
into Appalachian coal fields with authority to arrest illegal wildcatters.
A16



The rise of junk orbiting the earth is causing concern. Scientists are taking
steps to better assess the extent of the hazard, to armor spacecraft against
possible collisions and to curb the formation of new debris.    C1

Mississippi voters gauge gubernatorial candidates

    A14



First child witness in California molestation case

    A17



Washington Talk    A18



No grass is growing under Bork

Teaching Congress to manage

Regional    B1-3



A building boom in Adirondack Park has prompted some towns to impose
construction moratoriums and some park officials to warn that if the trend
continues, the Adirondack wilderness could be in jeopardy.    B1



Fees on vehicles entering Manhattan south of 59th Street and tolls on four East
River bridges are being supported by the Mayor as ways of reducing the city's
air pollution.    B1



A plan to extend the Yankees' lease on their stadium in return for a parking
garage, luxury boxes, a restaurant and a commuter railroad station is nearing an
accord, but remains uncertain, in part, because of demands of George M.
Steinbrenner 3d.    B3

A new attack aircraft for the Navy was rolled out by the Grumman Corporation,
Long Island's largest employer. The ceremony was marked with a sense of sureness
about the company's past but less certainty over the future.    B1



The Board of Elections invalidated the petitions of four Democratic candidates
in Bronx boroughwide races, reducing the prospects for a civil war in the Bronx
Democratic organization after a year of scandals.    B3



Slow emergency medical response was cited in the death of a 70-year-old woman by
United States Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani. At the same time, two other
complaints were disclosed about the response time of city ambulances.    B3



AIDS education for police officers in New York City is planned to allay fears of
infection, officials said. A primary goal of the program is to dispel fears of
giving cardiopulmonary resuscitation to heart attack victims who may have the
disease.    B3

The arrest of a State Senator from Queens on Saturday on charges of attempting
to violate Federal currency laws was a result of a broader investigation by the
F.B.I.'s white-collar crime division, authorities said.    B2



Garbage fees soar in Jersey

    B2



Cable executive says consultant solicited a bribe

    B3



Probation chief quits

    B3


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Grumman and L.I. Pin Big Hopes on A-6F

BYLINE: By PHILIP S. GUTIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 830 words

DATELINE: CALVERTON, L.I., Aug. 3


In a ceremony marked with a sense of sureness about its past but less certainty
for the future, the Grumman Corporation, the largest employer on Long Island,
rolled out its new Navy attack bomber today.

The plane, the A-6F, is the latest version of the classic A-6, the Intruder. If
Congress continues financing, the prototype could be the first of 150 A-6F's to
roll through Grumman factories by 1995.

But as Grumman officials and New York politicians fight an intense battle over
the program, they are, in a sense, struggling for the survival of a long
tradition of manufacturing airframes on the Island.

Since the 1930's, when there were at least 15 aircraft builders on the Island -
including Brewster, which built the Brewster Buffalo Fighters used in World War
II - the airframe business has steadily dwindled.

The A-6F development program alone, Grumman executives said, represents 3,500
jobs for the aerospace industry here. This year, the industry lost more than
4,000 jobs through the closing of the Fairchild Republic plant in Farmingdale
and a Grumman layoff of 1,500 employees.

In addition, 2,200 Grumman workers are still producing A-6E's, which the A-6F is
intended to replace until the development of the next generation of tactical
aircraft, the highly classified Advanced Tactical Aircraft, or ATA, in the 90's.
About 30 A-6E's are due for delivery by 1989.

In a vast hangar at the 6,000-acre Grumman plant here, more than 500 people from
the Navy, Defense Department and other aerospace companies watched Grumman
executives and Navy officers proudly present the stubby A-6F, painted a pristine
white, with red and blue markings.

''Grumman Ironworks produces one fine aircraft,'' the commander in chief of the
naval air force in the Atlantic, Vice Adm. Robert M. Dunleavy, said. ''We need
that aircraft in the fleet, and I expect you to produce it.''

The ceremony was tempered by the continuing battle in the Senate over the future
of the plane. The Armed Services Committee has pledged to eliminate money for
the program. Opponents of the plane said that it would cost $6.5 billion by 1995
and that the money would be better spent on speeding development of the ATA.

Grumman's satisfaction with its new plane was also dimmed by the fate of the
last major airframe program announced on Long Island, the T-46A trainer. In
1985, the Fairchild Republic Corporation and the Air Force announced the T-46A,
a plane to train pilots. Last winter, however, the company announced that the
Air Force had agreed to cancel the program, meaning the closing of the
56-year-old Farmingdale plant and the loss of 2,500 jobs.

Grumman officials, asked about the T-46A, hastened to point out that even if the
A-6F program were ultimately canceled by Congress, the company was not in any
financial danger.

''This is not a corporate-survival kind of thing,'' the chairman of Grumman,
John C. Bierwirth, said. ''If the Government cancels this program, we would get
a huge cash inflow of a couple of hundred million dollars from them. Our stock
would go up.''

No 'Life and Death Struggle'

The Congressional fight over the A-6F also does not represent a ''life and death
struggle'' for the economy of the Island, according to Senator Alfonse M.
D'Amato, who is leading the fight to restore more than $800 million to the
Defense Department budget for the A-6F.

''But it could become important in the perception of the future and the
prominent position Long Island has built in the aerospace industry,'' said Mr.
D'Amato, a New York Republican.

The A-6 has been responsible for a good part of that prominence. The Navy
awarded production of the plane in 1957 to Grumman, which has its headquarters
in Bethpage and which employs more than 24,000 people on the Island. The company
has delivered 655 of the jets, which are designed to fly at night and in bad
weather. During the Vietnam War, the A-6 became known as the workhorse of the
Naval fleet.

The plane introduced today is one of five prototypes Grumman is producing under
a $500 million contract.

Engines, Computers and Radar

There are few external changes on the A-6F. ''The cheeks are a little puffier
than on the previous A-6's,'' the director of development of the plane, Richard
Fyke, said. The plane contains more powerful engines, new computers and improved
radar.

Grumman, in partnership with the Northrop and LTV Corporations, is competing for
the production of 450 ATA's. Even if Grumman were to lose the A-6F and the ATA,
business leaders argued that the Island's economy would not suffer too much.

''That's not to say that we can forever restore negatives,'' James L. Larocca,
president of the Long Island Association, a business group, said. ''But one of
the things that has happened on this Island is that our economy is much more
diversified than it was.

''There may have been a time when if Grumman sneezed, we all caught colds. Now
if Grumman sneezes, we only get the sniffles.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Grumman A-6F airplane (NYT/Vic DeLucia)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Writers Try to Make Sense Of the Vietnam-Book Boom

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 3


Publisher after publisher rejected Philip Caputo's manuscript for ''A Rumor of
War,'' the wrenching memoir of his experiences as a Marine officer in Vietnam.
The editor who finally accepted it told him later she had refused to read it for
three weeks because it was about the Vietnam War.

''It was unfashionable in 1977,'' Mr. Caputo said Saturday afternoon during a
discussion between four authors of novels and memoirs about the Vietnam War at
the annual convention of the Vietnam Veterans of America here. ''It was kind of
like writing a porno novel in 1857. Now all of a sudden it's wildly fashionable,
and I think it could go out of fashion depending on the marketplace next week.''

''A Rumor of War'' became a best seller. Mr. Caputo went on to write three
novels about the war, all popular, all critically well-received. Now he and the
three other Vietnam veterans and writers who joined him for the discussion - Tim
O'Brien, Larry Heinemann and Robert Olen Butler - are struggling to define and
understand their place in the latest artistic trend: novels, films, plays and
poems about the Vietnam War.

The Vietnam War, the subject of Oliver Stone's Oscar-winning film ''Platoon''
and many of other movies as well as more than 300 novels in recent years, has
catapulted to the forefront of American culture. The four writers said they were
heartened by the interest in Vietnam. But at the same time they voiced
frustration and puzzlement over what Mr. Caputo terms ''Vietnam chic.''

Happy to Trade Places

Mr. Heinemann, a combat infantryman during the war and author of two novels
about Vietnam, ''Close Quarters'' and ''Paco's Story,'' said: ''One thing that
is confusing to me and makes me feel uneasy as an ex-soldier and also as a
writer is to have guys who are writers who didn't go overseas come to me and say
they regret not having gone over. Somehow they feel the war is a central
literary experience that they have missed. And I always make a point of telling
those guys that they could have traded places with me anytime.''

Mr. Butler, who worked for Army intelligence in Bien Hoa in the early 1970's and
wrote ''The Alleys of Eden,'' a love story about an American Army deserter and a
Vietnamese woman, said: ''America doesn't like losers; I'm not sure how deep the
interest in Vietnam really runs. We've got a psychic wound in the country and
the country's artists are usually the people who work those psychic wounds out.
I hope it lasts but I'm not sure it will.''

According to Mr. O'Brien, author of ''Going After Cacciato,'' a dreamlike novel
about an American soldier's journey through Vietnam: ''I think Vietnam will go
out of fashion. People are going to be writing Nicaragua novels, El Salvador
novels, World War II novels. But all of us are aspiring to write something that
can be read 100 years from now and still have truth to it, Vietnam forgotten,
even though the details can't be verified. It's got nothing to do with the
particulars of what happened in Khe Sanh; it's got nothing to do with the
surface detail of the war.''

Something Universal

For Mr. Caputo, the war was a watershed in American history, ''not only in
political history but in our emotional and cultural history as well,'' and
writing about the experience helps convey something universal about the country
and its people. For Mr. O'Brien, the war makes good stories. For Mr. Butler, it
was one of many experiences in his life he wants to capture in art and something
he may not write about again for a while. For Mr. Heinemann, writing a novel
about Vietnam was a vehicle for sorting out what he saw and did there in his own
mind.

For all, it is a key to getting at a basic truth.

''If the prime motive for writing is that you have a sense that the world fits
together beneath this flux of experience, if you aspire to show that, then
saying we are Vietnam novelists is like saying Monet is a lily-pad painter,''
Mr. Butler said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 5, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Whiteheads Separate, Calling Marriage a Casualty of Baby M Case

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Aug. 4


Mary Beth Whitehead, who gave birth to Baby M under a surrogate-mother contract
and then fought for the custody of her daughter, has separated from her husband,
their marriage ''an inevitable casualty of this unusual case,'' her lawyer said
today.

The lawyer, Harold J. Cassidy, said he had forwarded a letter telling of ''the
change in circumstance'' to the State Supreme Court, which is scheduled to hear
Mrs. Whitehead's appeal of a Superior Court ruling that awarded custody of Baby
M to the father, William Stern, and his wife, Elizabeth.

Letters were also sent to the child's court-appointed guardian and the Sterns'
lawyer, Gary N. Skoloff, who said the Whiteheads' separation should strengthen
the Sterns' prospects to retain custody.

'An Inevitable Casualty'

He said the separation ''merely confirms one piece of evidence during the trial,
that there was marital instability in the Whiteheads' marriage in the past, and
we predicted there would be instability in the present and the future.''

Mr. Cassidy, in a statement released by his office, said although the
Whiteheads' separation might ''be subject to change, there is no present
intention to reunite.''

''Mrs. Whitehead,'' he said, ''believes that the extra stress placed upon her
marriage by the public discussion of private matters rendered Mr. and Mrs.
Whitehead's marriage an inevitable casualty of this unusual case. Mr. and Mrs.
Whitehead love each other very much.''

He said the separation should have no impact on the court deliberation on the
public policy of surrogacy contracts.

Flight to Florida

The stability of the Whiteheads' marriage was a major issue in the seven-week
trial in Superior Court in Hackensack that ended last March. In the trial, Judge
Harvey R. Sorkow ruled that surrogacy contracts were valid and that the Sterns,
considering the ''best interests'' of Baby M, should be awarded custody.

Mary Beth Messer was 16 years old in 1973, when she married Richard Whitehead, a
23-year-old Vietnam veteran and truck driver. They had two children by the time
Mrs. Whitehead was 19, and Mr. Whitehead later had a vasectomy.

The testimony at the trial told of Mr. Whitehead's problems with alcohol, his
wife's part-time jobs and the family's financial problems. At one time, they
separated for six months. In 1983, they declared bankruptcy and went on welfare
for a time.

Soon after giving birth on March 27, 1986, to a baby conceived with sperm from
Mr. Stern, Mrs. Whitehead decided she could not give up the infant. Confronted
by police officers at her home in Brick Township with a court order giving
temporary custody to the Sterns, she fled with the baby to her parents' home in
Florida. She stayed there 87 days, until detectives hired by the Sterns found
them and returned the baby to New Jersey.

Mrs. Whitehead said that she had intended to honor the contract she had made
with the Sterns, but that after giving birth, she discovered she could not bear
to give up the child.

Request for Privacy

Mrs. Whitehead was recently hospitalized for a recurrence of a kidney infection
she suffered in July 1986, while she was hiding in Florida.

After almost a year at the center of a case that has attracted national
attention, the Whiteheads requested through their lawyer ''that their privacy in
these personal matters be honored at these stressful times.''

On the day the Whiteheads revealed the breakup of their marriage, an amicus
brief was filed with the State Supreme Court arguing that Mrs. Whitehead's ties
to the baby not be severed.

The brief, by the American Adoption Congress of Washington, said Superior Court,
which allowed Dr. Stern, a pediatrician, to adopt the baby and terminated Mrs.
Whitehead's rights, ''failed to understand the importance of preserving the full
heritage of a child, including ties to both natural parents.''

''Like other adoptees, Baby M will be placed at psychological risk because one
of the major means through which individuals develop a secure sense of self is
through identification with their parents,'' the brief said. ''Identification
with the parent of the same sex is particularly important.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mary Beth and Richard Whitehead (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 5, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV Reviews;
'Charlie,' on 13, Mixes Murder and Politics

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


BRITISH television has a knack for taking the most familiar pop genres and
putting them into the service of pointed socio-political commentaries. On
American prime time, ''Miami Vice'' is just about the only series that will
occasionally tackle such potentially unsettling subjects as the festering legacy
of Vietnam or the spectacle of mercenaries preparing to infiltrate Nicaragua.
The British are less reserved when it comes to provoking audiences. A good case
in point: ''Charlie,'' a four-hour film, half of which can be seen tonight at 9
o'clock on Channel 13 and the rest next Wednesday.

Charlie Alexander (David Warner) is a private detective who describes himself as
an ex-student, ex-leftie, ex-journalist, ex-soldier. For a while, he was busy at
writing, busy at being a hack. His wife Susan (Marion Bailey) has taken the
children and run off with an ''estate manager'' - a kind of real estate agent -
named Saul (Patrick Malahide). Susan is not impressed with Charlie's detection
abilities: ''How are you going to find out about anything when you couldn't see
me and Saul in front of your eyes?''

On one of his typically seedy jobs, trying to effect a reconciliation between a
heartbroken little man and his unforgiving Eastern European girlfriend, Charlie
passes a door in a racially mixed housing project and discovers a man battered
to death. The television is still running, offering news reports about the
United States pullout from Vietnam. Charlie discovers that his own name and
telephone number are in the dead man's address book. He begins calling the other
names in the book. Charlie has found the perfect challenge: a murder with no
evidence and an endless list of suspects.

In no time at all, he finds himself in the offices of the Distributive Workers
Union, which is already being investigated for allegedly fraudulent elections of
its top executives, even as rumors swirl about that the pension fund has been
squandered. Some of the union officials have a curious penchant for vacations in
countries like Bulgaria. One, named David Abbott (Geoffrey Hutchings), comes
forward to give Charlie all sorts of helpful information, most of which turns
out to be not quite complete. And along the way, Charlie gets the aid of two
gin-guzzling journalists, the dipsily debonair Tucker (Michael Aldridge) and the
weaselly Smith (Clive Merrison), who has a talent for reducing most of life's
vicissitudes to a tabloid headline.

This is not the England, clearly, of ''Masterpiece Theater.'' The very first
scene is shot on a street teeming with black residents, most of whom seem to be
unemployed. Charlie sits in his car listening to a soulful American blues song
on the radio. Boundaries are blurred. It seems that the dead man and several of
the union executives attended Oxford together in the 1960's. Initially, it seems
as if the union will turn out to be the villain of the piece, a plot development
not likely to be unappreciated by the current Thatcher Government (''Charlie,''
produced by Graham Benson and directed by Martin Campbell, was made in 1984).
But hold on. It seems there are right-wing elements lurking about, waiting to
take over the union in the event of new elections. The teleplay, by Nigel
Williams, keeps Charlie, and the rest of us, intriguingly off balance.

Mr. Warner is doubtless a year or two too old for the role of Charlie, who
spends most of his time in jeans and sneakers, but he captures vividly the
detective's distinctive blend of determination and disillusionment. Mr. Warner
turns in one of his best performances since romping dizzily with Vanessa
Redgrave in the 1966 comedy film ''Morgan.'' And the supporting cast is splendid
in its characteristically British way. Maggie Steed, something of a Redgrave
type herself, is wonderfully tough and wary as the dead man's widow who, of
course, becomes Charlie's obsession. And Mr. Aldridge, that character actor
nonpareil, is wickedly good as the devious journalist, right down to his sitting
in court as a spectator and pulling out a martini from his well-stocked
briefcase. ''Charlie'' moves at its own sometimes lumbering, sometimes confusing
pace, but it keeps hitting enough notes of unsettling authenticity to keep us
tagging along eagerly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Warner in ''Charlie''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 6, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam's Issues May Be Next for Talks

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 5


Vietnamese officials expect to open talks with the United States before the end
of this month that will for the first time address Vietnamese problems arising
from the war, a high-ranking Foreign Ministry official said today.

''For the last 12 years, we have handled humanitarian issues for the United
States,'' the official, Nguyen Dy Nien, a Deputy Foreign Minister, said in an
interview in his office here referring to the accounting of the 1,776 Americans
missing since the war.

''I think now the United States must - has already made a start to - deal with
the humanitarian issues of Vietnam,'' said Mr. Nien, an expert on United States
affairs. ''We can not carry on one-sidedly.''

Officials close to talks last weekend between the Vietnamese and an American
team led by President Reagan's special envoy, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., say that
the American side balked at agreeing to a future meeting on strictly Vietnamese
concerns.

Action 'Is Important'

''In negotiations sometimes there is only one word in the text and it can take
hours to remove it and replace it with another word,'' Mr. Nien said when asked
about the American attitude toward talks on Vietnam's human casualties. ''But I
told the American side that the important thing is action.''

''We would like to close this chapter as soon as possible,'' he added. He
recalled that in January 1986, Vietnam set a two-year timetable to resolve the
issue. He declined to comment on what might happen when that period ends.

The Foreign Ministry official said that Vietnam, one of the world's poorest
countries, had limited expectations about what assistance it could get from the
United States. The Reagan Administration has ruled out reparations or war
damages.

''The humanitarian issues of Vietnam are enormous,'' Mr. Nien said. ''But we
know the limits. We are realistic.''

Children of Servicemen

Mr. Nien said that in the recently concluded talks with the American delegation,
the subject of the offspring of Americans based in Vietnam also came up. The
Foreign Ministry official said it was his understanding that there might be a
separate set of talks on this issue in the near future. Neither side knows how
many of these children remain in Vietnam.

But a number of the children are reaching the age of majority, and Anerican
humanitarian organizations say that this could make them eligible for military
service, particularly since many are street urchins who might be viewed as
delinquents.

Mr. Nien said Vietnam's political prison camp population, most suffering for
their association with the United States-backed Saigon regime, had not been
discussed with the Vessey party. He called this a political issue that was
related to internal policies of Vietnam, Three years ago, Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, had challenged the United States to empty the camps.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz responded by offering to resettle the
political prisoners in the United States.

Visit by Solarz

But when Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the
House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, visited Hanoi
in December 1984 and asked if Mr. Shultz's offer would be accepted, he was told
that the prisoners could not be released unless the United States could
guarantee they would not take part in ''anti-Vietnamese'' activities abroad.

Mr. Solarz told Vietnamese officials that rights of free speech in the United
States made such a promise impossible.

Mr. Nien said today that he expected that General Vessey would ''keep up
contacts'' with Vietnam, although he is not expected to be part of the next
round of talks, which will be at the ''technical expert'' level. The Deputy
Foreign Minister said General Vessey, a veteran of the Vietnam War, had been
cordial but frank in the recent discussions.

Asked if there was a chance that a further round of talks may be held in
Washington, Mr. Nien laughed.

''We are not so optimistic,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., U.S. special envoy on Americans
missing in action in Vietnam, meeting in Hanoi with Nguyen Co Thach, Vietnam's
Foreign Minister. (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 6, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: THE ARMED SERVICES;
Officers and Gentlemen and Situational Lying

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 5


The testimony of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North of the Marine Corps and Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter of the Navy in the Iran-contra hearings has raised a
fundamental question of military ethics: May an officer lie?

Just after the two officers had testified before the Congressional committees,
the six members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were asked through staff aides:

''Is it permissible for a military officer to lie? If so, under what
circumstances, to whom and about what? If not, why not?''

After considerable deliberation, the nation's top military officers declined to
reply to the query, thus underscoring the ambivalence that runs through the
officer corps of all services on a critical issue of military ethics and
integrity.

Those in training to be officers are taught, from the moment they raise their
right hands to swear allegiance to the Constitution, that officers do not lie,
cheat or steal and will not tolerate those who do. That stricture is basic to
the honor codes of the military academies and officer training schools.

But in recent years the practice of what military officers refer to as
''situational ethics'' has become pervasive. That view of ethics says that a
higher end, such as national security, justifies such means as lying and
deception.

In his testimony at the Iran-contra hearings, Colonel North admitted lying to
Congress, to other Government officials and to American associates in his
venture.

Later, when Senator Paul S. Trible Jr, Republican of Virginia, accused Admiral
Poindexter of an ''unapologetic embrace of unthruth,'' the former national
security adviser to President Reagan did not deny it. But he justified his
position by saying, ''I think the actions that I took were in the longterm
interests of the country.''

Early in the Reagan Administration, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger
ordered members of the Joint Chiefs then to take polygraph, or lie detector,
tests as he sought to discover who had divulged budget information to the press.

In session after session at the war colleges in recent years, many officers have
risen to assert in no uncertain terms that it would be permissible to lie
through the press to the American public in an effort to deceive an enemy.

The Hasenfus Incident

A military officer lied to a reporter in saying that Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub,
a retired Army officer, had arranged a flight to deliver weapons to the
Nicaraguan contras. After the plane was shot down, a crewman, Eugene Hasenfus,
was captured and later released by the Sandinista Government.

In another case, a general said he was stunned to find that some lieutenants
believed they had to lie on readiness reports on vehicles. ''Sir,'' he said a
lieutenant told him, ''you put so much emphasis on operating rates that we feel
obligated to lie about what we're doing.'' The general said it took him a year
to get that practice stopped.

Lying, in this context, is distinct from deception of an enemy, which has been a
principle of war since the Chinese statesman Sun Tzu wrote his treatise on
strategy 2,500 years ago. ''In war, it is legitimate to deceive an enemy,'' said
a former officer, Lewis S. Sorley 3d, who has written on military ethics. ''But
we never lie to our own people.''

Even in covert operations, where deception can be an art form, American officers
should not lie to American officials or the public. Secretary of State George P.
Shultz, once a marine, alluded to that when he told the Congressional
committees: ''Everybody in the Government, certainly anybody who works for me,
should know they must not lie and they must not mislead.'' At the same time, Mr.
Shultz said, it is acceptable to decline to discuss sensitive information in
public.

Mr. Weinberger agreed, saying that the principles of the honor codes at the
military academies ''are applicable at all times.'' He told the Iran-contra
committees: ''I don't see how you can leave aside situational or other ethics.''

Or, as a former Chief of Staff of the Army, Gen. William C. Westmoreland once
put it: ''I want to make it clear beyond any question that absolute integrity of
an officer's word, deed and signature is a matter than permits no compromise.''

That philosophy, while rooted in the Judeo-Christian tradition, rests on a
pragmatic proposition: If an officer lies, a vital mission might not be
accomplished and men could needlessly die in battle.

Disaster and Death

A senior officer who lies to subordinates about the dangers of their mission may
condemn them to death.

A junior officer who lies about his unit's readiness can mislead a superior into
a disastrous decision.

Ship captains must be able to trust one another to follow their battle plan, or
they will see their ships exposed to the enemy.

In combat, moreover, soldiers should be able immediately to count on the
integrity of a new commander replacing a slain leader.

A commander taking part in the ethics discussion said that if soldiers believe
that some officers always tell the truth but that others lie, the soldiers will
hestitate to follow the new leader's orders. ''Then we're in big trouble,'' the
officer said. ''That's the importance of ethics.''

Those principles hold true in any armed force, but particularly in a democracy
where the military services are constitutionally subordinate to civilian
authority. Mr. Shultz said at the hearings, ''I don't think that desirable ends
justify the means of lying, of deceiving, of doing things that are outside our
constitutional processes.''

Some military officers agree. Harry G. Summers Jr., a retired Army colonel who
writes about military affairs, wrote recently: ''Tampering with civilian control
of the military by the President or by the Congress is a slippery slope, indeed,
for at the bottom of that slope is military dictatorship.''

The situational ethics in the officer corps today appears to be a vestige of the
corruption that spread through the armed forces during the conflict in Vietnam.
Political leaders in Washington, notably President Johnson, demanded a gauge of
progress in that guerrilla war. Since the classic measure of captured territory
did not work, counting dead enemy bodies became the signpost.

An obsession with numbers led to a body-count syndrome and inflation of
statistics to keep headquarters happy. That in turn fostered false reports to
win combat decorations and promotions. Paradoxically, the body-count sydrome
flourished under General Westmoreland when he was the commander in Vietnam,
which may have caused him later to order a study of military professionalism and
ethics.

Even today, however, the effects of Vietnam are debilitating.

Mr. Sorley said that they had caused ''the erosion of trust upon which
professional relationships, lifelong friendships and loyalties of comrades in
arms and the honorable perception of military service have been based.''

'These Are the Rules'

Despite the widespread practice of situational ethics, many officers in each
service have said that such behavior will not be tolerated under their command.
The demand for integrity appears to increase as officers get farther from the
flagpole in Washington.

On his first day, a new battalion commander in Texas told his officers he
expected them to speak the truth. ''These are the rules,'' he said. ''If you
violate them, that will be a catastrophic failure from which you cannot
recover.''

Similarly, a general told officers in his division: ''There is no room to
negotiate one's integrity. Anyone who violates his integrity will be dealt with
severely and I will do my damndest to get him eliminated from the service.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Telegrams Are on the Wane

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH NEUFFER

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


During the Iran-contra hearings on Capitol Hill, the telegrams stacked in front
of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North testified to his fame. But aside from major
national and international events that inspire members of the public to wire
messages, the business of sending telegrams is declining.

About 200 million telegrams were sent in 1929, but only 3 million in 1985,
according to the Western Union Corporation. Telegrams are being replaced by the
swifter telex, facsimile or telephone.

When more than 150,000 messages were sent to Washington after Colonel North took
the stand last month, it broke an unofficial record. Only in 1973, when
President Nixon dismissed the Watergate special prosecutor, Archibald Cox, was
there a bigger response.

Modern Communication

No longer are telegrams vital missives delivered swiftly to one's doorstep by a
messenger in olive-green livery. Today, telegrams are considered more quaint
than useful.

''They're like the Stanley Steamer - they're not that important any longer,''
said Warren G. Bender of Arthur D. Little, a Boston consulting company.

At Western Union, which has its headquarters in Upper Saddle River, N.J.,
telegrams now make up only 5 percent of the company's business. The concern has
diversified into more modern means of communication, like telexes.

Telegram delivery boys were phased out in 1968. Gone are singing telegrams,
given up in 1972. The Army stopped sending telegrams to families of soldiers
during the Vietnam War. And the company's monopoly on the domestic telegram
business was broken in 1979.

In 1945, there were 3,500 Western Union offices around the United States. Today,
because the company now uses local agents, there are only eight.

''It's like what happened to the 5-cent cup of coffee, the 10-cent cigar,'' said
Donn Dutcher, who heads the Western Union newsroom. ''We're a part of
Americana.'' Telegrams are still popular on Mother's Day, Christmas and
Thanksgiving. But the bulk of the business is in ''opiniongrams,'' a variant of
the telegram that is sent only to elected officials.

While it costs $10.75 to tell Mom what you think of her in 10 words in a
telegram, it cost only $5.95 to tell your senator or congressman your thoughts
in a 20-word opiniongram.

Because of the overwhelming public response to the Iran-contra hearings, Western
Union modified its policies and applied the opiniongram rate to telegrams sent
to any witness before the Congressional investigating committees.

Some 30 million Western Union customers a year use Mailgrams, in which a message
is sent electronically to a post office and then placed in first-class mail. But
even this form of communication is on the wane, company officials said,
increasingly replaced by electronic mail sent via computers.

The decline in the use of the telegram occurred over time, they added, as other
means of communication became more popular.

Relayed by Telephone

But in the 1960's, before the telegram business was deregulated, the Federal
Communications Commission noted thousands of consumer complaints about Western
Union telegrams, from delayed messages to garbled ones.

In the 1970's, the company modernized and established telephone bureaus. Now,
banks of operators tap out telegram messages into computers, and messages are
most commonly relayed by phone. If a customer cannot be reached, a copy of the
telegram is placed in the mail.

Some Western Union employees mourn for the days when telegrams were an art form.
Never again, they say, will a playwright send a telegram to an actor in
mid-performance with the message: ''Watching your performance from back row.
Wish you were here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 927 words


THE BAD WAR: An Oral History of the Vietnam War. By Kim Willenson with the
correspondents of Newsweek. 451 pages. A Newsweek Book. New American Library.
$19.95.

IN Studs Terkel's pioneering oral history of World War II, '' 'The Good War,' ''
the author placed quotation marks around the title. He explained in a prefatory
note that he added them ''not as a matter of caprice or editorial comment, but
simply because the adjective 'good' mated to the noun 'war' is so incongruous.''

By contrast, in ''The Bad War: An Oral History of the Vietnam War'' -written by
Kim Willenson with the correspondents of Newsweek - no quotation marks are added
to the title. The reason for omitting any such ironic qualifying touch is also
not capricious. The dedication by Mr. Willenson, the book's editor, helps to
explain why: ''To the names on the Wall and all the other names on all the other
walls that it may not happen again.''

Looking back on the longest war in American history - longer than both World
Wars combined - none of the contributors now see much light at the end of the
tunnel. Nevertheless, ''The Bad War'' is a balanced work. More than 75 hawks and
doves from that time, including former grunts in the jungles of Vietnam as well
as survivors of the street battles in America, open up in this opinionated and,
in some places, surprisingly eloquent book. ''The Bad War'' originated as a
cover story in Newsweek on the 10th anniversary of the fall of Saigon in 1975,
and is now expanded.

A particular value of the book is that it emphasizes the relevance of Vietnam to
American foreign and military policy today.

The Vietnam syndrome - fear of getting bogged down in the Big Muddy of war again
- occupies the attention of a number of the commentators here. Two military
involvements during the Reagan Presidency - the invasion of the island of
Grenada in the Caribbean, where American armed forces were directly engaged but
American reporters were barred, and the covert war in support of the contras
against the Nicaraguan Government, on the agenda of the recent Congressional
hearings - are both mentioned a dozen times in ''The Bad War.''

J. William Fulbright, who practices law in Washington, was chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee when President Lyndon B. Johnson escalated
the war in Southeast Asia. In an interview with Mr. Willenson last year, Mr.
Fulbright said: ''Look, it's very unpleasant to even talk about this [Vietnam].
It has no significance any more. The country didn't learn a damn thing for it.
They're doing right now as bad or worse in Nicaragua, intervening, throwing
their weight around like the big bully they are.''

He adds: ''These people come in from Hollywood and think they can do anything,
just like John Wayne.''

Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., retired, a Republican aspirant for President, who
was President Nixon's last chief of staff and President Reagan's first Secretary
of State, presents an opposite view that stresses the intentions of the Soviet
Union and Cuba in the Caribbean: ''Why Central America has importance for us is
not that it's a social and economic struggle, but that it's an external
intervention which is dangerous to our vital interests.''

The head of President Ford's National Security Council, Gen. Brent Scowcroft,
retired, comes somewhere down the middle: ''Let's just suppose for example that
the President comes to the conclusion that the only way to settle the Central
American situation is to go into Nicaragua. He might be able to go in but I
don't think he could complete the job. My assessment is that anything we can do
in three days or five days, before the opposition mobilized, we can do. But if
we launched an engagement that would take as long as Nicaragua would take, I
think he would absolutely be cut off at the knees. A Grenada we can do.
Nicaragua would be a far different case.'' And in an interesting remark that
runs counter to the traditional von Clausewitz theory of total war and may well
represent current Pentagon thinking, General Scowcroft says: ''It is not
fundamentally the role of the military to integrate diplomacy with the use of
force. So in a sense you could say that the military have become the doves of
our time.''

All the interviews in ''The Bad War'' were conducted in 1985 and 1986 by various
Newsweek correspondents, before the Iran-contra hearings, but they still hold
up.

One of the Senators who has played an active role in the hearings, William S.
Cohen, Republican of Maine, echoes what he has been saying on television. He
says that he believes that the country has learned something from Vietnam. ''Its
lingering effect does not mean we won't send our sons to fight anywhere, but it
does mean we won't send them to fight everywhere,'' Senator Cohen says.

''One of the reasons there are no troops in Central America is that we have
learned a very serious lesson, which is not to commit troops to any region
unless the country and the Congress are convinced that the reasons are good.''

This oral history records voices from Joan Baez to Gary Hart, from former
Premier of South Vietnam Nguyen Cao Ky to Eugene McCarthy, from Caspar
Weinberger to Maj. Gen. George S. Patton 3d, retired, son of the famed World War
II general. General Patton criticizes the lack of strategic direction and
national support during the war and bitterly declares: ''We were defeated by an
eighth-rate power.'' But not even the military-minded General Patton, who says
he cried at the final loss of Vietnam, finds much good in ''The Bad War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kim Willenson

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COMPANY NEWS;
Cannon Group Reports Loss

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 3, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 201 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 6


The financially troubled Cannon Group Inc. confirmed in a delayed report today
that it had not alleviated its cash crisis in the first quarter of its fiscal
year, which ended April 4.

The company cited weak box-office results from six films, including ''Hanoi
Hilton'' and Sylvester Stallone's ''Over the Top.''

Cannon, an independent film maker under investigation by the Securities and
Exchange Commission, said it lost $10 million in the quarter despite revenues
that were more than 50 percent above last year's but still insufficient to cover
interest expenses. Revenues were $117.5 million. A comparison with year-ago
figures was not available, and Cannon said previous unrestated results should
not be relied upon.

The company's financial disclosures since 1983 are the subject of the S.E.C.
investigation.

The inquiry, shareholder lawsuits and box office flops have caused Cannon's
financial crisis, which the company has tried to balance through asset sales and
cash infusions from European investors.

But the first-quarter results show that Cannon's retained earnings have
worsened. Its net worth fell to $44.4 million in the period, from $50.6 million
as of Jan. 3, a spokesman said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

That's Hollywood: The Strike That Never Was

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2511 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD


MORNING comes early in Hollywood. Power and money don't buy an extra hour of
sleep for producers, directors and studio executives who have to rise at dawn if
they want to keep practicing the tricky and well-paid art of making movies and
cutting deals.

Monday, July 13, was different. Hollywood - the state of mind and the state of
California's fourth-largest industry - was closed and bolted. In 24 hours, the
Directors Guild of America was scheduled to go out on what everyone expected
would be a long and nasty strike. Stockpiling for war, the major studios had
shoved nearly 100 pictures into production since January and then raced to
finish them before the deadline. The partly edited film was now stacked in cans
in studio vaults, the sets torn down and the actors dispersed.

This is the story of July 13, of who won and who lost and why the strike never
happened. It is a story of a high-stakes gamble by union negotiators that paid
off and of a dramatic 11th-hour concession by studio heads who were hobbled by
conflicting goals. And it is just an early chapter of a larger story in which
all of Hollywood's unions eventually will do battle as the studios search for
ways to cut runaway costs.


In his condo in a high-rise building on Wilshire Boulevard, Gilbert Cates, newly
elected to a third term as president of the directors guild, stared at himself
in the bathroom mirror a little before 7 A.M. ''Those crazy people are really
going to make us go out on strike over this silly issue,'' he later recalled
thinking.

What Mr. Cates called ''this silly issue'' - management's proposed rollback on
royalty payments, or residuals, to directors when a movie is sold to
pay-per-view cable television - was the heart of the battle between the studios
and the directors. Because of skyrocketing costs, movies were no longer making
enough money in theaters to pay for themselves. The example the studios kept
giving was Universal Pictures' ''Howard the Duck,'' which cost $35 million to
make and another $12 million to advertise and promote. Universal took in less
than $10 million in film rentals on ''Howard'' last summer.

The rising costs of making and distributing movies are partly the result of
union work rules and featherbedding. But they have more to do with movie star
salaries, layers of highly paid executives, the extravagance that has
historically been worn by the industry as a badge of honor and a desire on the
part of studio heads to outdo each other with fantasy-adventure films that boast
grandiose and expensive special effects.

Nevertheless, the studios have been looking to the directors guild and the other
unions for relief. And the battlelines have been drawn not around traditional
salary issues but rather the newer entertainment technologies, such as cable
movie channels, video cassettes and pay-per-view cable.

Under existing contracts, directors, actors and writers have received royalties
from these new revenue sources for years. But lately the studios have been
insisting that these payments had to end - starting with the directors - or at
least not begin until a movie had earned enough to repay much of its production
costs.

Pay-per-view television - in which a consumer pays to see a particular movie or
sports event - is barely a seedling now, but analysts estimate that it will
bring in more than $2.5 billion a year by 1997. Any agreement that reined in the
directors would put tremendous pressure on the actors and writers for similar
concessions.

But the producers misjudged the importance of the issue to the 8,400-member
guild. Royalties, which are also paid when television series are re-run, can add
up to quadruple the original salary. And writers, actors and directors, too,
sometimes have to live for years on those payments.

The studios had a second disadvantage. Each week Variety reported the summer box
office bonanza and the unprecedented profits of Universal, Disney, Paramount,
Columbia or their parent companies. The directors perceived the producers as
rolling in money and still ''trying to destroy us, to skin us alive,'' said Ted
Post, the director of ''Go Tell the Spartans,'' a movie about Vietnam.

In February the studios had crushed the Screen Extras Guild, forcing it to
accept a two-tier wage pact in which some extras would be paid as little as $5
an hour. By contrast, others would still get $160 a day in salary and benefits.
The other unions saw the collapse of the extras guild as a first step in a
studio master plan to destroy them and gave unexpected support to the directors.

The unity of the guilds was matched by the disharmony among the producers. The
Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers was the bargaining agent for
more than 200 production companies with different needs. It included major
studios - 20th Century-Fox, Disney, Warner Bros., Columbia, Paramount,
MCA/Universal, MGM/UA and Lorimar - and major television production companies
such as MTM, the Aaron Spelling Company and the three networks. It also included
more than 100 small television companies and independent movie producers.


THE television companies desperately wanted to avoid a strike since they were
just going into production for the season that begins next month. And taking a
strike over pay-per-view would be absurd for them since only major movies and
sports events were likely to be shown on such cable services.

As producers and as purchasers of television programs, NBC, ABC and CBS were
also uncomfortable with a strike. In addition, pay-per-view was their
competition. Anything, including residual payments, that drove the price of
pay-per-view higher would be to the networks' benefit.

There were divisions even among the movie studios. The hard-liners were led by
Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney Pictures, and Sid Sheinberg,
president of MCA. Frank Mancuso, chairman of Paramount, headed the moderates.

Mr. Katzenberg was almost obsessed about out-of-control costs. A tough new
contract with the directors guild ''is merely the first step,'' he said in an
interview earlier this year. ''The directors have the bad luck to be up first
when everyone has discovered the religion of economy.'' Mr. Sheinberg exults in
confrontations and has been described as someone who will sue the waiter for
spilling coffee. Mr. Mancuso, on the other hand, is a compromiser by nature.

''Our game plan was to exploit the rifts,'' said Mr. Cates of the directors
guild. One of the rifts involved a complex proposal for dealing with pensions
that primarily benefited Universal and which the directors opposed. ''For the
studios to bring it up as an issue of negotiations was imprudent,'' said Mr.
Cates. ''So we made the pension plan a major issue early because most of the
companies didn't give a damn about it.'' The proposal was eventually withdrawn.

The directors identified the moderates as Warner Bros., Columbia and Paramount.
But negotiations started with 136 issues, including a dozen of importance, and
the sides shifted on almost every one. On many issues, the moderate bloc of
studio heads was composed of Columbia's David Puttnam, Fox's Barry Diller,
Lorimar's Merv Adelson and Paramount's Mr. Mancuso.

By July 13, most of the issues had been resolved or, like residuals on video
cassettes, pulled off the table by the producers as the two sides jockeyed for
position. Pay-per-view was the only major issue that remained. Details still had
to be worked out, however, on another front involving residuals - one-hour
television shows that are sold in syndication after their network runs. Since
these shows were selling poorly, the directors had already tentatively agreed to
a sliding scale of royalties.

To put pressure on studios that were perceived as wavering, the guild had
announced a strike against Warner Bros. and Columbia to begin at 6 A.M. Tuesday,
July 14. The guild's action turned Robert Daly, chairman of Warner, ''from a
mild-mannered Irishman into a raving lunatic,'' according to one studio
official.

Directors thrive on stress, and Gil Cates was a 25-year veteran director of such
films as ''I Never Cried for My Father'' and ''Summer Wishes, Winter Dreams.''
Nonetheless, he had slept fitfully Sunday night. ''Once you pull the pin on the
grenade, you don't know what will happen,'' he said. ''Every senior person on
our side was convinced that if the single issue we were going to strike on was
pay-per-view, the producers would collapse. But it didn't seem to be happening.
When I drove back to the negotiations Monday, I thought we would have a major
strike for a long long time.''

Although the guild was not aware of it, it already had its victory. At 4 P.M.,
the heads of the major companies met at the Alliance headquarters. It was to be
a short meeting to handle publicity about the strike.

Instead, the meeting lasted four hours and the fragile agreement among the
producers to take a strike dissolved. Under the rules of the Alliance, the 20
major companies had to agree unanimously on decisions.

In essence, that gave each studio veto power, and, after three hours of debate
and pressure, two studios - Warner and MGM/UA - were obviously ready to exercise
it.

The studios did not stick together because they had no single leader, said
several participants.

Lew Wasserman, chairman of MCA and the industry's eminence grise for the last
two decades, was in the hospital for major surgery. Mr. Sheinberg, his
second-in-command, was too rough-tongued to soothe and cajole.


MOST of the other men in the Alliance's huge conference room had the kind of
close ties that added up to a huge case of sibling rivalry. Until three years
ago Disney's Mr. Katzenberg and Paramount's Mr. Mancuso were working for Mr.
Diller, who was then chairman of Paramount. MGM/UA's Lee Rich had left Lorimar
on not entirely friendly terms with Merv Adelson. An Englishman, Columbia's
David Puttnam was so new to Hollywood that he was regarded with suspicion.

''It was incredibly fluid,'' said one participant. ''If you got the top seven
people who were there to talk openly, you'd get seven different versions.''

One of those versions: ''In this meeting, the only meeting that really
mattered,'' said a participant, ''MCA was not quite tough enough.''

''The television producers would have been with us if the one-hour series
problem hadn't been solved,'' said a different studio head. ''But they had no
appetite for a strike over pay-per-view and they said, 'Well, if you have no
consensus . . .' ''

The ultimate pragmatist among the studio bosses, Mr. Daly of Warner Bros.,
applied the coup de grace. Calm and unemotional, he insisted the others stay and
talk about what the pay-per-view issue really meant. The actors had gone on
strike for 11 weeks in 1980 to get a share of the revenues from original
programs made for pay TV. But, seven years later, pay-television channels still
had little original programming.

''It's fair to say I was outspoken,'' said Mr. Daly. ''It was a question of what
was left to accomplish, of what was left at stake. Nobody knows yet how
significant pay-per-view is going to be.'' He added, ''I kept pointing out that
we had arrived at a formula for one-hour television shows, a major
accomplishment. Was it fair to take the whole town out on strike over
pay-per-view?''


HE was joined by Mr. Rich of MGM/UA. Over the last few years, MGM/UA had been
sold and repurchased and divided and recombined. Mr. Rich was heir to the new
James Bond movie but, unlike the other studio heads, he had almost no other
movies completed or in production.

''There was no unanimity in the group,'' said Mr. Rich. ''Nobody could come to
an agreement on anything.''

If the studios had still been asking for rollbacks in the royalties they paid
directors for video cassettes, there probably would have been a strike, several
studio heads say. Then, the issue would have been the more important one of
paying any type of royalty on movies that had flopped. ''There is something
wrong when pictures lose money and we still have to pay residuals,'' said Mr.
Rich.

As they drove into the Alliance parking lot around 8 that Monday night, the
guild's negotiators were surprised to find that the studio heads had just
concluded a meeting, indicating new management rifts.

Indeed, as the final talks began, the union officials noted ''a change in the
climate,'' said Michael Franklin, the guild's veteran executive director. Mr.
Franklin had faced Nicholas Counter, the Alliance's chief negotiator, half a
dozen times before in contract talks.

''To those of us who do this for a living, the smell was different,'' said Glenn
Gumpel, the guild's deputy executive director.

For hours, the two sides sparred amid stacks of Mounds, Milky Way and Nestle
Crunch bars and bags of popcorn supplied by the producers. Before they left the
Alliance building, the producers instructed Mr. Counter to keep trying to find a
workable formula on pay-per-view. The directors reincarnated an earlier proposal
that allowed the producers to recoup some money on a movie before royalties were
triggered. In return, the producers would pay extra residuals later. At 10:25
P.M., according to Mr. Gumpel's notes, ''after months of rhetoric, they gave us
a proposal we could buy, a sliding scale.'' He walked into an adjoining room and
gave Mr. Cates a thumbs-up sign.

But the guild was wary. ''Six years ago, Wasserman and the guild concluded a
deal on pay-TV 10 days before the expiration of our contract,'' said Mr. Cates.
''After we agreed, they iced us on every other issue, so we didn't want to jump
in and agree on pay-per-view before other things were settled.''

At 12:15 A.M., Mr. Franklin and Mr. Gumpel told Mr. Counter to assume a deal was
possible on pay-per-view and that they should get on to the remaining issues.
These included the specifics of a pay raise - they settled on a token increase,
a total of 10 percent over the next three years - and the final details of the
earlier agreement on royalties from one-hour dramatic shows.

Between 3 and 5 A.M., studio negotiators called their bosses, waking them up to
present different pay-per-view formulas. But the guild had tied its acceptance
of a sliding scale for pay-per-view to an increase in video cassette royalties.
The price was not worth it, the producers decided.

At 5:35, Mr. Counter returned to Mr. Franklin and Mr. Gumpel with a sheet of
paper. On the paper was written, ''I'm going to withdraw pay-per-view.''

The directors had won.

In the aftermath, Mr. Sheinberg said the settlement would lead to more
production leaving Hollywood for cheaper locales. ''I would hate to see the Four
Seasons Hotel in Toronto replace the Beverly Hills Hotel.''

A month later, several studio heads could see a silver lining. ''When the dust
settled,'' said Mr. Daly, ''we realized we must discuss our objectives in much
greater detail in advance.'' Said Fox's Mr. Diller, ''At the very least, it will
force us not to ignore the problem of consistency.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Gilbert Cates, president of the directors guild (AP);
Warner's Robert Daly

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
U.S., Vietnam Resume Talks

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity, Milt Freudenheim and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


The United States has refused to open diplomatic relations with Vietnam, but
officials of the two countries have been talking for years about 1,700 Americans
still listed as missing since the United States troops quit the war in 1973.
Despite persistent reports that some of the Americans may be alive, no
conclusive evidence has been found. Last week, a high-level American delegation
went to Hanoi and agreed to add ''certain humanitarian concerns of Vietnam'' to
the agenda.

But, in a terse statement, the Americans and Vietnamese said humanitarian issues
''should not be linked to broader political questions such as normalization [of
relations] or economic aid.'' ''Technical experts'' will meet soon to discuss
ways to speed up accounting for the missing Americans.

John W. Vessey, a retired Army general and former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, headed a nine-member delegation of American officials and families of
the missing. He declined to elaborate on the official statement. But Nguyen Dy
Nien, a Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, said talks would begin this month.
He added that there might be a separate discussion of the Vietnamese offspring
of Americans. Neither side knows how many remain in Vietnam, but some are old
enough to be eligible for Vietnamese military service, which could compromise
their claims to American citizenship.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT OPTIONS FOR ACTION IN GULF?

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ALTHOUGH Secretary of State George P. Shultz asserted last week that the United
States could avoid hostilities in the Persian Gulf, specialists on the region
and senior military officers were not so sure.

In a news conference Thursday, Mr. Shultz said: ''I don't think there is any
prospect at all that we will be drawn into a shooting war.'' The same day,
however, the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, Richard W.
Murphy, said tensions ''are perhaps higher than they have been for the last few
years.''

''One way that Iran could strike out is through international terrorism,'' Mr.
Murphy said. Military officers, echoing the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Adm. William Crowe Jr., said the American presence in the gulf was ''not
risk-free.''

The possible contingencies for combat are varied, as are the chances for success
of the American forces in the gulf. Some missions seem possible, others more
difficult for tactical, diplomatic and domestic political reasons.

Should Iran openly attack a tanker flying an American flag, or a United States
warship, or an American embassy in the region, American retaliation could be
swift, given the United States armada, which will soon have about 24 vessels and
15,000 men in the region.

An air strike could come from the carrier Constellation in the Arabian Sea, just
outside the gulf. It could also be mounted by B-52 bombers flown from Guam and
refueled on the island of Diego Garcia 2,000 miles away in the Indian Ocean.

Eight warships in the Middle East task force could fire on Iranian coastal
targets. Marine artillery specialists could be slipped ashore to direct the
gunfire so there would be no repetition of the kind of attacks that mostly
missed targets in Lebanon in 1983.

By midmonth, the battleship Missouri is due to arrive in the Arabian Sea, along
with six other ships. Since naval officers oppose sending a battleship into the
gulf's confined waters, the Missouri's huge 16-inch guns may not be fired. But
she is armed with Tomahawk cruise missiles that could be fired from far at sea
at targets 500 miles inland.

Missiles From the Sea

Another possibility is that cruise missiles could be fired from submarines in
the Arabian Sea. The Iranians would never know where they came from. The Navy
does not disclose submarine movements, but it is standard for at least two to
accompany an aircraft carrier. Many of the submarines have been armed with
Tomahawks.

While retaliation might be relatively simple, a larger military operation would
be extremely difficult if an Iranian invasion of Kuwait or Saudi Arabia prompted
a request from their governments for sustained American military support.

Marines could be flown in and then pick up arms aboard ships that would have
sailed to the gulf from Diego Garcia. Paratroopers could reinforce the marines.
The terrain would favor American forces, since the invasion route from Iran to
Saudi Arabia is a narrow corridor on the west coast of the gulf. But the mission
would be difficult. The Strait of Hormuz is halfway around the world.

The United States does not have the air and sea transport to sustain a flow of
troops, weapons and supplies, and lacks bases, communications and water supplies
in the region.

''Anyone thinking of sustained operations in that part of the world would be
nuts,'' said an officer privy to the thinking of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

A greater difficulty would arise from an attack of ambiguous origin, such as the
bombing of an American embassy or an explosion aboard a fishing boat that had
sidled up to an American warship. So far, the Administration's policy has been
not to retaliate unless an attacker has been identified.

In any event, the United States apparently cannot count on being joined in the
gulf by allies in Europe, despite indications last week that they might give
advice on sweeping mines there. It would be ''out of the question,'' said an
Administration official, for the Europeans to send forces or to permit the
United States to use bases in Europe. And they would balk if the United States
tried to dispatch American forces in Europe to the gulf. Nor could Washington
count on help from Turkey, Japan or even most Arab nations, officials said.

As for the Russians, who began seeking a foothold in the region long before
Rudyard Kipling wrote about the czarist drive south to a warm-water port, the
best guess here is that they would complain loudly about American military
action. But Moscow would probably do nothing because that would risk a wider
conflict for which it is unprepared.

In Washington, opposition to the Administration's gulf policies seemed to be
growing.

One hundred members of Congress said they would seek to invoke the War Powers
Act. That act, approved after the war in Vietnam, says the President can send
troops into ''imminent danger'' for only 60 days, unless Congress approves a
longer mission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of American Navy helicopter returning to the guided missile
cruiser Fox (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPIKE LEE'S GOTTA HAVE IT

BYLINE: By Stuart Mieher; Stuart Mieher is a staff writer for Georgia Trend, a
business magazine in Atlanta.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3528 words


THE SCENE IS AN OLD FAIR-GROUNDS building in Atlanta, now Madame Re-Re's Beauty
Salon, a surreal creation of plywood, plaster and paint. The set has been packed
with a score of dancers, a film crew and the director Spike Lee, all of them
sweating under 140,000 watts of lighting to piece together a production number.
Now the crew is taking a break. The dancers, overheated, head for cooler air
outside.

Lee wanders out too, a short, spindly figure in black trousers, black sneakers
and a Mets baseball cap. He is looking for an audience, and he finds one, a
visitor. He asks, ''Did you hear we got kicked off campus?'' The campus in
question is that of Morehouse College, Lee's alma mater and the main location
for his second feature film, about student life at an all-black college. Things
are not working out as planned. Lee tells of how the school's president, Hugh
Morris Gloster, ''thought this would be a negative portrayal of black
colleges.'' The director pauses at a snack table to stuff a few orange slices
into his mouth, then adopts a mocking, presidential tone: ''He said, 'We have
information that actors in the movie use an obscene word, and parents wouldn't
want to send their children here if they heard that.' Sure, we're using the
word. And so are the parents of those kids.'' (Gloster, the Morehouse president,
says: ''They came in shooting on the campus and we began to get reports about
things that were going on,'' such as some football cheers with decidedly
off-color references. Parents, he feared, ''would judge the school on what they
see in this film.'') Lee devours a few more slices of orange, then continues:
''We were going to do a premiere in Atlanta. Now we'll do it in New York. We
need a warm reception, and there are too many people, powerful people in Atlanta
who wish we'd never come here.''

This is Spike Lee, talking wise, disrespectful of authority, a bit paranoid,
hungry. As a first-year graduate-school film student, he had the audacity to
parody the cinematic classic ''The Birth of a Nation.'' As director, writer,
star and producer of his first feature-length film, he became a phenomenon.
''She's Gotta Have It'' was the tale of a young black woman who felt no need to
choose among her three lovers. She was, says Lee, ''living her life like a
man.'' Lee played Mars Blackmon, a rapping street kid who joked his way into her
bed and stole scene after scene. The film, made in 1985 for less than $175,000,
pulled in $7 million at the box office. For an independent, shoestring
production, this was remarkable. For an independent shoestring production by a
black man about black people, it was astounding.

Since then, Lee has emerged as a nexus of black culture. Stevie Wonder wrote a
song for his new film. Jesse Jackson delivered a prayer on the set for the
project's success. In Atlanta, clean-cut Morehouse students beseeched Lee for
autographs, seeing in him a new role model. One, grasping a copy of Black
Enterprise magazine that featured an article about Lee, asked, ''Should brothers
and sisters go to an entrepreneurial mode and struggle it out, or go to white
corporations?'' Lee's advice: ''It's always better to have your own thing
going.''

Still only 30 years old, Lee has gained a degree of respect and freedom accorded
few independent film makers at any age. ''I consider him, forget black and
white, one of the most original young film makers in the world,'' says David
Picker, president of Columbia Pictures. Lee's current project, which Columbia
plans to distribute next February, is a musical with the punnish title ''School
Daze.'' Its budget of about $6 million is small by Hollywood's standards, but
three dozen times larger than Lee has had before.

With an audience or an interviewer, Lee is animated, opinionated, gloriously
quotable. He rails against black celebrities who ''have a vicious crossover
mentality.'' According to Lee, ''They want to get on the cover of Rolling Stone.
That's when you start seeing the symptoms - the nose jobs, the cleft chins, the
blue and green contact lenses.''

He takes the film establishment to task for producing shallow, misleading
portrayals of black society. ''I'm tired of people who know nothing about us
defining our lives,'' he says. He trumpets a grand ambition: to present a new
view of black life to the mass audience.

But on the set of ''School Daze,'' a different Spike Lee emerges, one with
little of his shoot-from-the-lip arrogance. He is a thoughtful, organized and
silent presence, focused on the task at hand, giving an occasional direction but
welcoming no interruption. One friend calls him ''a pot at continuous simmer,''
and the description seems apt.


THE DIRECTOR, ALL 125 POUNDS of him, is sitting in a college auditorium, a black
pork-pie hat perched on his head. His sweatshirt this evening says on the front
''Mission,'' the name of the fictitious black coed school where the film takes
place. On the back, a motto: ''Uplift the Race.'' Lee's high-top basketball
shoes are secured with orange Day-Glo laces.

His socks droop around his skinny ankles. He is a minor spectacle.

It is three months before the Madame Re-Re scene, the first day of casting calls
in Atlanta. The site is Spelman College, the black women's school across the
road from Morehouse. Lee is cracking jokes, filling the short breaks between
auditions by swaying to music swelling out of a tape player. He recognizes a
young woman who wants one of the minor roles Lee has reserved for student
talent. ''Miss Wannabee, the prototype,'' he says teasingly. The term is short
for ''wannabee white,'' and it describes one of the opposing groups of students
in the film, whose plot revolves around the clash between well-to-do,
light-skinned students - wannabees - and poorer, darker students, whom the
script calls ''jigaboos.''

Morehouse and Spelman form one of those bastions of the black middle class about
which the rest of America knows little. Blacks seeking to communicate the
schools' preeminence call them the black Harvard and Radcliffe. Their students
have included Martin Luther King Jr., the novelist Alice Walker and not only
Spike Lee but his father and grandfather.

Shelton Jackson Lee, nicknamed Spike by his mother, was born in Atlanta shortly
before his family moved to Brooklyn. His mother, who died in 1977, taught art
and black literature. His father, Bill Lee, is a jazz musician and composer.
Spike had been indifferent to guitar and piano lessons. But in 1976, during his
sophomore year at Morehouse College, he began playing around with another
instrument, an eight-millimeter camera. Lee made his first short film during a
summer in New York, interposing footage of the 1977 blackout with shots of disco
dancers.

If Morehouse was an education, it was also an inspiration. As at many colleges,
students built their social lives around fraternities and football rivalries.
Lee helped direct the Coronation pageants, the highlight of homecoming weekends,
huge productions, the size of a Broadway musical.

At Morehouse, Lee says, as in black culture generally, there were signs that
blacks discriminated on the basis of color, that light-skinned blacks had an
easier time reaching the upper levels of society. Yet even the thought of such
color lines is controversial, and Lee's new film is already cause for grumbling.
''This just isn't true, and it's never been true,'' says Hugh Gloster. ''I don't
see anyone around here wanting to be white.''

Lee says that while his film may exaggerate a bit, it speaks an essential truth.
''The people with the money, most of them have light skin. They have the
Porsches, the BMW's, the quote good hair unquote,'' he explains. ''The others,
the kids from the rural South, have bad, kinky hair. When I was in school, we
saw all this going on.'' He grins wickedly. ''I remember saying, 'Some of this
stuff has to be in a movie.' ''


AFTER HIS GRADUATION from Morehouse, Lee enrolled in the film program at New
York University's Tisch School of the Arts, where he was one of only a handful
of black students. His first-year project was a cheeky film portraying a black
scriptwriter assigned to a remake of D.W. Griffith's ''The Birth of a Nation,''
and it included some digs at the classic director's portrayals of blacks in the
Old South. The short bombed with Lee's instructors - he suspects they didn't
like his criticism of the great Griffith - and he barely made the cut for the
second year. Eleanor Hamerow, the film program's director, says that Lee was
simply too ambitious: ''You make 10-minute films in your first year, and it's
hard to redo 'Birth of a Nation' in 10 minutes.''

Lee went on to win a student director's academy award, given by the Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, for a 45-minute film about a
barbershop-cum-numbers-joint in Brooklyn's Bedford-Stuyvesant section. But the
prize produced no work. Lee made ends meet by cleaning and shipping film at a
movie distribution house for $200 a week, all the while trying to line up film
projects. He networked feverishly in New York's artistic community. Larry
Fishburne, who plays one of the two pivotal male roles in ''School Daze,''
remembers he was watching a comic in Washington Square Park one evening when he
felt a tap on his shoulder. ''It was this little guy who said, 'You're Larry
Fishburne, you're a great actor.' I said, 'Thanks.' Then he said, 'I'm Spike
Lee, and I make films.' ''

''She's Gotta Have It'' came about almost by accident. In the summer of 1984,
Lee was set to begin a family drama about a young black bicycle messenger coming
of age. Then, shortly before shooting was to begin, part of the financing fell
through. So Lee wrote a different script for a smaller project, used some of the
same actors and rounded up a crew of friends. He began filming with $18,000 in
grant money from the New York State Council on the Arts. Most of the film's
eventual cost of $175,000 was financed by I.O.U.'s.

The effort was to Hollywood what a street bazaar is to Tiffany's. Cast and crew
sweated their way through 12 days of summer shooting in a poorly ventilated
restaurant attic. The film, shot in black and white, was edited in Lee's studio
apartment, with a rented editing machine wedged between Lee's bed and his huge
record collection. By the end, Lee was so behind on his bills that his film lab
threatened to auction off the finished product.

Lee eventually ransomed the film, found a distributor, Island Pictures, and had
his hit. Investments in the film paid off handsomely, and Island Pictures
offered Lee a production deal.

Lee went to work recasting a three-year-old script into a musical, ''School
Daze.'' The project grew into a family enterprise. An aunt, pianist Consuela Lee
Morehead, was named assistant music director. Spike's sister, Joie, was cast as
one of the ''jigaboos.'' Two brothers, David and Cinque, were assigned jobs on
the crew. And to write much of the music, Lee turned to his father, Bill Lee,
who had done the lush score for ''She's Gotta Have It.'' By November, Lee had
cast many of the principal roles.

Then, on Jan. 19, a Monday, Lee was awakened after midnight by a phone call from
Island's California office. The small production and distribution company likes
to keep its projects below $4 million, and ''School Daze'' was beginning to look
more expensive. Island wanted out. ''The picture got a little rich for us,''
explains Laura Parker, Island's vice president of production. ''We really wanted
to do the movie, but we didn't want to cramp Spike's style,'' she explains.
Without backing, the project would have to fold.

Lee remained calm. The next morning, Tuesday, he began calling studios. That
afternoon, he hopped a subway to Manhattan and delivered a script to Columbia's
president, David Picker. On Wednesday, Lee cut a deal with Columbia, and on
Thursday, he flew to Los Angeles for a round of meetings.

That weekend, Lee went to the Super Bowl and had a taste of what life could be
like Hollywood-style - the studio, he says, had found him some great seats.


IT IS A BRILLIANT AFTERNOON, perfect for shooting one of the film's big scenes,
the homecoming football game. The two teams run through their drills in a
borrowed football stadium. A band plays some jazzy tunes under the direction of
Bill Lee, his hips swaying, sweat beating on his brow. More than a thousand
extras pack the stands. They have been working all day for free, and they are
tired and disgruntled. The Columbia deal raised the budget by $2 million but
''School Daze'' still has to scrimp.

Lee has been in motion all day, shuttling among the three cameras, loping up and
down the field with a pigeon-toed gait. Now and then he directs himself in his
role as Half Pint, a ''pledgee'' with Mission College's most powerful
fraternity, Gamma Phi Gamma. He tends toward the ''jigaboo'' in color and
background, but he has ''wannabee'' aspirations.

One crew member says Half Pint is ''a kid who doesn't have a romantic interest
and is very inept at finding one.'' Lee says nothing at all, perhaps fearing
that talk of the role will lead to one of his pet peeves, his label as the
''black Woody Allen.'' There are some similarities. Both directors are from New
York. Both write and direct ethnic films that transcend their ethnicity. But
most of all, both act in their films, playing frail, fast-talking lovers whose
sex appeal lies in their wit.

The comparison angers Lee. He says his cinematic role models are directors like
Akira Kurosawa, Martin Scorsese and Gordon Parks.

''Woody Allen, he can do a film about Manhattan - it's about one-half black and
Hispanic - and he doesn't have a single black person in the film,'' Lee says.
''And they ask me, 'When are you going to have some white people in your films?'
Nobody asks Kurosawa, 'When are you going to have non-Japanese?' But a black
film maker, they say he's racist, he's separatist, because he doesn't have any
white people.''

The comment points to one of Lee's paradoxes as a film maker, that he both
affirms and challenges America's view of itself as an integrated society. The
affirmation comes from his talent: ''She's Gotta Have It'' eloquently
communicates black culture to a broader audience. The challenge comes from Lee's
desire to make films that highlight the uniqueness of black society.

In the early 1970's, Hollywood wooed black audiences with so-called
''blaxploitation'' films. Artistically, the results were uneven, but the best of
the films, such as the ''Shaft'' detective series, made millions for the
studios, employed black directors and gave black actors big roles that
challenged negative stereotypes. The genre soon petered out. Recently Hollywood
has shown new interest in films about blacks, including ''A Soldier's Story''
(1984) and ''The Color Purple'' (1985). The industry has also begun to
appreciate films by black directors. Earlier this year, ''Hollywood Shuffle,''
Robert Townsend's comedy about the travails of black film actors, was received
warmly by both critics and audiences. But it disturbs Lee that he might be part
of another passing fad. ''We don't want to have two or three films, and then
wait 10 years again,'' he says.

Good films, Lee says, should be able to cross cultural lines. But he also has a
message. ''We want to show we're not all hanging around in the ghetto, shooting
up, selling crack,'' he says. ''We want to look at the black middle class, at
some of the success stories.''

Yet Lee and those who know him say his agenda is artistic, not political. ''I
think that when ideas first come to Spike, it's because there's something
intrinsically right about transforming them into films,'' says Barry Brown,
Lee's film editor for ''School Daze,'' who co-directed a documentary about the
Vietnam era that won him an Academy Award nomination. ''Spike was just in love
with the cinema,'' Brown explains, recalling his first encounter with Lee. ''He
was the only one I knew who wouldn't look down his nose at a musical, for
instance. Everyone else thinks that isn't serious film making.''

Lee thinks cinematically, conceiving his films in visual as well as verbal
terms, and this is one reason he insists on controlling the film from scripting
through editing. ''I have the original vision, and I see the film in its
finished form before one frame is shot,'' he says. ''When you get people
dickering with your stuff, it distorts the vision and it's not what you set it
out to be.''

Lee started to plan the major shots for ''School Daze'' last fall, with Ernest
Dickerson, a friend from N.Y.U.'s film school. To prepare for the dance scenes,
they watched old M-G-M musicals and ''West Side Story,'' observing the bright
colors, the intense lighting, the way the dancers were photographed.

''We didn't want the dance to be edited into motion,'' says Dickerson. ''And we
wanted to film the dance in full figure, the way an audience would see it on
stage.'' To plan the actual shots, they drew storyboards, diagrams of how
certain shots should look through the camera. As a result, when shooting began,
the pace moved quickly enough to cram all the shots into an eight-week schedule.

Watching Lee on the set gives few clues to his methods. One day he is filming a
scene with Larry Fishburne, who plays the campus radical, head of the
anti-wannabee faction. In this scene, Fishburne's task is to ring an antique
bell. Lee watches silently for a take or two. Then he gives his most conspicuous
direction of the day: ''Larry, the way you did it the first time was really
better.''

Dickerson says this is the height of extroversion. ''Sometimes'' he says,
''Spike has his back turned and his eyes closed. He will just listen.''

Much of Lee's direction takes place off the set, in small groups. And he
encouraged the actors whose characters belonged to different factions - the
fraternity men, the wannabees, Fishburne's rabble-rousers - to become friends
with their on-screen friends and avoid their on-screen enemies. ''It was
brilliant,'' says Fishburne. ''He knew a director just cannot tell a group of
eight actors, 'I want you all to be as one.' So he sets you up in a situation
where you're going to be together 24 hours a day.''

On the set, says Fishburne, ''Spike really doesn't communicate verbally with
actors a lot. I'll look at him like I'm wondering, 'Hey, am I doing O.K.?' And
he nods.''

Fishburne says this is, in part, the silence of inexperience. ''I don't think
he's developed all the skills he might need to communicate with actors.'' But it
might imply the silence of sheer inscrutability. ''When he gets behind the
camera, there are other things at work,'' Fishburne says. ''And what they are, I
have no idea.''


IF LEE LOVES FILM more than basketball, perhaps it is only because, at 5-foot-6,
he is too short to play. Even so, he hopes one of the perks of success will be a
pair of season tickets behind the bench at Madison Square Garden. His passion
for the game found its way into the character of Mars Blackmon in ''She's Gotta
Have It.'' During an argument, Mars describes the star forward of the Boston
Celtics, Larry Bird, who is white, as the ugliest so-and-so in the National
Basketball Association. The line has since echoed off locker room walls
throughout professional basketball.

So it was probably inevitable that Lee's and Bird's paths would cross. It
happened one night last January, when the Celtics were playing the Knicks. ''I
had great seats,'' Lee says. ''I could see what they were saying on the bench.''
Conner Henry, a Celtics guard, who was sitting next to Bird, spied Lee. ''He
pokes Bird, and he points to me and says, 'Look at him, the guy in the hat, he's
the guy who made the movie.' And when Bird looks around, he isn't laughing.''

''All the guys in the N.B.A. have seen the movie,'' Lee says, ''and that line is
their biggest laugh.''

Lee seems pleased by such celebrity, and he relishes the chance to make films
with real money. These days, he says, $4 million, the original budget for
''School Daze,'' is too small. ''If you do that, you end up with two people
talking in a closet,'' he says.

Lee's production company, Forty Acres and a Mule Filmworks now operates out of a
stylish converted firehouse in Brooklyn where he is polishing ''School Daze''
into its finished form. Otherwise, aside from his notoriety in the N.B.A.,
success has had few detectable effects on his life. When in New York, he still
rides the subway; he doesn't own a car, and he doesn't drive one. He is already
preparing himself for the time when he is no longer a novelty. He volunteers
that: ''On your first film, people will fall all over you. With your second
film, the audience and critics can be laying for you. They're ready to put you
to the firing squad.''

Lee now has a chance for a bigger success, or for his first big failure. But the
prospect doesn't seem to worry him. ''I feel that I'm a very good film maker,
and this film's going to make money, regardless,'' he says. ''I think I will be
making films for the rest of my life. And I'm just going to get better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Spike Lee (Karen Kuehn) (page 26 & 27); scene from 'School
Daze', Lee's upcoming film, 'School Daze' with 'Wannabees' and 'Jigaboos' (David
Lee)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A Democrat in the White House?

BYLINE: By Kevin Phillips; Kevin Phillips's most recent books are ''Staying on
Top: The Business Case for a National Industrial Strategy'' and
''Post-Conservative America.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 642 words



THE END OF THE CONSERVATIVE ERA
Liberalism After Reagan. By Robert S. McElvaine. 338 pp. New York: Arbor House.
$18.95.


A VERY good case can be made that the end of the conservative era in United
States politics is on the horizon, and that Reaganism is staggering under the
weight of high-risk economics and extraconstitutional adventurism.
Unfortunately, Robert S. McElvaine, a professor of history at Millsaps College
in Jackson, Miss., and chronicler of the Great Depression, has made only a
fervid, partisan case.

That's certainly not for want of anti-Reagan indictments. The thrust of ''The
End of the Conservative Era'' - he describes it as ''equal parts of analysis,
prediction, and prescription'' - is that the Republicans can no longer hope for
a deepening political supremacy because Reaganism is in trouble and the country
is getting ready to turn back toward liberalism (which the author says will have
to relabel itself the ''New Progressivism'' in order to succeed). There's quite
a bit of truth in this, but Mr. McElvaine's analysis has about as much balance
as a junk-food diet - and the more tendentious parts of his book underscore the
ways in which many liberals may not yet be ready to take advantage of their
opportunities, thereby prolonging at least a more centrist version of the
conservative era.


Problem No. 1 with Mr. McElvaine's book is that he really can't bring himself to
admit what's been happening since the late 1960's. Four of the last five
Presidential elections have gone to the Republicans, three by outright
landslides (1972, 1980 and 1984). That doesn't happen in an ideological vacuum.
By looking at the changes in key regions as well as among ethnic and religious
groups, it's easy to confirm what happened: voting for President, Americans
shifted against a Vietnam-Great Society era permissive toward inflation,
welfare, crime, drugs and military irresolution.

That shift is history now. But anyone who doesn't understand it may have a
wistful, even naive, view of the upcoming dynamics of centrist and progressive
re-emergence. I don't think Mr. McElvaine does really understand what happened.
As a Mississippian, he can see the way the race issue has devastated the old
Democratic coalition, but by overfocusing on that factor he misses a larger
realization. For example, consider this comment near the beginning of the book:
''Opinion surveys throughout the 'conservative' era of the late seventies and
early eighties showed majorities of Americans to be in agreement with basic
Democratic social and defense policies.'' This is true only if you define
''Democratic'' without reference to top Washington Democratic policy makers of
the era.

Partly in consequence, Mr. McElvaine's prescriptions are a little naive too.
Idealism abounds, culminating in a proposal for a new international organization
prepared to expel nations ''that strayed from democratic values and practices.''
In another section, he calls for a ''Bill of Responsibilities'' to complement
our Bill of Rights. Its contents? Everything from protection of the environment
to commitment to peace.


PERHAPS a third of Mr. McElvaine's book consists of serious and perceptive
analyses of President Reagan and Republican weaknesses, flaws and
vulnerabilities - his dissection of Reaganomics, for example. But too many pages
are studded with endless, routine quotations from Democratic politicians,
especially putative and declared 1988 Presidential candidates. Indeed, one
senses that perhaps he has in the back of his mind the hope that one of these
worthies, on reaching 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, might enlist so dedicated a
cheerleader to come to Washington as an incipient Arthur Schlesinger. Mr.
McElvaine's book, though, is less the product of a historian than of a
Democratic speechwriter-in-waiting.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Best Sellers: August 9, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 1; Book Reviw Desk

LENGTH: 1351 words

                                                                          Weeks
This                                                                 Last    On
Week Fiction                                                         Week  List
 1   PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy.  (Putnam,                            1     2
     $19.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles
     international terrorists in England, Ireland and
     America.

 2   PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.                                 2     7
     (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
     creates a crisis among a big city's politcians and
     lawyers.

 3   MISERY, by Stephen King.  (Viking, $18.95.)                        3    10
     Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
     psychotic fan.

 4   WEEP NO MORE, MY LADY, by Mary Higgins                             4     6
     Clark.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Love and
     murder at a swank California health spa.

 5   THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.                                6    13
     (Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
     Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.

 6 * SPHERE, by Michael Crichton.  (Knopf, $17.95.)                     9     8
     Four scientists explore the mysteries of an alien
     spaceship found on the floor of the South Pacific.

 7   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.                          7    27
     (Morrow, $18.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall
     a woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 8 * DIRK GENTLY'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE                                   5     7
     AGENCY, by Douglas Adams.  (Simon & Schuster,
     $14.95.) A private eye's search for a missing cat
     takes him on a trip through space and time.

 9   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel.  (Delacorte,                      10    21
     $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
     way to the 80's.

10   EMPIRE, by Gore Vidal.  (Random House, $22.50.)                   12     9
     Turn-of-the-century Washington, from the point of
     view of a young woman newspaper publisher.

11   THE TIMOTHY FILES, by Lawrence Sanders.                           11     9
     (Putnam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran turned
     detective checks out dubious entrepreneurs for
     Wall Street firms.

12   TO SAIL BEYOND THE SUNSET, by Robert A.                           13     4
     Heinlein.  (Ace/Putnam, $18.95.) A pastiche of
     themes and characters from the author's earlier
     work, related as the memoir of a spirited woman.

13   PALE KINGS AND PRINCES, by Robert B.                              15     9
     Parker.  (Delacorte, $15.95.) Spenser on the trail of
     a major Northeastern cocaine ring.

14   HEIRESS, by Janet Dailey.  (Little, Brown, $17.95.)               14    13
     Sisters vie for their father's affection and fortune.

15 * MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow.                            8     9
     (Morrow, $17.95.) The many-faceted relationship of
     the 35-year-old narrator and his uncle, a famous
     botaist.
                                                                          Weeks
This                                                                 Last    On
Week Nonfiction                                                      Week  List
 1   THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by                               1    15
     Allan Bloom.  (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
     of liberal arts education during the past 25 years.

 2   SPYCATCHER, by Peter Wright.  (Viking, $19.95.)                    4     2
     The autobiography of a former senior member of
     the British secret service.

 3   CULTURAL LITERACY, by E. D. Hirsch Jr.                             2    10
     (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) The information --
     geography, hostory, literature, polities -- that you
     need to read with.

 4   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.                            5    18
     Siegel.  (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A surgeon stresses
     the importance of the patient's mind and emotions.

 5   THE GREAT DEPRESSION OF 1990, by Ravi                              3     5
     Batra.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) An economist's
     dire predictions about the coming decade.

 6   CALL ME ANNA, by Patty Duke and Kenneth                                  1
     Turan.  (Bantam, $17.95.) The autobiography of the
     actress and show business personality.

 7   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA.  (Collins                            8    36
     Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
     recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 8   LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien                               10     7
     Cheng.  (Grove, $19.95.) China's Cultural Revolution
     as experienced by a wealthy woman accused of
     spying for the West.

 9   HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon.                         9    13
     (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the
     octogenarian industrialist and philanthropist.

10 * THE DIFFERENT DRUM, by M. Scott Peck.                             11    10
     (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A psychiatrist's
     prescription for personal and communal peace.

11   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber.  (Beech Tree/                      7    24
     Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
     visits of "intelligent nonhumans' to his home.

12   THE SPY WORE RED, by Aline, Countess of                            6     6
     Romanones.  (Random House, $18.95.)
     Recollections of a woman from upstate New York
     who served as an undercover agent in Europe
     during World War II.

13   EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Jimmy and Rosalynn                         12     8
     Carter.  (Random House, $16.95.) The former first
     couple tell what they're doing to make the most of
     the rest of their lives.

14   BLUES, by John Hersey.  (Knopf, $16.95.)                                 2
     Reflections on anghng as a sport, presented in a
     dialogue between two fisherman on Martha's
     Vineyard.

15   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes.  (Knopf,                       14    26
     $24.95.) Australia, from penal colony to its gradual
     emergence as a flourishing nation.
                                                                          Weeks
This Advice, How-to and                                              Last    On
Week Miscellaneous                                                   Week  List

 1   THE 8-WEEK CHOLESTEROL CURE, by Robert                             2     5
     E. Kowalski.  (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Ways to
     lower your blood cholesterol level without drugs.

 2   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE                                     3   100
     DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
     standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 3   WOMEN MEN LOVE, WOMEN MEN LEAVE, by                                4    10
     Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.  (Clarkson N.
     Potter/Crown, $18.95.) Why men are drawn to
     some women and desert others.

 4   MEN WHO CAN'T LOVE, by Steven Carter and                           5     2
     Julia Sokol.  (M. Evans, $15.95.) What women can do
     about men who fear a commitment.

 5   HOW TO MARRY THE NAN OF YOUR CHOICE,                                     1
     by Margaret Kent.  (Warner, $14.95.) Ways to find a
     mate.




* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE SONGLINES, by Bruce Chatwin.  (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $18.95.) A
brilliant, assertive not-exactly-novel, set in Australia/Arcadia and containing
adventurous meditations, anecdotes, visions and speculations on basic issues
like nomadism and the nature of man (originally good, nowadays not so great).

THE BOYS OF WINTER, by Wilfrid Sheed.  (Knopf, $16.95.) Literary careerism, sex
and softball in the Hamptons are the raw material of this novel -- his ninth --
by a shrewd and playful former alien no Yank can long deceive.

ON THE RUN, by Philip Agee.  (Lyle Stuart, $19.95.) A highly readable account of
Mr. Agee's life in the 19 years since he left the Central Intelligence Agency;
he resolved to drive the C.I.A. crazy, and they have tried to do the same for
him.

SEASON OF THE JEW, by Maurice Shadbolt.  (Norton, $16.95.) This thumping
historical novel concerns a Maori rebellion of 1868 and its leader, Kooti, who
renounced the Gold of the Victorians for the hard-line Deity of the Old
Testament, especially Joshua.

SCENES FROM THE HOMEFRONT, by Sara Vogan.  (University of Illinois, $11.95.)
Eleven tough, agile, exceedingly various stories; featured players include
self-destroying women, incompetent fathers and truly dreadful North American
weather.

BECOMING A DOCTOR, by Melvin Konner.  (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $19.95.) Mr.
(now Dr.) Konner, an anthropologist, went through medical school and produced
this engaging account of the long, painful initiation by which people become
physicians.

SARTRE: A Life, by Annie Cohen-Solal.  (Pantheon, $24.95.) Published two years
ago in France, this modest, industrious biography is full of suggestive detail
about Sartre's odd, unhappy life but steers clear of psychological reductionism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Ease Limits On Artists and Writers

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 6


At the 11th-century Temple of Literature in a quiet Hanoi park, there are three
gates leading to the inner courtyard. The ornate one in the middle is for kings.
Two modest ones flank it. One is for soldiers and the other for writers and
scholars.

''In ancient times, there were literary mandarins and military mandarins,''
Nguyen Du Chi, an art historian, said. ''But it was the literary mandarins who
entered the court first, to advise the king.''

While writers, artists and dramatists interviewed this week about contemporary
Vietnam avoided the use of what they call ''feudal'' terms, their message was
the same. As the country struggles after decades of war to build a peacetime
society, the literary mandarins are again advising the king.

''We Vietnamese can live without breakfast before going to work,'' said Pham Thi
Thanh, founder and director of the Youth Drama Group. ''But our hearts are
dependent on the arts.''

Intellectual Ferment

Vietnam, and Hanoi most of all, is in intellectual ferment. Artists are turning
to Expressionism, playwrights to self-indulgent, personal themes of
relationships gone wrong. The youth group has gone on stage to pillory teachers
who sell exam papers.

''I have been a journalist for 35 years, and this is the most interesting period
of all,'' said Huu Tho, an editor of Nhan Dan, the Communist Party daily
newspaper. ''In wartime, we couldn't speak our minds.''

''During wartime, we can say that leaders and writers had to unite ideologically
in the cause of national defense,'' Ly Hai Chau, director of a literary
publishing house, said.

''But in peace, the writer can return to a reflection of ordinary life -
offering new ideas and being in the forefront of public opinion.''

Little Is Sacred

The change has come in the last year or two, in the company of economic
liberalization and a self-criticism campaign before which little is sacred, not
even the Communist Party's leadership over the last half-century.

There are limits to expression in Hanoi - except in a small, clandestine
publishing world that an outsider cannot measure. And there is a fear among some
that the door to expression can be closed as easily as it was opened.

There can be no movement to challenge the Communist principles of the country's
founders. Nor would anyone start a campaign against the nine-year-old war in
Cambodia that drains already slender resources and asks a new generation of men
to risk their lives.

But in a recent book, ''Time Gone Away,'' Le Luu tells the story of an ordinary
man defeated by life who describes in flashbacks the failures of his society and
his own passivity in the face of those failures. The success of the book is
described as sensational.

Change From Within

Vu Tu Nam, director of the Vietnam Writers' Association publishing house, said
the book, which appeared last year, could not have been published three or four
years ago. At the literary publishing house, Mr. Chau said he was reviewing
manuscripts that had been rejected in previous years.

Vietnamese who are sensitive to suggestions they are under Soviet influence say
the wave of introspective criticism is not a development that has been forced on
the country by Moscow, Hanoi's patron.

Rather, they say, it is something that comes from within Vietnam itself, just as
economic changes in the city grew out of five years of experience with
''contract'' private-enterprise farming, or from a reluctant admission that some
of the methods that had been used by the south could be applied without damaging
the Communist orthodoxy of the north.

In Hanoi, private businesses, which are beginning to expand under liberalized
city laws, are drawing families back together into ancestral homes and
neighborhoods from scattered cooperatives.

New Currents

Old habits return, even in rough economic times. This year, for example, Hanoi
got a gardening club.

The new currents, thus, move in two directions: inward toward a revival of
ancient Vietnamese cultural traditions - not only in the arts - and outward for
broader links with the world.

Vietnam's poverty, intellectuals say, is creating a stagnating isolationism. A
European ambassador here said this disturbs many Vietnamese who remember that
this was once one of the most cosmopolitan societies in Asia.

While shelves in Hanoi bookstores groan under the weight of unsold heavy Soviet
technical volumes, readers, translators and publishers press on a visitor lists
of books by American authors they would like to have - Kurt Vonnegut, William
Styron, Eric Segal - or they simply ask for ''anything new.'' They want to go
beyond Mark Twain, Jack London and John Reed. Alex Haley's ''Roots'' was a
recent success.

Novels in Limited Supply

Contemporary Vietnamese novels and short-story collections are printed in
limited quantities because of a shortage of paper, and they sell out almost
before they reach the stores. Mr. Chau remarked that Vietnam must be unique in
the world in having a black market in its own literature.

At night, the Vietnamese flock to theaters through repeated power failures to
see exquisitely costumed actors recreate old plays in auditoriums that are
little better than stifling barns.

''We can be nationalistic, modern, realistic and romantic,'' said Mrs. Thanh,
who studied theater in the Soviet Union, as she guided a visitor around the
Youth Drama Group's rehearsal rooms. Her aims, she said, were ''to praise love
and life'' and to link a new generation of wartime children with their rich, but
forgotten past.

''The best things of Vietnam have been abandoned everywhere - not only in the
theater,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, AUGUST 10, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words




International    A2-11



The Iran-contra affair prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, said that ''high office,
well-intended policies or popular policies do not place anyone above the law.''
Mr. Walsh is expected to seek indictments later this year.

    Page A1



News analysis: The Latin peace plan signed by five Central American leaders
fails to address some difficult problems, but seems to offer a tentative
political opening that could take on a momentum of its own.    A1



The dispute over the contras' role in peace negotiations might be resolved by
having them represented by third parties, Jim Wright, the House Speaker, said.
The rebels have insisted that they be included in talks.    A7



South Africa's biggest legal strike began as the first of an estimated 200,000
black miners reportedly stopped work to support demands for higher wages.    A1

Violence in Haiti is so unrelenting that it has become doubtful whether the
country's first presidential elections in three decades can be held. They were
to have been held in less than four months.    A1



European travel by Americans is popular again. Many potential tourists were
frightened away last summer by fears of terrorism and the radioactive fallout
from the Chernobyl nuclear catastrophe. The Americans are back in much higher
numbers.    A1

Vietnam is in intellectual ferment. Artists are turning to expressionism,
playwrights to personal themes of relationships gone wrong. ''Our hearts are
dependent on the arts,'' one Vietnamese said.    A2



A 3-year-old truce in Colombia between the Government and the country's largest
leftist guerrilla movement is slowly breaking down. It was once held up as a
possible peace model for Central America.    A11

British bids for American companies totaled nearly $4 billion last week. Not
since the 19th century has there been such a visible wave of British investment
in America.    D1

Tamils halt arms surrender

    A2



Lost instruments and discord in Argentina

    A3



A Republican in U.S. and Ulster

    A3



Libyan planes hit Chad forces

    A3



Leningrad journal

    A4



Political inroads for West African women

    A8



Spirit of change reappears in Hungary

    A10



National    A12-17

Tougher academic standards in schools have been imposed and billions of dollars
have been spent in a spate of school reforms across the country. But there is no
proof that students are learning better.    A1



A Federal AIDS conference ended with complaints by blacks and Hispanic delegates
that minority community workers had been snubbed by the Government in the fight
against AIDS.    A1



News analysis: The S.E.C. proposal for a bill that would define insider trading
could lead to a legislative landmark that would strengthen the Government's hand
in prosecuting what are often complex cases, officials said.    D1



A deadline on an air quality standard to reduce ozone emissions will not be met
by about 70 cities, the Environmental Protection Agency believes. The agency
says it may ban construction of sources of ozone pollution in those cities that
will not meet the deadline.    A12

A Soviet trip for U.S. psychiatrists is quietly being planned. The American
Psychiatric Association is seeking to send a delegation there to examine people
the organization asserts are confined to mental hospitals for political reasons.

    A15



PAC contributions to U.S. senators have passed $1 million each for more than
half of the current senators in their Congressional careers, financial reports
show.    A17



A U.S. map based on news coverage of the 1984 Presidential primaries and
caucuses has been drawn by a political scientist. It shows New Hampshire 60
times as big as Alaska, Iowa dwarfing Texas, and most Western states scarcely
existing.    A17



Mesa Verde: Good fortune

    A12



Oratory, bratwurst and indecision

    A12



453 arrested in atom protests

    A12



Alcohol no solace in youth's deaths

    A13



Decomposed bodies found in Philadelphia

    A13



Washington Talk    A16



Summer, and the political operatives do not let up

Celebrity crusades lose appeal

Regional    B1-5



Mayor Koch left the hospital 72 hours after suffering a minor stroke, saying he
felt ''very, very good'' and thrusting his arms above his head in jubilation.
Doctors said they found him to be in ''excellent shape.''     A1



U.S. efforts to end the heroin flow from Southeast Asia have been expanded. The
''China White'' heroin is the lifeblood of the Chinese criminal organizations
that are taking control of the heroin industry in New York City.    B1



A Bronx school was ordered closed by the New York City Schools Chancellor
because it failed to improve its academic performance. He said that other
schools would be put on probation this fall.    B1



City property in Times Square appears to be the last in the area to be
redeveloped. Officials predict they can begin condemnation proceedings in the
fall, but they say there is no agreement on several elements of their plan.
B3

Sharks off East Hampton closed 15 miles of beaches this weekend. The sharks came
to feed on the remains of a 400-ton finback whale that washed ashore last week.
    B3



A controversy about a speedway in Riverhead, L.I., has broken out. The dispute
over noise, a simmering problem for two years, is another sign of how growth is
changing the character of eastern Long Island.    B1



A shelter for abused children will be closed by New York City, officials said.
Since it opened last year, the East Harlem Reception Center has been opposed
because it does not meet licensing requirements.    B3



A man was found bludgeoned to death in the Upper East Side apartment where he
had lived more than 30 years. The motive for the murder was unclear and there
were no arrests in the case, the police said.    B3



Teaching inmates to re-enter society

    B1



Man slain in restaurant

    B3


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

On Heroin Battlefield, Half a World Away in Asia

BYLINE: By PETER KERR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2145 words

DATELINE: CHIANG MAI, Thailand


The mountains at night appear like silhouettes in a Chinese brush painting - a
line of dragon humps and stone spikes occasionally capped by an odd clinging
cloud. They are the start of the China White Trail to New York.

And on some nights these mountains, criss-crossed by jungle paths, serve as a
moonlit battleground in a quiet war between Asia's largest heroin traffickers
and the men who try to stop them.

Here, where the borders of Thailand, Burma and Laos converge, the United States
has recently expanded its efforts to stop the flow of the ''China White''
heroin, the lifeblood of the international Chinese criminal organizations that
are fast taking control of the heroin industry in New York City.

In joint operations, United States drug agents and Thai police officers have
mounted an increasing number of surprise military raids against jungle heroin
laboratories, as well as attacks on armed heroin caravans and undercover sting
operations in nearby cities and towns.

The operations are aimed against drug trafficking armies that have controlled
this, the Golden Triangle region, for decades. As a result, the handful of
United States drug agents in northern Thailand play a highly unusual role here,
functioning partly as police men, partly as intelligence agents and partly as
soldiers.

The agents work with three special units of the Thai police totaling nearly 100
men. Their raids and arrests are often based on information gathered from
American-run networks of paid informers recruited from inside drug organizations
throughout the region.

At best, officials acknowledge, the operations can only hope to capture a small
fraction of the drugs produced in the Golden Triangle each year. Most of the
1,200 tons of opium produced yearly in the region is grown beyond the agents'
reach, inside Burma and Laos. And here in Thailand, honest officials must
struggle against a backdrop of widespread corruption among law-enforcement
officials.

Risky Operations

American diplomats in Bangkok at times have challenged the operations as risking
the lives of agents and Thai police officers with no hope of stopping the flow
of China White to the United States.

Even so, American drug officials here argue as a first step, it is an effort
worth making.

''The bad guys arrested here see more heroin in a day than a New York street
pusher sees in a lifetime,'' said Ben C. Yarbrough, the agent who heads the drug
agency's office in Chiang Mai, Thailand's second largest city. ''In the Bronx
you are scooping up an ounce of heroin here, a kilo there in dozens of different
investigations. Here we help the Thais to make seizures of pure heroin that
would each turn into hundreds of pounds in the states.'' A Jungle Night On the
Trail ''See that ridge,'' says Mr. Yarbrough, pointing to the line of mountains.
''Beyond that is Burma.''

The car comes to a halt at the end of a dirt road at the foot of a mountain. Two
American drug agents and a Thai police sergeant emerge in camouflage fatigues,
slap clips into their M-16 rifles and check their walkie-talkies. Already, sweat
soaks their undershirts and begins to wash away the layer of insect repellant on
their hands, necks and faces.

Tonight, the Thai police and American agents hope to stop a train of from 5 to
30 soldiers carrying heroin by trail from Burma. Seven border policemen are
already hidden in place at a pass four miles up into the mountains, with
automatic rifles, grenade launchers and rockets aimed at the sandy trail. The
American agents promised to join them before midnight.

The trail connects two towns straddling the mountains, one in Burma controlled
by the Shan United Army, a drug trafficking organization with more than 4,000
troops at its command. The other is a Thai market town where representatives of
some of the world's largest criminal organizations come to make their purchases.

After two hours of thrashing through brush that cuts cheeks and hands, the men
reach a clearing. At their feet the trail is dotted with fresh horse dung, a
sign that somebody recently passed.

''If anybody comes by, in either direction, we dive into the bushes and stay
quiet as we can,'' says Michael Bansmere, a 44-year-old agent who served with
American special forces in Vietnam. ''We just let them go by.''

Decision of Death

An agent's nightmare is to bump into a large group of armed traffickers by
mistake as they travel down a trail. Without the element of surprise on their
side, they are likely to be outgunned. And unlike a military operation, the
agents and Thai police usually have no helicopter and medical evacuation
services available.

The agents come to a halt and the Thai sergeant whistles a high-pitched bird
call. A moment later he and the Americans climb 20 yards up the hillside, where
the seven Thai police officers are hidden in the night black brush.

If the caravan passes, explains Major Bancherd Pongsiriwan, the border police
commander, his men will ignite a flare, bathing the valley in white light and
blinding the traffickers. At that point, he faces a split-second decision.

If his men fire immediately, the operation becomes a simple ambush: the suspects
have no chance to surrender. But if the major waits long enough for even one
suspect to fire his automatic rifle, the major says, it is likely that some his
men will be killed.

The major's dilemma is really a choice between the rules of law and the rules of
the jungles. In the United States, a Federal agent who shoots a suspect during
an arrest without giving him a chance to surrender knows he could face a murder
charge. In a war, any platoon commander who gives the enemy a chance to shoot
his men first is derelict in his duty. Which paradigm applies to law-enforcement
officials fighting armies of drug soldiers here?

''That's a decision that he's got to make alone,'' Mr. Yarbrough says.

Assault at Dawn

The further they travel into the jungle, Mr. Bansmere says, the more the
procedures of law enforcement give way to warfare. The risks are greatest, Mr.
Bansmere says, on the raids against laboratories that process the opium from
poppies into heroin. They are distant outposts protected by guard houses and
sometimes by soldiers in trenches.

On a raid last September, he recalls, 29 Thai police officers and 2 agents were
led for 18 hours through the mountains in heavy rain by an informer who knew
where the laboratory was situated. The informer's face was concealed in a black
bag sewn by Mr. Bansmere's wife. The informant did not want anyone to see his
face or know know his identity.

''It was totally black that night,'' Mr. Bansmere recalls. ''You'd take one step
forward in the mud and slide half a step back.''

When dawn broke, the group attacked the laboratory, first with the loud,
pounding explosions of two 3.5-millimeter rockets and then with gunfire. The
soldiers guarding the laboratory fired back AK-47 assault rifles for 10 minutes
and then retreated into the jungle.

They left behind the body of a dead chemist, another worker, and more than 40
pounds of morphine and 90 liters of liquid opium - products in the intermediate
stages of the production of heroin. The drugs could have eventually become
hundreds of pounds of heroin on the streets of Hong Kong, Amsterdam or New York.

Tonight, the policemen and American agents suddenly hear something up the trail.
Each man tenses, rechecks his weapon and focuses his aim on a spot 20 yards
below. At such moments, the heart beats so hard it hurts and sweat pours into an
undershirt until it clings tight and hot, as if the chest is wrapped in a
steaming towel. Everyone is silent.

But the minutes pass and the snake-like line of flashlights that they ex pected
to wend down the mountainside does not appear. After sitting on the trail for
hours more, it becomes clear the traffickers will not move their load.

At 4 A.M. the men begin an hour-long climb over a mountain side to a camouflaged
truck where they breakfast on cold water and chunks of fresh pineapple in the
gray dawn light.

''We'll be back again,'' Major Banshere says. ''We will meet them another
night.'' At the Heart Of Operations A few days after the night in the jungle,
Mr. Yarbrough was driving the narrow streets of Chiang Mai. As always he
followed a slightly different route to the agency office. Every few seconds his
eyes darted to the rear view mirror to make sure no one was following.

His caution was more than perfunctory. In 1980, a drug agent's wife was shopping
on a Chiang Mai street when she was kidnapped and shot to death. More than once
in recent years the families of agents have been evacuated after informants
reported that angry drug dealers were planning another act of retribution.

Once inside a heavy metal gate, Mr. Yarbrough walked past a weight-training
room, a vault where weapons are stored and a wall of photographs of Thai police
officers in camouflage fatigues, of prisoners and bags of seized heroin.

Waiting in his office was a Thai police captain, eager to discuss the last stage
of an investigation that, he said, should result in the seizure of heroin with a
New York street value of $41 million.

''Ben, the deal's going to go,'' said Captain Ouyporn Chintaganont, commander of
a Thai police unit that specializes in undercover operations.

Law-enforcement officials in New York see a special connection to the operations
in Chiang Mai, where four American agents and an intelligence analyst are
stationed. Increasingly, Chinese trafficking groups based in Bangkok, Hong Kong
and New York have taken over the New York heroin market. They come here, to the
mountains of the Golden Triangle, to buy their product.

The Heroin Armies

Their suppliers are the drug trafficking armies based in sections of Burma where
the Rangoon government has never held control.

The trafficking groups, in fact, are the armed forces of Burmese warlords,
ethnic independence movements, Burmese Communist rebels and Nationalist Chinese
generals who retreated from Southern China after the 1949 Communist revolution.
Working in ever-shifting coalitions, groups with up to several thousand armed
troops buy opium from hill tribe farmers and process it into fluffy, 97 percent
pure heroin in bamboo and thatched roof laboratories along the border.

Often they meet buyers from around the world in the small border towns at the
base of the mountains.

As part of the increased attack on the traffickers over the last two years the
Thai border police working with the American agents in Chiang Mai have raided 14
laboratories inside Thailand, killing 9 and arresting 14 soldiers and chemists,
and capturing more than 2,000 pounds of heroin, opium and morphine.

To support the operations, the Defense Department this summer sent a 15-member
Army special forces team to Chiang Mai for six weeks to train the border police,
according to Rolland Hughes, the drug agency's attache in Bangkok. As a result
of Congressional action last year, the drug agents now are permitted to carry
M-16 rifles for self-defense on such operations.

Diplomats and Tension

The new aggressiveness of drug agents and Thai police in northern Thailand has
disturbed some State Department officials in Bangkok, who at first opposed the
training and improved arms for the operations. They argued that armed operations
could only have a limited effect on the heroin traffic, while risking the lives
of the American advisers.

Such a tension often exists between State Department officials in embassies
around the world, and some of the more than 200 drug agents overseas who prefer
to pursue more aggressive and, some diplomats say, less cautious approaches to
the drug problem.

According to Ann B. Wrobleski, the assistant secretary of state for narcotics
matters in Washington, the United States in the past has emphasized eradicating
the opium crop in Thailand. Since most of the crop is grown in Burma and Laos
and only transported through Thailand, she said she agrees with the Drug
Enforcement Administration on the need for increased enforcement operations.

Nonetheless, she said, the State Department has some uneasiness about the
operations.

''They are not there to kick down doors and arrest people on their own,'' Ms.
Wrobleski said. ''D.E.A. is in a liaison mode. They are there to provide
technical assistance. They are there at the pleasure of the host government and
we have to make sure they do not act without their Thai counterparts.''

As such policy discussions continued between drug agents and diplomats, a tip
came from Hong Kong that a group of international heroin dealers recently sent
word that they needed a courier to bring a load of heroin from Bangkok to New
York.

A drug agent, working undercover, got the job.

NEXT: Tracking the Chinese connection on the streets of New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: China White Trail: The New Heroin Connection
Second of Three Articles

GRAPHIC: Photos of police officers apprehending a suspected drug dealer in Fang,
Thailand (NYT/Peter Kerr); Photo of portion of nine pounts of heroin confiscated
during sweep of Fang, Thailand (Page B2) (NYT/Peter Kerr); Map of Southeast Asia
highlighting 'Golden Triangle' area

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 11, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. REPORTS FIRING ON IRANIAN PLANE OVER PERSIAN GULF;
TWO MISSILES MISS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 10


A United States Navy fighter plane fired two missiles at an Iranian plane above
the Persian Gulf over the weekend, but the Iranian aircraft was not hit, Reagan
Administration officials said tonight.

The officials said a Navy patrol plane was approached by an Iranian fighter,
prompting F-14 Tomcat fighters to be dispatched from the aircraft carrier
Constellation in the Gulf of Oman. One Tomcat fired two missiles at the Iranian.
The precise location of the incident was not clear.

Reluctance to Discuss Incident

The incident occurred as United States Navy vessels escorting Kuwaiti tankers
that are flying American flags left the western end of the Strait of Hormuz on
Saturday, officials said. The convoy is the second since the United States began
providing such escorts last month.

Administration officials were reluctant to discuss the incident. Spokesmen for
the Defense Department said they would neither confirm nor deny the reports.

In his scheduled briefing this morning, the Pentagon's chief spokesman, Robert
B. Sims, announced that ''Iranian aircraft conducted surveillance'' of the
escort transit group, and an Iranian frigate was seen in the area.

War Powers Act an Issue

Asked whether ''these surveillance aircraft were intercepted,'' Mr. Sims
replied, ''I don't have anything for you on the details of the transit of the
strait.''

Mr. Sims, pressed by reporters on why secrecy was being maintained after the
fact on operations in the gulf, was reminded that the Administration had sought
to avoid having the War Powers Act invoked. The act would require the President
to withdraw American forces from a hostile area within 60 days, unless Congress
agreed they could stay.

Mr. Sims replied: ''We're not attempting to provoke hostile action. We are
merely defending those ships as they go through international waters to deliver
the commerce of the region.'' Administration officials said a Navy P-3 Orion, a
four-engine, propeller-driven radar aircraft usually used to track submarines,
had been flying a patrol to help escort the tankers being convoyed by American
warships.

During the flight, the P-3 was approached by an Iranian F-4, a type of
fighter-bomber built by McDonnell Douglas during the Vietnam War and sold to
Iran during that era.

The officials said the Iranian pilot was warned, presumably over a guard channel
that all pilots are supposed to monitor when in international air space, to stay
away from the American patrol plane. In the past, Iranian pilots have heeded
such warnings, the officials said.

In this case, however, the Iranian pilot continued to approach the patrol plane.
Thereupon, the F-14 pilot launched two Sparrow air-to-air missiles. The Iranian
veered sharply away, causing the missiles to miss, the officials said.

After an Iraqi jet plane hit the United States Navy frigate Stark in May,
killing 37 sailors, there was a redefinition of the rules of engagement that
tell American ship captains and pilots when they can shoot.

Defense Department officials said at that time that any aircraft or ship that
moved toward an American plane or ship in a hostile manner would be subject to
attack.

Until now, most of the attention on threats to the tankers and their Navy
escorts has been on mines, with some concern for the small, fast boats manned by
Iran's Revolutionary Guards, who might stage suicide attacks on the ships. The
incident over the weekend appears to have expanded that concern to include
threats from the air.

Mr. Sims said today that Rear Adm. Harold J. Bernsen, the commander of the
Navy's flotilla in the gulf, had been given great flexibility in scheduling the
convoys and assigning ships to protect Kuwaiti oil vessels.

For example, Admiral Bernsen chose to move through the Strait of Hormuz over the
weekend when some news organizations were reporting that the voyage would be
delayed. At the time, Iran had just concluded highly publicized naval maneuvers.

The Pentagon disclosed today that the guided missile cruiser Valley Forge,
equipped with the advanced Aegis radar defense and guidance system, accompanied
the convoy through the strait, along which Iran has built launching sites for
Silkworm antiship missiles.

It was the first time that a cruiser with an Aegis system had been used in the
gulf operations. The Valley Forge has since left the gulf and rejoined a group
of ships centered on the aircraft carrier Constellation outside the gulf in the
Arabian Sea.

No Details Disclosed

Mr. Sims refused to discuss operational details relating to the convoy that is
under way and urged news organizations to refrain from reporting too many
details of the operation.

Unlike the first convoy to move north through the gulf in July, this group of
ships has no reporters on board.

It was not clear why the Reagan Administration declined to provide information
about the incident.

A possible explanation was bureaucratic rigidity. Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger issued a stern memorandum last Wednesday ordering all officials of
the Defense Department not to discuss operational matters, borrowing a World War
II maxim: ''Loose lips sink ships.''

Encounter Over the Persian Gulf



The F-14 Tomcat

The American fighter has been a mainstay of the U.S. Navy's air arm for more
than a decade. It was designed as the primary air defense for a carrier task
force and to clear contested airspace of enemy aircraft.

Armament: Sparrow, Phoenix and Sidewinder air-to-air missiles. Also has
20-millimeter cannon.

Equipment: Electronic countermeasures to foil enemy radar. Radio jamming
equipment. Reconnaissance cameras.

Crew: Two.

Length: 63 feet.

Wingspan: Ranging from 33 to 64 feet with variable-sweep wings.

Cruising speed: 460-575 miles per hour (maximum speed of over Mach 2).

Range: 2,000 miles with external fuel tanks.



The F-4 Phantom

The Iranian plane, a twin-engine multipurpose fighter widely used by the U.S.
Air Force, the U.S. Navy, the Marine Corps, and by the armed forces of Britain,
West Germany, Iran and Israel. An all-weather fighter interceptor and
ground-attack and aircraft, it was used extensively in combat in Vietnam and the
Middle East.

Armament: Sparrow, Sidewinder, or Shrike missiles, or 16,000 pounds of bombs.

Equipment: Electronic navigation computers and electronic countermeasures.

Crew: Two.

Length: 58 feet.

Wingspan: 38 feet.

Cruising speed: 580 miles per hour (maximum speed of over Mach 2).

Range: 700 miles(combat version)



The P-3 Orion

The reconnaissance plane is an advanced search and warning aircraft with highly
computerized operations, infrared detectors and acoustic sensors. Has special
submarine sensing abilities.

Armament: Can carry mines, bombs, rockets or torpedoes.

Equipment: Extensive electronic equipment: digital computers, sonar, infrared
and acoustic sensors.

Crew: Normally 10, can vary according to mission.

Length: 117 feet.

Wingspan: 100 feet.

Patrol Speed: 237 miles an hour.

Range: 1,550 miles, with 3 hours on station.



Source: Jane's All the World's Aircraft

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows areas of Iraq's alleged attack on oil sites, Kuwaiti tankers
being escorted by American vessels, U.S. Navy attack on Iranian plane, and
striking of American-owned, Panamanian-registerd supertanker (NYT); Drawings
illustrate the types of aircraft involved in the Persian Gulf encounter (Source:
Jane's All the World's Aircraft) (Pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 11, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Says It Keeps No Live Americans Missing in the War

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 457 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 10


A Presidential envoy who visited Hanoi last week said today that Vietnam
insisted it did not have control over any living Americans missing in action
from the war.

Nevertheless, the envoy said, Hanoi suggested the possibility that there might
be some in Southeast Asia, and the United States and Vietnam agreed that Hanoi
would step up its effort to find missing Americans or their remains.

The envoy, John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general and former chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, said he would not speculate on whether there are
Americans being held involuntarily in Vietnam.

''There are certainly all sorts of evidence to show that some might be there,
but yet it has been a long time since the end of the war,'' General Vessey said.

He said that while the Vietnamese insisted that ''there are no live American
prisoners under the control of the Vietnamese Government,'' they ''acknowledged
that there are some wild parts of their country.''

''The suggestion is that it is possible for there to be live Americans in
Southeast Asia, not under the control of the Vietnamese Government,'' he said.
''That is the inference that I draw. They did not say that.'' Three Days of
Talks He talked with reporters at the White House after briefing President
Reagan on his three days of talks in Hanoi with Vietnamese officials on the
issue of Americans missing in Vietnam. He was appointed President Reagan's
special envoy on the matter last January.

He said the United States and Vietnam agreed that Hanoi would speed its efforts
to find missing Americans or their remains, and that Washington would send
experts to Hanoi to look into ''humanitarian concerns that the Vietnamese
have,'' such as war orphans and people incapacitated by the fighting.

''We agreed that we would address these as humanitarian concerns and not link
them to broader political issues, such as normalization of diplomatic relations,
resumption of trade or economic aid,'' he said.

More meetings will be held in Hanoi at the end of the month on the issue of the
missing and the humanitarian issues, he said.

There are 2,413 Americans missing in action in Indochina, 1,776 of them in
Vietnam.

General Vessey said Vietnam had agreed to pursue 220 cases involving missing
Americans, including 70 cases on which the United States has compelling evidence
that an American was alive after being reported missing.

''We have people who were seen parachuting close to their forces, most probably
captured,'' he said. ''Those men did not return, nor have their remains been
returned.'' In another case, a picture of a wounded American was published
during the war in a Vietnamese newspaper, yet he did not return and his remains
have not been recovered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 12, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Guns in August

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


One of the largest buildups of American forces since the Vietnam War is now
assembling in and around the Persian Gulf. Given Iran's threats and
unpredictability, attacks on the force are far from unlikely. More mines have
been found and a United States fighter plane recently had to fire missiles to
ward off Iranian aircraft. Secretary of Defense Weinberger yesterday reiterated
hair-trigger but necessary rules for dealing with threats.

The gulf is a flashpoint, where many countries' vital interests intersect.
There's no telling where more shooting might lead. Yet President Reagan still
ignores the War Powers Act, which requires him to report to Congress within two
days of introducing forces into situations where hostilities may be imminent.

That's a serious error that Congress needs to insist be quickly repaired.
Invoking the act will at last compel Mr. Reagan to spell out his strategy in the
gulf. If he can now present a plausible policy for countering Iran and
protecting the considerable American interests in the area, there's every reason
to believe Congress would go along.

Representative Robert Torricelli of New Jersey gives the best reasons for
invoking the act: ''What we are trying to do is assure that if we're going to be
there, that it's done right. This isn't Ronald Reagan's policy; it's an American
policy.''


Presidents hate to submit the report required by the War Powers Act because it
sets off a 60-day clock. When the time runs out, the forces must be withdrawn
unless Congress declares war or specifically authorizes an extension. The
Administration argues that the law may unconstitutionally limit the President's
authority. But that interpretation has not been tested in the courts. Until it
is, the law is the law.

The Administration recognized this when it gave formal warning to Congress of
the raid on Libya last year, three hours before the bombing started. The
situation in the gulf now is far more dangerous.

Far from being paralyzed by fear that the act might limit his authority, Mr.
Reagan needs to recognize its potential benefits. First would be the act's
requirement that he explain his Persian Gulf strategy in terms that persuade
Congress. Mr. Reagan can then cite his need for Congressional support as he
seeks greater help from reluctant partners like Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Congress's explicit backing and the support of the gulf states would be of
immense aid in facing down Teheran.

The White House may despise the War Powers Act, passed in the shadow of the
Vietnam War in 1973. But the act can be used in positive ways. Congress under
the Constitution has the sole power to declare war, yet it has done so only five
times, the last being World War II. The War Powers Act is intended to protect
Congress against being dragged into a war unconsulted, and to allow the United
States to face crises with unity.

The situation in the Persian Gulf calls out for an American policy that has the
support of Congress. But what if that support is not forthcoming? Could not
Congress use the War Powers Act to compel American withdrawal from the gulf,
leaving a vacuum of power in which Iran can intimidate the gulf states or into
which the Soviet Union could rush as their protector? If the Administration
cannot persuade Congress to resist so obviously dangerous a course, it doesn't
have a strategy worth defending.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 12, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PUBLIC AFFAIRS LOBBYING;
Tips by Messrs. Inside and Outside

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


Over two decades, Michael Pertschuk, as a well-placed Congressional staff member
and then as the chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, became known as a
Washington insider who helped set agendas and make policy.

Over the same years, David Cohen worked on the outside, at one time serving as
president of Common Cause and becoming known as the dean of public affairs
lobbying here by helping set agendas and influence policy.

Now they are co-directors of the Advocacy Institute, a nonprofit group they
established three years ago to train public affairs lobbyists and advocacy
groups in ''how to work the system,'' Mr. Cohen said, ''how to bend it.''

The reception room of their warren of tiny offices on M Street in the northwest
quadrant of the capital is dominated by a wooden sign that reads: ''Washington's
Headquarters for Magic, Tricks, Jokes - Fireworks.'' It serves as a fitting
introduction to the rumpled and energetic team of Pertschuk and Cohen.

Mr. Cohen, who helped organize the coalition effort in 1984 that defeated a
proposal for financing the MX missile, says successful lobbying is a matter of
both tactics and long-range strategies.

They are currently working with diverse groups that need to develop strategies
for placing arms control on the political agenda of 1988 and the legislative
agenda of 1989. The care and feeding of coalitions, they point out, is essential
when it comes to public affairs lobbying.

In waging any political or lobbying battle, they add, it is critical to seize
the symbols of the debate. Corporations would do well to seize the moral high
ground early on and not appear too powerful or greedy, they say.

''The House especially responds to symbols,'' Mr. Pertschuk said. ''It is a very
human institution, it responds to moods and symbols as much as it does to
logic.''

He cited the issue of continued aid to the Nicaraguan contras.

''If anti-Soviet-defending-the-hemisphere-against-Communist-aggression is the
transcendent symbol, it is likely to pass,'' he said. ''If Vietnam, a symbol
that represents overcommitment and painful involvement in foreign adventures, is
the transcendent symbol, then contra aid will face difficulties.''

Labels and symbols and the ways in which people react to them is also discussed
in a research paper prepared by the institute for groups fighting the nomination
of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court.

Pick a Label

''The White House wasted no time in wrapping Bork in positive symbols,'' the
study says. It suggests a counter-attack using labels ''that would help convey
Bork's extreme ideological activism such as: bureaucrat absolutist, executive
imperialist, judicial extremist, constitutional rights no-man, enemy of the Bill
of Rights, right-wing ideologue.''

Mr. Pertschuk, who wrote a book, ''Giant Killers,'' that celebrates some public
affairs lobbying victories, says it is critical for lobbyists to gain grassroots
support and the attention of the press. ''What public interest groups do best is
to inject demands into the system,'' he said. ''You use the grass roots to flog
the media.''

Both men speak of the virtue of ''hanging out'' in Congress, of picking up bits
of intelligence, of the power of ''moral suasion.'' All lobbyists, they say,
must understand the social psychology of Congress and keep tabs on the political
and behavorial profiles of its members. ''That means listening as well as
petitioning and persuading,'' Mr. Cohen said. ''A good lobbyist listens all the
time, for signals, for code words, for clues.''

There is a time for militancy, he says, but also a time for compromise. It is
the premature itch for a vote or compromise that must be avoided.

''Even within the framework of something you are advocating,'' Mr. Cohen said,
''there is room for difference and room for finding different ways to get to the
same place.''

In three years the Advocacy Institute has counseled, free of charge, 50 citizen
groups and lobbyists. The two men and their staff of six do no personal lobbying
''but we are very active third base coaches,'' Mr. Pertschuk said. They also
coordinate the efforts of 200 lobbyists from private industry who volunteer
their services for public-spirited causes.

The institute's $600,000 annual budget is largely supported through foundation
grants and private contributions. A fund-raising brochure suggests that
''flourishing former white hats'' should be able to make a $5,000 contribution,
while ''upwardly mobile lobbyists & lawyers'' are expected to give only $100.

With their experience, Mr. Pertschuk and Mr. Cohen might just as well be
collecting enormous sums by selling their expertise to law firms, corporate
clients and foreign governments. So why aren't they?

''Because this is more fun,'' Mr. Pertschuk said.

''There is a career to be made out of the craft of lobbying for things you
believe in,'' he added. ''You may lag behind your contemporaries in BMW's, if
not Cuisinarts, but it really is worth it - there is a great joy in the
effort.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael Pertschuk and David Cohen (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 12, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-Nurse Leading Veterans' Body Recalls Her War

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


Almost 15 years after she returned from duty as an Army nurse in Vietnam, Mary
R. Stout began to relive the war.

That was 1981, and Ms. Stout was living with her three daughters in her
hometown, Columbus, Ohio. Her husband, a major in the Army, had just left for a
year's tour in Korea.

''Here I was, alone,'' Ms. Stout recalled. ''I was faced with full
responsibility for a house, a car, kids - and all I could think about was
Vietnam.'' It was that year of grappling with buried emotions that led her to
join the Columbus chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America.

Six years later, on Aug. 2, Ms. Stout, now 43 years old and living in Arlington,
Va., was elected president of the group.

In an hour-long interview in her office Monday, she recalled that at the first
meeting she attended in Columbus people looked at her and said, ''We know what
you're going through.''

Feeling 'Like an Alien'

The other veterans understood what it was to come back from Vietnam and feel
''like an alien,'' she said. They understood why, after all the years, the
horror of the war and the shock of homecoming had returned to haunt her.

A Veterans Administration spokesman described Ms. Stout as the first woman to be
president of a major national veterans' group. As such, she is an advocate of
not only the nine million veterans of the Vietnam War but also a small and
largely unrecognized subgroup: the 216,000 women who served there, as nurses and
administrators, as clerical workers, cryptographers, air traffic controllers and
in other service positions.

Ms. Stout said she hoped that as head of the group she would be able to help
other Vietnam veterans learn that someone cares about them. She also hopes she
will be able to resolve some of the issues still outstanding after the war,
which ended 12 years ago.

Ms. Stout said these include fighting to save the Vet Center, a
Government-sponsored program of counseling and other services for Vietnam
veterans; lobbying to enable veterans to go to court to protest Veterans
Administration decisions, and pressing for better health and disability
benefits. #300 Members Are Women ''The American public really hasn't become
involved in Vietnam veterans' issues,'' she said, adding that her organization,
founded in 1979, had received little support from more established veterans'
groups. With 35,000 members, just 300 of them women, it is still relatively
small, but it is the only Congressionally chartered organization for Vietnam
veterans.

Speaking quietly, Ms. Stout said it was often more difficult for women than for
men to return home after Vietnam.

She said that many men tended to play down women's efforts in the war. ''When
guys talked about Vietnam, it was all trading combat stories,'' she said. ''They
had a difficult time dealing with people they'd lost, and they'd associate the
loss with the people who took care of the patients.''

Ms. Stout left the Army when she returned from the war after serving in 1966 and
1967 at a mobile surgical hospital at An Khe and Chu Lai. She married Carl
Stout, whom she met several years earlier at Fort Ord in California. He had also
served in Vietnam.

''He had been commissioned shortly after I was,'' she said, ''so I out-ranked
him by six weeks.''

They Changed the Subject

Her husband remained in the service, and for the next 15 years or so the couple
moved from base to base as his job required. ''Most people didn't know I was a
veteran,'' she said. ''Carl would say, 'Mary was there, too,' and even his
military friends would look at him, say 'Oh,' and change the subject.''

Ms. Stout never went back to nursing, instead becoming involved in community
service projects, including counseling, teaching and working with children. The
couple have three daughters, one 19 years old and the others 18-year-old twins.

After serving as executive director of the Ohio State Council of the Vietnam
Veterans of America, Ms. Stout was appointed membership director for the
national organization in 1983 and was elected national secretary in 1985.

She sees her election as a lift for all Vietnam veterans and especially for the
women. ''Traditional veterans' organizations haven't included women,'' she said.
''The fact that I am visible, I hope, will help other women recognize that they
are veterans, too, and that there are organizations that want very much to have
them join.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mary R. Stout (The New York Times/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
NEW HEAD OF U.S. BAR ASSOCIATION: ROBERT MacCRATE

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 12


Robert MacCrate, who took over as president of the American Bar Association
today, began his one-year term with rave reviews - not for his professionalism
or his dedication to public service, but for his singing.

Mr. MacCrate, a tall, courtly senior partner in the Wall Street firm of Sullivan
& Cromwell, had knocked them dead at the annual dinner-dance Tuesday night with
a hilarious parody of ''Joe Porter's Song'' from the Gilbert and Sullivan
operetta ''H.M.S. Pinafore.''

Accompanied by a professional pianist and backed up by four members of the
A.B.A.'s staff, Mr. MacCrate, a high baritone, told the story of his life
through song: from his youth in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn to the head
of the 330,000-member bar association.

''He's actually very good,'' said Benjamin Fields, an A.B.A. staff member who
sang backup for Mr. MacCrate. Mr. Fields's critique carries weight. Back in
Chicago, where the association has its headquarters, Mr. Fields sings with the
Chicago Symphony Orchestra Chorus.

''Whatever happened to the image of the stuffed-shirt Wall Street lawyer?''
Eugene C. Thomas of Boise, Idaho, the association's outgoing president, asked
good naturedly.

Mr. MacCrate, a longtime leader of the law profession at the local, state and
national levels, is described by friends and colleagues as a master at fostering
good feelings, even among those who might disagree with him on particular
issues.

''He's a consensus builder,'' Dr. M. L. Henry Jr., executive director of the
Fund for Modern Courts, said of Mr. MacCrate, who was chairman of the New York
organization from 1978 to 1986. ''He has an ability to sit there at a meeting
where people have very, very strong views, and find some way of bringing them
together in a way I have never seen before.''

His stint as head of the bar association will not be Mr. MacCrate's first time
on the national stage. From December 1969 through March 1970, he served as
special civilian counsel to the Army in its inquiry into the killings of
hundreds of civilians at Mylai, South Vietnam, in 1968.

Although charges filed against Army officers implicated in the killings were
later dropped for the most part, over the objection of Mr. MacCrate, he said he
still believed that some good came out of the investigation, including
''constructive reforms'' within the Army. ''It is imperative that we do explore
such matters and try to learn from them,'' he said.

Father Served in Congress

Mr. MacCrate was born into a Methodist family on July 18, 1921, the son of John
MacCrate and the former Flora MacNicholl. The senior Mr. MacCrate was a Scottish
immigrant who rose from a storefront lawyer in Brooklyn to become a member of
Congress and, for 35 years, as a justice of the New York Supreme Court.

The younger Mr. MacCrate was educated at Brooklyn Friends School and Haverford
College in Pennsylvania and served in the Navy in World War II. He joined
Sullivan & Cromwell after graduating from Harvard Law School in 1948, and has
remained with the firm since then, except for two brief stints in government.

Mr. MacCrate left the firm in 1951 to serve as legal secretary to Presiding
Justice David W. Peck of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in
Manhattan. Mr. MacCrate also served, from 1959 through 1962, as general counsel
to Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller, and was widely regarded as the Governor's chief
assistant in drafting bills and shepherding them through the Legislature.

Mr. MacCrate's law firm has been in the news recently for allegations of
unethical conduct in two New York probate cases and for violating Federal
securities law. In each instance, the firm has denied any wrongdoing.

'Tremendous Pride' in Firm

''I do not think the episodes that have recently received attention are at all
reflective of the true ethic of the firm,'' Mr. MacCrate said. ''I have
tremendous pride in the organization.''

He also expressed a similar pride in his family. He has been married for 41
years to the former Constance Trapp of Laconia, N.H. The MacCrates, who live in
Plandome, L.I., have three children and three grandchildren.

Charles E. Heming, the immediate past president of the New York State Bar
Association, marveled that Mr. MacCrate has been able to maintain a law
practice, take on civic responsibilities and accept increasingly demanding
assignments in the state and national bar organizations.

Mr. MacCrate says he firmly believes that a lawyer has an obligation to serve
the public, a theme he intends to stress in the upcoming year.

He said in an interview that he would also use his term as president of the
A.B.A. to promote efforts that benefit the profession and that further the
independence of the judiciary, including efforts to assure that Federal judges
are adequately compensated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert MacCrate

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCHOOLS AND ETHICS: MORE THAN JUST TEACHING;
No Bottom-Line Factor

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


To the Editor:

John Shad's article on business ethics helps explain why that phrase has become
almost an oxymoron. His message to business school students is equally clear and
wrong: ''In sum, ethics pays; it's smart (i.e., good business) to be ethical.''

Reducing ethics to a strategy for achieving profit has the crippling effect of
devaluating morality into expediency - the belief that whatever ''works for
you'' is good. Suppose crime did pay (even a bumbler who gets himself caught
like Ivan Boesky hasn't exactly suffered). Would Mr. Shad then preach a doctrine
of crime for the bottom line? Presumably not, but this is what his ''ethical
system'' calls for.

Markets are more or less morally neutral to their participants. For every
instance in which they reward integrity (this probably occurs more at the local
level than as a corporate phenomenon) there are strong countervailing pressures
to produce ''bottom-line results,'' regardless of the means employed to achieve
them. Business people who do not bring virtues like good judgment, courage and
honesty into the fray are not going to feel pressure to be ethical from the
marketplace.

Thus, when Mr. Shad rounds up the usual suspects behind the moral decline of our
youth - family disintegration, Vietnam, television, permissiveness and affluence
- he should be reminded that the last of these is the most prevalent and,
potentially, the most threatening. Capitalism reproduces itself when its adults
instill in their juniors a belief in the importance of seeking goals that
involve profit-making activity. Those adults who do so while advocating
expedience in place of substantive morality can count themselves among the
greatest contributors to any moral flabbiness in our young professionals.

JOHN GOLDBERG
Princeton, N.J., July 29, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE FLOW INTO HONG KONG

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 830 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Aug. 13


Thousands of Vietnamese who had settled in China over the last decade are
flooding into Hong Kong, straining the territory's capacity to handle them and
raising concerns about China's role in the exodus.

Rickety boats filled with Vietnamese began to arrive in mid-July, and the
numbers keep swelling, the Government said.

A total of 334 people on nine boats arrived today, after 691 people on Wednesday
and 596 people on Tuesday. In all, about 6,000 Vietnamese have arrived from
China in the last six weeks, compared with fewer than 100 in the first half of
the year.

Local officials discount suggestions by the Beijing representative of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees that as many as 50,000 more boat people
may be coming. But they say they have no way of knowing when the wave of
arrivals will diminish.

Although the latest arrivals are regarded as Vietnamese, most are ethnic Chinese
and speak Chinese as their first language. They left Vietnam over the last 10
years and went to China, the land their ancestors had left a few generations
earlier.

Fears Over the Journey

The boat journey to Hong Kong does not involve the perils, including piracy,
that many refugees have faced in fleeing Vietnam. But many of the boats are
overloaded, raising fears that they might not be able to survive a storm.

''They're in big trouble if they get stuck in a typhoon,'' said Robert L. Wing,
refugee officer at the United States Consulate in Hong Kong. ''They're sailing
in flimsy boats. People have died before in rough seas, and it could happen
again.''

The Hong Kong Government refuses to allow anyone to interview the new arrivals,
so it is difficult to determine why they are suddenly leaving China.

But a senior Hong Kong official, speaking to reporters today, cited two reasons
that he said had been mentioned by some refugees.

First, he said, a Voice of America broadcast in late June, reasserting America's
willingness to absorb some refugees, might have been misconstrued as an
invitation. In addition, he said, some refugees had mentioned rumors circulating
among the Vietnamese communities in China that an amnesty was imminent in Hong
Kong for boat people.

China's Role is Key

Daniel Sreebny, information officer of the United States Consulate in Hong Kong,
said that the consulate had reviewed transcripts of the broadcast and that it
did not believe the broadcast could have caused the exodus.

A key question in the affair concerns China's role. Chinese officials have so
far have not met with Hong Kong representatives to discuss the exodus, although
consultations are expected soon.

The Hong Kong official said today that he had no evidence that China was
encouraging the Vietnamese to leave, but he suggested China perhaps could do
more to stop the flow. He said China had stopped some boats from departing, but
most diplomats and analysts here say they believe officials in China are doing
little or nothing to prevent people from leaving.

Reporters today managed to call out questions to some Vietnamese shortly after
they landed here. The boat people said in reply that Communist Party cadres in
China knew they were leaving and had not tried to stop them.

Many of the Vietnamese seemed not to have assimilated well in China. Most of
them, even former city dwellers, had been assigned to work on large farms in
China, and their unhappiness apparently was an underlying reason for their
departure. Some analysts say they believe local Chinese officials may have been
happy to see them go because of the failure to assimilate.

China Is Slow to Respond

Hong Kong does not regard the latest arrivals as refugees because they have
settled in China over the last decade. Officials describe these Vietnamese as
illegal immigrants and say they will be returned to China like the scores of
Chinese who daily try to sneak across the border from China to Hong Kong.

Illegal immigrants caught sneaking across the border are usually returned within
24 to 48 hours. The Vietnamese immigrants are in detention camps in Hong Kong,
and one foreign diplomat in Hong Kong warned that it might be months before
China agreed to take them back. Before doing so in the past, China has conducted
a lengthy investigation to determine whether they really came from China.

Hong Kong officials seem irked that China had not responded more quickly to
requests for meetings to discuss the problem. Hong Kong would like China to do
what it can to quell any rumors of an amnesty in the territory, as well as help
in arranging the prompt repatriation of the Vietnamese.

Although Hong Kong says it intends to return the latest arrivals to China, it
continues to accept those coming directly from Vietnam. Those Vietnamese are now
kept in camps, often for years, until a home can be found for them abroad.

Some 8,500 Vietnamese refugees are now in camps in Hong Kong, including 3,500
who have been waiting for more than five years for a new home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo shows members of a Vietnamese refugee family in Hong Kong.
(Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 15, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Sandspit Journal;
With Logging Banned, The Logger Is Mourned

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: SANDSPIT, British Columbia


Frank Beban was a big man in this little town, physically and otherwise, and he
might have chuckled if he had known how his death brought a measure of concord,
at least about Mr. Beban, among people who had agreed on little else in years.

Mr. Beban, who was 47 years old, was the leading businessman in this community,
the owner of the local hotel and a helicopter tour company.

But above all he was a logger. And it was as the employer of a crew of 70 or 80
fallers, men skilled in reducing forests to tangled acres of stumps, that he
became a central figure in one of the most bitter controversies to strike the
Queen Charlotte Islands, off Canada's northwest coast, since white men began
settling here in the early 1900's.

The controversy was resolved, for all practical purposes, when the Canadian
Government and the provincial government of British Columbia announced in July
that the lower half of the islands, an archipelago that stretches 125 miles
south of Sandspit, are to be turned into Canada's newest national park.

Died at Logging Camp

The decision means there will be no more logging of mountainsides clad with some
of the finest examples of first-growth rain forest remaining in North America.

The park decision was a defeat for Mr. Beban, who had campaigned hard for the
jobs of his men and for victory in a fight he depicted as crucial to the timber
industry that underpins British Columbia's economy.

But immediately after the park decision was announced, he set out to dismantle
his $2 million logging camp on Lyell Island, within the proposed park. It was
there, on a Sunday night after a heavy day's work, that he had a heart attack
and died.

Obituaries appeared in newspapers across Canada. But it was here, where families
gave up talking to each other because of the logging dispute, and where brawls
over the issue had been known to break out at the bar in Mr. Beban's Sandspit
Inn, that his death was most felt.

Even those who had battled him hardest, notably Haida Indians whose forebears
inhabited the islands for thousands of years, spoke well of their adversary.

''He was an honorable man,'' said Ernie Collison, a Haida leader. ''We are a
people protecting our heritage, and he was a man fighting for his livelihood and
his workers' jobs.''

Colin Richardson, one of the younger generation of Haidas who see the
establishment of the park as a first step toward the ultimate goal of retrieving
the tribe's title to the islands, recalled being arrested by the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police in 1985, along with dozens of other Haidas, for blocking a road
in an effort to halt logging on Lyell Island.

But he said he felt no bitterness toward Mr. Beban personally, nor toward those
who had worked with him in the fight against the park.

''Now that the trees have stopped falling, it's a new situation,'' Mr.
Richardson said as he sat at his desk in a Haida longhouse, or meeting place, in
the community of Queen Charlotte, across the bay from Sandspit. Mr. Richardson
is the coordinator of the Haida Gwaai Watchmen, an organization trying to
develop Haida interests in tourism and other businesses.

''We realize that we have friends here among those who are not Haidas, and we
want them to remain friends,'' he said.

'Hippie Tour Operators'

The mood has not always been conciliatory. Not long before Mr. Beban died, an
editorial in The Redneck News, a weekly published in Sandspit that was backed by
Mr. Beban, took aim at the environmentalists and tour operators who had
campaigned for 15 years for the park.

R. L. Smith, a heavy-equipment operator who is the editor, called on islanders
to ''pack off these Vancouver hippie tour operators, pack them up with their
books and send them back to university.''

Mr. Smith said that those pressing for a park were endangering a logging
industry that was contributing $45 million a year to the islands' economy and $2
million in stumpage fees to the provincial government. Stumpage fees are the
royalties paid to the provincial government, which owns the land.

''We can happily do without a bunch of characters who think that people doing
honest timber-cutting should be thrown onto the unemployment rolls to provide
wealthy Californians with scenery devoid of clear-cuts,'' Mr. Smith wrote.

Because the islands are among the more remote and beautiful regions in the
temperate zone of Canada, they were one of the favored destinations in the
1960's and early 1970's of young Americans who headed north to escape the
Vietnam War, or to establish an alternative way of life.

Many of them became involved in the battle to save the southern half of the
islands, known as South Moresby, from the loggers. One of those in the battle
was Thom Henley, co-founder of the Islands Protection Society, the group that
successfully lobbied for the park.

Mr. Henley moved to Victoria, the provincial capital, to coordinate the lobbying
effort, but he returns each summer as the organizer of a camp, called
Re-discovery, on the northwest coast of Graham Island. There, on a coastline
noted for its shipwrecks and bird colonies, he works to fire the enthusiasm of
youngsters, particularly young Haidas, for the natural beauty of the islands and
for the traditional skills of the Haida, from fishing to carving.

But not all Americans here have thrown in their lot with the environmentalists.
Among the most talked-about are Neil and Betty Carey, who have combined a life
of writing and beachcombing with sallies into the dispute over logging.

'Always Confrontation'

Mr. Carey, a United States Navy veteran, crossed the straits from the mainland
with his wife and two sons in 1955 aboard a 19-foot fishing dory, and the couple
have made their home in a log cabin at Puffin Cove on the southwest coast ever
since.

One summer morning, they were encountered unloading their latest beachcombing
haul on the dock outside Sandspit. Mr. Carey, 65 years old, shuttled back and
forth to a beat-up van with his arms full of football-sized floats from fishing
nets.

Mrs. Carey, a spry, gray-haired figure, leaned on a walkway rail and offered her
opinion of the hippies and others who, she said, had pressed for a park without
regard for the injury it would do to the livelihood of others.

''We thought the rest of the world was going to get the hippies, and this place
was going to stay pure,'' she said. ''But they came anyway, and it was always
confrontation.

''The young people are always saying, 'The islands have got to be saved.' Hell,
there's been canneries down there, and mines, and whaling stations - they're not
that pure. And now everything's got to be stopped because these soft-eyed people
say they can't stand the sight of an honest stump.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Maps of British Columbia; Photo of Al Whitney proposing a toast after
hearing of decison to create a national park in the Queen Charlotte Islands, off
Canada's northwest coast. He had been a leader in environmentalists' efforts for
the the park. (NYT/John F. Burns)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 15, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Deal With Managua? Pro and Contra.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


I know what all that palaver about Central American peace plans is about. It's a
liberal scam. If those Sandinista Communists sign a peace agreement, they'll
cheat, lie and not comply. And if they don't sign, they'll dawdle until American
aid for the contras expires. That's what this is all about.

Why are you so self-righteous? When it comes to violating treaties, we're not
such innocents. Look at the contra war and our mining of Nicaraguan harbors.
What this is really about is national interest. For the first time in years,
negotiations are in everybody's interest, even the President's. He needs a
diplomatic track to get Democratic votes for aid to the contras, so for a while
there's an opening for diplomacy.

Sure, negotiations are in the Sandinistas' interest. They'll swear to hold
elections, free the press, let the Catholic Church have its radio programs, all
of that - until we stop funding the contras. Then, quick as you can whisper
Fidel Castro, it's back to their real agenda. They want to be a Soviet base and
want to subvert the neighborhood. The same folks who whooped it up for Ho Chi
Minh are whooping it up for Comandante Ortega.

Let's not be glib. It was some of your folks who said Red China was pulling the
strings in Hanoi. Now we know that the Vietnamese think of China much the way
many Latin Americans think of us: darkly. Peace means bread and beans for
Nicaraguans. My guess is that Ortega will go along with a peace treaty because
he figures his crowd will get the credit - and can win a truly free election. If
so, he's got an interest in complying with a treaty.

Right, but meanwhile we would doubly betray the contras. First, we'd deny them
guns. Second, we'd be letting the Sandinistas rig an election that we would then
have to recognize. Some deal.

Betrayal? What kind of betrayal would it be if a peace treaty achieved the
contras' purposes - like ending emergency-rule dictatorship, giving real freedom
to opposition parties and holding internationally supervised elections? The
President has just made a big concession. He's willing to bless a deal letting
the Sandinistas stay in office as long as they open up their system, stop aiding
guerrillas elsewhere and keep out Soviet bases and advisers. Now, for the first
time, the Sandinistas are talking about the same things.

They'll say anything to get Congress to vote against the contras. Besides, who's
to judge whether the elections will really be free and whether those advisers
will really be sent home?

Well, the White House will say anything to get Congress to vote for the contras.
Who's to judge? Everyone will be able to see if the press is free, to see if
respect for political rights is real. And don't forget, Nicaragua would like to
end the nonstop U.S. maneuvers in Honduras.

I don't buy that for a minute, but suppose I did. Why on earth should Ortega
make a deal now with Ronald Reagan when he could spin out the process, bury the
contras and maybe get a better deal from the next President?

Because for him, a deal with Ronald Reagan means more than a deal with a more
liberal President; it would be a lot harder for conservatives to renege on it in
the future. That's the President's truly effective leverage - since a deal with
him is worth more, he can expect more. Anyway, what are we arguing about? The
contras can't defeat the Sandinistas, even if they get more military aid out of
Congress, which is highly uncertain. The United States is not about to send in
troops. So what's the alternative to trying to negotiate constructively? There
isn't any.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 15, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vincent Persichetti Dies at 72; Composer of Wide Repertory

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


Vincent Persichetti, a prolific American composer, educator, theorist, pianist
and conductor, died yesterday at his home in Philadelphia, of lung cancer. He
was 72 years old.

During a career that spanned half a century, Mr. Persichetti wrote nine
symphonies, chamber compositions for many different combinations of instruments,
more than a dozen sonatas for piano and harpsichord, songs and choral works, an
opera - ''The Sibyl,'' based on the fable of Chicken Little -and an enormous
quantity of music for wind band.

Mr. Persichetti's esthetic was essentially conservative, a distinctive blend of
Classical, Romantic and Modernist elements, contrapuntal, rhythmically charged
and expertly scored. Although the composer modestly insisted that there were
only two main strains in his work - one graceful and the other gritty - his
musical imagination was in fact multifaceted and highly virtuosic.

''Following the lineage of Mozart, Mendelssohn and Ravel, Persichetti's music
suggests the innocence and childlike joy of pure musical creativity,'' Walter
Simmons wrote in the New Grove Dictionary of American Music. ''Hence many works
for beginners stand, with neither condescension nor apology, alongside more
difficult compositions.''

Indeed, Mr. Persichetti's works for chorus and for band - the latter an ensemble
that many 20th-century composers have neglected - provided an engaging,
sophisticated introduction to contemporary music for thousands of young
musicians.

Ran Composition Department

Mr. Persichetti was associated with the Juilliard School for nearly 40 years. He
joined the staff in 1947, and in 1963 became the chairman of the composition
department, a distinguished body that included, over the years, Milton Babbitt,
Elliott Carter and Roger Sessions. In 1970, he was appointed chairman of
Juilliard's literature and materials department. He was the author of ''William
Schuman'' (1954), a monograph, with Flora R. Schreiber, and ''Twentieth-Century
Harmony'' (1961).

Vincent Persichetti was born in Philadelphia on June 6, 1915. Although his
parents were not musical, they encouraged their son's talent, which was apparent
from an early age. By 5, Mr. Persichetti was enrolled in the Combs Conservatory
in Philadelphia, where he studied piano, organ, double bass and, under the
tutelage of Russell King Miller, theory and composition. After graduation from
Combs, he studied piano with Olga Samaroff and conducting with Fritz Reiner at
the Curtis Institute of Music. For a time he was also head of the Combs theory
and composition department.

Although he had been composing regularly since the age of 11, he first came to
public attention in the mid-1940's when the Philadelphia Orchestra, under the
direction of Eugene Ormandy, began to play his music - the ''Fables'' for
narrator and orchestra in 1945 and later the Symphony No. 3, written in 1943 but
first performed in November 1947.

Several Commissions

Thereafter his compositions entered the repertory of several American ensembles.
The Symphony No. 5 (1953) was commissioned by the Louisville Orchestra; the
Symphony No. 7 (''Liturgic,'' 1958) by the St. Louis Symphony, and the final
work in this genre, (''Janiculum,'' 1970) again by the Philadelphia Orchestra.

In 1973, Mr. Persichetti was involved in a controversy that put him on the front
page of newspapers throughout the country. He had been commissioned by the
Presidential Inaugural Committee to write a work for performance by the
Philadelphia Orchestra at Richard M. Nixon's second Inaugural Concert, on Jan.
19, 1973. Mr. Persichetti set excerpts from Abraham Lincoln's second Inaugural
Address; the choice was deemed unsatisfactory by members of the committee
because Lincoln's comments about the Civil War, which he described as a ''mighty
scourge,'' were considered too charged for the waning days of the Vietnam War.
Consequently, Mr. Persichetti's work, entitled ''A Lincoln Address,'' was
deleted from the inaugural program; it was played for the first time later that
month by the St. Louis Symphony under the direction of Walter Susskind.

Several of Mr. Persichetti's compositions have been recorded, including the
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth and Ninth Symphonies, seven serenades, four string
quartets, and other chamber and choral pieces.

He is survived by his wife, Dorothea Flanagan Persichetti, a pianist; a
daughter, Lauren; and a son, Garth. No memorial services are planned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vincent Persichetti (Peter Schaaf)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
PRANKSTER PALS: THE APPEAL NEVER AGES

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1864 words


SO WHAT'S THE SPECIAL KICK of ''Stakeout,'' John Badham's new movie about a team
of detectives assigned to keep an eye on the house of an all-time bad guy's
sometime girlfriend? Not exactly a novel plot or situation - cop teams are a
drug on the movie and television markets; they're due for a bust - and you don't
have to have second sight to predict love at first sight between one of the cops
at least and the shapely woman under surveillance.

What came to mind, however, as I found myself getting into the big kids' kidding
around, was not the latest fashion in tough-guy smash-and-grabbers but the
adventure movies of another time, on which many of us grew up. I'll always think
of them as boys' movies because they seemed to speak especially to us boys or to
the boy in us adults, and ''Stakeout'' gives the same sort of pleasure. The
buddy banter between Richard Dreyfuss and Emilio Estevez as the cops, the
attitude toward the woman in the case, the schoolyard or locker room low jinks
punctuated by he-man action took me back to the great movie year of 1939 and
''Gunga Din.''

No, I'm not rating ''Stakeout'' up there with what may be the best boys' movie
ever made. Still, there are family resemblances. A lot of time in ''Gunga Din''
is given to joshing around by Cary Grant, Douglas Fairbanks and Victor McLaglen.
The humor is more clunky than classy, but it gets across the sort of good
fellows they are, the youthful camaraderie that will serve them so well when
they come under fire or fall into the enemy's clutches. Sophistication wasn't
wanted here. What we wanted was to see the big guys acting like mischievous
kids, having the sort of fun that we daydreamed we might have when we grew up,
even though we knew that these heroes never would grow up.

So it is with the cops in ''Stakeout.'' The practical jokes that the daytime and
nighttime surveillance teams play on each other are, to be kind, crude, the sort
of stuff you're supposed to grow out of in junior high school. (Remember the
fake little telescopes that left a black ring around your eye?) These guys have
not been subdued by maturity; they speak for boyhood - and for a boyhood of
buddydom, without rough edges. They show us what ''best friend,'' that prized
phrase of adolescence, can mean.

There is never any question of their heterosexuality, however. Women are there
to be rescued and reverenced. Despite the advances in sexual explicitness, the
heroes' attitudes are not all that different from Douglas Fairbanks's attitude
toward Joan Fontaine. Mr. Dreyfuss is as worshipful as any Victorian gent. He
falls at first glimpse. (Granted, that glimpse of Madeleine Stowe reveals
aspects that you never got to see of Ms. Fontaine, dolled up from neck to toes
in a fashion designer's vision of a memsahib. And Miss Stowe, a woman of the
1980's, comes on the way girls used to only in boys' dreams. Nonetheless, like
Ms. Fontaine, she behaves in a generally more grown-up way than any of the men
around.) The big kids in ''Stakeout,'' moreover, lack the sadistic inclinations
that infect movie cops these days. Who can imagine happy-go-lucky Cary or
gallant Doug inflicting pain for the pleasure of it? Sure, the Dreyfuss-Estevez
team is tough, and the enemy is merciless, but you never get the feeling that
these lawmen are looking for opportunities to blow people away. These are
wholesome, softhearted guys. Mayhem is forced on them; they are the kind of cops
who would rather let a hundred criminals escape than endanger the life of a
single innocent passer-by. Wouldn't Cary and Doug, even confronted by so
sinister an adversary as Eduardo Cianelli, do the same?

Now, all this could be interpreted as a putdown of a concocted comedy-adventure
entirely lacking in social overtones or psychological undertones. Mr. Dreyfuss
is a little miffed when the woman in his life walks out, taking everything,
including the bedroom curtains, but his main problem is trying to get some sleep
with the light and street noises pounding into the room. He's not bedeviled by
horrible nightmares about Vietnam. It's a relief being around him, not having to
worry that really he identifies with the bad guy or has a mother fixation or
might go beserk at the sound of a telephone - but a complex character he's not.

The question is, how much complexity do we need or want in a boys' movie? Seeing
''Gunga Din'' today may arouse more complicated feelings than it did in 1939,
when the British Empire was standing against Hitler. The white man's burden
celebrated by Rudyard Kipling has taken on different meanings, most of them
unpleasant, and the sight of Sam Jaffe scampering loyally about as the ragged
water boy who sacrifices himself to keep the sun from setting on her Majesty's
realm does not go down well. Once it brought a lump in the throat; now, if you
take it seriously, the gorge may rise.

But why take it seriously? One of the annoying things about some adventure
movies these days is the affectation that they have something to say about crime
or society or the human condition. ''Robocop,'' for a recent example, contains
some huggermugger about corporation types corrupting everything; it's a thin
excuse for laying on the violence, which is what that movie is mainly about.

Mr. Badham is no slouch at violence, but his good guys aren't parading around
asking for some crook to make their day. ''Stakeout'' is about something else, a
couple of comical heroes who do battle because duty demands it,
peacefully-inclined Joes who would rather fool around than fight. Just like Cary
and Doug and Vic.

SO WHAT'S THE SPECIAL KICK OF ''Stakeout,'' John Badham's new movie about a team
of detectives assigned to keep an eye on the house of an all-time bad guy's
sometime girlfriend? Not exactly a novel plot or situation - cop teams are a
drug on the movie and television markets; they're due for a bust - and you don't
have to have second sight to predict love at first sight between one of the cops
at least and the shapely woman under surveillance.

What came to mind, however, as I found myself getting into the big kids' kidding
around, was not the latest fashion in tough-guy smash-and-grabbers but the
adventure movies of another time, on which many of us grew up. I'll always think
of them as boys' movies because they seemed to speak especially to us boys or to
the boy in us adults, and ''Stakeout'' gives the same sort of pleasure. The
buddy banter between Richard Dreyfuss and Emilio Estevez as the cops, the
attitude toward the woman in the case, the schoolyard or locker room low jinks
punctuated by he-man action took me back to the great movie year of 1939 and
''Gunga Din.''

No, I'm not rating ''Stakeout'' up there with what may be the best boys' movie
ever made. Still, there are family resemblances. A lot of time in ''Gunga Din''
is given to joshing around by Cary Grant, Douglas Fairbanks and Victor McLaglen.
The humor is more clunky than classy, but it gets across the sort of good
fellows they are, the youthful camaraderie that will serve them so well when
they come under fire or fall into the enemy's clutches. Sophistication wasn't
wanted here. What we wanted was to see the big guys acting like mischievous
kids, having the sort of fun that we daydreamed we might have when we grew up,
even though we knew that these heroes never would grow up.

So it is with the cops in ''Stakeout.'' The practical jokes that the daytime and
nighttime surveillance teams play on each other are, to be kind, crude, the sort
of stuff you're supposed to grow out of in junior high school. (Remember the
fake little telescopes that left a black ring around your eye?) These guys have
not been subdued by maturity; they speak for boyhood - and for a boyhood of
buddydom, without rough edges. They show us what ''best friend,'' that prized
phrase of adolescence, can mean.

There is never any question of their heterosexuality, however. Women are there
to be rescued and reverenced. Despite the advances in sexual explicitness, the
heroes' attitudes are not all that different from Douglas Fairbanks's attitude
toward Joan Fontaine. Mr. Dreyfuss is as worshipful as any Victorian gent. He
falls at first glimpse. (Granted, that glimpse of Madeleine Stowe reveals
aspects that you never got to see of Ms. Fontaine, dolled up from neck to toes
in a fashion designer's vision of a memsahib. And Miss Stowe, a woman of the
1980's, comes on the way girls used to only in boys' dreams. Nonetheless, like
Ms. Fontaine, she behaves in a generally more grown-up way than any of the men
around.) The big kids in ''Stakeout,'' moreover, lack the sadistic inclinations
that infect movie cops these days. Who can imagine happy-go-lucky Cary or
gallant Doug inflicting pain for the pleasure of it? Sure, the Dreyfuss-Estevez
team is tough, and the enemy is merciless, but you never get the feeling that
these lawmen are looking for opportunities to blow people away. These are
wholesome, softhearted guys. Mayhem is forced on them; they are the kind of cops
who would rather let a hundred criminals escape than endanger the life of a
single innocent passer-by. Wouldn't Cary and Doug, even confronted by so
sinister an adversary as Eduardo Cianelli, do the same?

Now, all this could be interpreted as a putdown of a concocted comedy-adventure
entirely lacking in social overtones or psychological undertones. Mr. Dreyfuss
is a little miffed when the woman in his life walks out, taking everything,
including the bedroom curtains, but his main problem is trying to get some sleep
with the light and street noises pounding into the room. He's not bedeviled by
horrible nightmares about Vietnam. It's a relief being around him, not having to
worry that really he identifies with the bad guy or has a mother fixation or
might go beserk at the sound of a telephone - but a complex character he's not.

The question is, how much complexity do we need or want in a boys' movie? Seeing
''Gunga Din'' today may arouse more complicated feelings than it did in 1939,
when the British Empire was standing against Hitler. The white man's burden
celebrated by Rudyard Kipling has taken on different meanings, most of them
unpleasant, and the sight of Sam Jaffe scampering loyally about as the ragged
water boy who sacrifices himself to keep the sun from setting on her Majesty's
realm does not go down well. Once it brought a lump in the throat; now, if you
take it seriously, the gorge may rise.

But why take it seriously? One of the annoying things about some adventure
movies these days is the affectation that they have something to say about crime
or society or the human condition. ''Robocop,'' for a recent example, contains
some huggermugger about corporation types corrupting everything; it's a thin
excuse for laying on the violence, which is what that movie is mainly about.

Mr. Badham is no slouch at violence, but his good guys aren't parading around
asking for some crook to make their day. ''Stakeout'' is about something else, a
couple of comical heroes who do battle because duty demands it,
peacefully-inclined Joes who would rather fool around than fight. Just like Cary
and Doug and Vic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Television and Vietnam

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 121 words



To the Editor:

In the box accompanying Peter J. Boyer's article, ''Is It Prime Time for
Vietnam?'' [Aug. 2], he mentioned that the Arts & Entertainment cable network is
rebroadcasting ''Vietnam: A Television History,'' originally shown on PBS. We
appreciate the mention, but A&E is currently broadcasting ''Vietnam: The Ten
Thousand Day War,'' which was produced by the Canadian producer Michael Maclear
and had its original airing in 1981, not 1984 as Mr. Boyer stated. This series,
narrated by Richard Basehart, was the first to gain access to North Vietnamese
archives and film footage.

BURT BERLINER
   Director, Public Relations
   Arts and Entertainment
   Cable Network
   New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YALE- A GREAT NURSERY OF SPOOKS

BYLINE: By GODFREY HODGSON; Godfrey Hodgson is writing a biography of the
American statesman Henry L. Stimson.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2015 words



CLOAK & GOWN
Scholars in the Secret War, 1939-1961. By Robin W. Winks. Illustrated. 607 pp.
New York: William Morrow & Company. $22.95.

IT was a Yale man, Henry L. Stimson, who is supposed to have closed down the
State Department's counterespionage Black Chamber in 1929 with the words,
''Gentlemen do not read each other's mail.'' The remark, as Robin W. Winks
points out, is probably apocryphal. Indeed, it is possible that it was put into
Stimson's mouth by another Yale man, McGeorge Bundy, the co-author of Mr.
Stimson's ''On Active Service in Peace and War.''

The fact is, though, that Yale University has been a great nursery of spooks. A
statue of Nathan Hale with a British noose about his neck, only regretting that
he has but one life to give for his country, stands in front of the Central
Intelligence Agency's headquarters in Langley, Va. Appropriately, it is a copy
of the one that stands on Yale's Old Campus in New Haven, for Hale was a member
of the Yale class of 1773. In more recent years, Yale has had, as Mr. Winks
shows, a curiously persistent connection with the business of intelligence
gathering. No other American university, it appears, has sent so many of its
graduates into the profession.

To a remarkable extent, the ethos first of the World War II Office of Strategic
Services, and then of its offspring, the C.I.A., was influenced by Yale men, and
therefore presumably by Yale. Think - naming names almost at random - of James
Jesus Angleton, C. Tracy Barnes, Richard Bissell, William Bundy, Cord Meyer Jr.
and Sherman Kent.

Sometime in the 1970's Mr. Winks, who teaches history at Yale, found himself in
an argument with a colleague about the ethics of cooperating with intelligence
agencies. His antagonist claimed that academics had never done so in the past.
Nonsense, thought Mr. Winks, and in that instant what was originally conceived
of as an article, and eventually evolved into ''Cloak & Gown,'' was born. As he
worked, Mr. Winks narrowed his target to a study of Yale and intelligence.

For those of us who did not go to Yale, there is something faintly
self-important, even comic, about such an enterprise. My own first reaction was
that this would be a book with a nostalgic, Edwardian flavor, and to be sure
there is about Mr. Winks the faint aroma of the Oldest Member. He does go on a
bit, as they say. To make the rather obvious point, for example, that someone
other than Sherman Kent might have emerged as the most influential historian in
the O.S.S., but didn't, Mr. Winks lists, in his ''Notes'' section, three pages
of alternative names.

There is a slight suspicion that he is too fond of the sound of his own voice.
And for a man who lays such stress on the scholar's dedication to accuracy,
there are a truly startling number of uncorrected printers' errors. I assume,
that is, that they are errors by anonymous printers or copy editors. For surely
the master of Yale's Berkeley College - a man who is forthright in his high
opinion of scholarship in general, and Yale's in particular - must be incapable
of misspelling the name of Gordon Seagrave, the American doctor who spent his
life in northern Burma; of giving the first name of the distinguished editor of
The Washington Post as both Albert and Alfred Friendly; or of giving Mr.
Stimson's middle initial as both L. and B. Facts are free, we journalists say,
but middle initials are sacred.

Mr. Winks's book, in fact, could have done with some checking as well as some
pruning. For all that, it is a delight. It has the flavor of one of those
British dining clubs used by John Buchan as a device to introduce his tales of
strange goings-on around the fringes of empire. You recall the scene. The port
goes round. The company is convivial and knowledgeable. The fire blazes merrily
in the grate, and old Winks has the floor. ''Yale never had anything to do with
intelligence?'' he snorts. ''A likely tale. Why, the crew coach was a recruiter
for the agency. Old Skip Walz! Bet you didn't know that!''

If Mr. Winks's manner does occasionally invite such irreverent parody, it is
lightly offered. For ''Cloak & Gown'' is not only an entertaining contribution
to the secret history of the 1940's and 50's, it is also an important one.

The book begins with a chapter about Yale's involvement with intelligence as a
whole that documents how deeply American higher education was affected by World
War II. It was not just that, as Mr. Winks estimates, 42 members of the class of
'43 went into the O.S.S., or that altogether at least 60 of the 397 Yale
graduates who lost their lives in the war did so in the secret service. More
insidious changes were at work. It was then that the F.B.I. first gained access
to confidential files, and that so-called enemy alien faculty were put under
surveillance, indeed made to turn in their shortwave radios. Worse still, from
the point of view of academic freedom, university programs, like those of Yale's
Institute of International Studies, or of the Institute of Human Relations'
cross-cultural survey, were converted to the purposes of wartime intelligence.
The line between asking anthropologists about the cultures of the Pacific
theater and using them as covers might be blurred, but it was a dangerous one
that many American (and some other) universities crossed.

In his second chapter, on research and analysis in the O.S.S., Mr. Winks makes
the point that the whole tradition of area studies was influenced by the
requirements of the intelligence community. He quotes McGeorge Bundy that ''the
area study programs developed in American universities in the years after the
war were manned, directed, or stimulated by graduates of the OSS.'' THE body of
the book is provided by biographical chapters about a quartet of Yale men who
became intelligence agents, and a very diverse bunch they are. In the summer of
1942, the O.S.S. found itself desperately short of printed materials from inside
Nazi-controlled Europe. To remedy this shortage, Yale's Sterling Memorial
Library was used as a front. The head of the O.S.S., William Donovan, called his
friend Wallace Notestein, a historian of 17th-century Britain, who in turn
tapped a young instructor, Joseph Toy Curtiss, to run the project.

The original idea was that Curtiss would work in Switzerland, incidentally
providing cover for Allen Dulles, who later became the Director of Central
Intelligence. When Switzerland was cut off by the Nazi invasion of southern
France, Curtiss went instead to Istanbul, where he operated as an O.S.S. agent
under cover of Robert College - an early precedent for the unhappy practice of
using American educational institutions overseas as covers for espionage.

The man who recruited Curtiss for this role, Donald Downes (Yale '26), was to
become one of the most controversial figures in the history of the O.S.S. He was
the classic secret agent of fiction: patriotic, idealistic, romantically
fascinated by complexity and by the intrigue of the bazaar and the backstairs in
such haunts of fantasy as Istanbul, Macedonia and Beirut. He recruited teams of
agents with names like Donald's Ducks and the Twelve Apostles. He was brave and
resourceful, but somehow too many of his operations went wrong, and he took the
blame, justly or unjustly, for the worst single disaster the O.S.S. suffered in
the entire war - Operation Banana, in which an O.S.S. team was infiltrated into
Andalusia, then abandoned, and 18 men, it was assumed, died.

After the war Mr. Downes became a tragic figure, a big fat man with a red beard,
trying with indifferent success to fulfill himself as a writer, and convinced
-with some justification, Mr. Winks believes - that he was being secretly
hounded by the F.B.I.

Norman Holmes Pearson, the apostle of American studies at Yale, had a more
gentlemanly war working within the X-2, or counterintelligence, branch of the
O.S.S. with the top-secret code-breakers in England. It must have been pleasant
dining at Quaglino's, which his British colleagues couldn't afford, and the
contacts with British writers and academics were rewarding. After the war,
Pearson was able to help his colleague, Sir John Masterman, bust the British
secrecy rules by publishing his classic account, ''The Double-Cross System.''

The longest and perhaps the least satisfactory section in the book struggles
against infinite regress in the wilderness of mirrors inhabited by the legendary
head of C.I.A. counterintelligence, the late James Jesus Angleton. Mr. Winks
draws a careful and sympathetic portrait of that subtle and paranoid man. He
does not resolve the all-important question of whether Mr. Angleton's conviction
that the C.I.A. was penetrated by a deep-burrowing Soviet mole was a delusion or
not. Indeed, he does not try to resolve it. Instead, he analyzes the alternative
theses and leaves readers to make what they will of the evidence.

Solving puzzles is not what Mr. Winks is about. His purpose is to take his
scholarly machete to the jungle of myth about the club-land heroes of the O.S.S.
and the C.I.A. What is left after his clearing operations is a picture quite
different both from the left's nightmare of Establishment manipulation and from
the right's nightmare of liberal treason. Instead, Mr. Winks suggests, these
spies were the champions of a ''sentimental imperialism,'' missionaries
dedicated to improving the world. He implies that there have been worse causes,
and no doubt that is true.

Yet after the C.I.A.'s Phoenix program in Vietnam and the Church committee
investigations of the agency in the mid-1970's, after Iran and Irangate, the
noble ambition of spreading the American ideal of democracy to the world has the
nostalgic fragrance of pressed flowers. The best and the brightest of the
clandestine imperialists from Yale begin to look like American Bengal Lancers -
brave and romantic, yet as obsolete as cavalry in a world of populism and
publicity, of nationalism and technology, of Nixon, networks and North.

PARANOIA FINDS ROMANCE

Robin W. Winks, the master of Yale University's Berkeley College and the
Randolph W. Townsend Jr. Professor of History there, is not now, and never was,
a spy. ''That is what I always tell the students who ask, but of course what
they always say is well, you wouldn't admit it if you were,'' he said in a
recent telephone interview from his home in New Haven. ''There is a certain
paranoia coupled with a kind of romance that goes with this notion, of course,''
he added.

Mr. Winks, who is 56 years old, gained this curious reputation long before he
started his latest book, ''Cloak & Gown,'' which investigates the intimate
relationship between Yale and American intelligence agencies.

''I think possibly one of the reasons students get the notion that I must have
worked with intelligence is that I've been to lots of remote places,'' he said.
''But I just happen to enjoy getting to remote places'' - among them Malaysia,
New Zealand and Australia.

In addition to being a frequent traveler, Mr. Winks is a prolific writer (he is
the author of seven books and the editor of nine others), a collector of old
maps, an outdoorsman and a veteran of the Foreign Service. He is also an avid
reader of detective and spy fiction. He has written two books on the genre, but
he refuses to say if has written any thrillers himself.

These various pursuits, Mr. Winks said, ''all relate to one central interest -
the study of how people perceive themselves and what it is that they take pride
in.''

As a historian specializing in the British empire, he sees himself more as a
detective than as a spy. ''In effect, what the historian is doing is seeking out
evidence and interrogating that evidence and assessing that evidence, very much
in the manner of the figure in detective fiction,'' he said. ''Cloak & Dagger''
emerged out of a desire to combine his interests in history and detective
fiction: ''I wanted to write something factual, something that would help me to
see to what extent the fiction had any basis in reality.''

MICHAEL FREITAG

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robin W. Winks (Yale University); Drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Clinton Traces His Decision Not to Run for President to Family Obligations

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 40, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1151 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, say his
decision not to run for President was simply a more public version of the
decisions that millions of couples in their generation have had to make in
recent years.

In a crowded field in which no candidate seems close to establishing a clear
margin over his rivals, even a late bid by the governor of a small state had
been taken seriously, at least until he announced in mid-July that he would not
run. Mr. Clinton had attracted the support of many experienced political
professionals and had potential backing from many governors.

His announcement was even more surprising because, Mr. Clinton said, he may
never again have the national visibility he has enjoyed over the last two years.
As president of the National Governors' Association, he had helped formulate the
group's widely discussed positions on improving the nation's education and
welfare systems.

Making Sense of 'Obstacle Course'

The turmoil the Clintons went through, they say, highlights the effort of
couples to balance the obligations of parenting and careers. It is an effort to
make sense of ''this kind of obstacle course of public versus private versus
individual versus collective,'' said Mrs. Clinton, a lawyer like her husband of
11 years, In an interview on Mackinac Island, Mich., in July, where Mr. Clinton
was attending a meeting of the Democratic Governors' Association, the couple
spoke of the demands of the political process and the ways it can make it
impossible for either partner in a marriage to spend enough time with their
children.

The decision by Mr. Clinton, who is 40 years old, was especially dramatic
because it seemed so sudden. On the day he announced he would not run some of
his closest friends and advisers had flown to Little Rock, Ark. to prepare him
for the news conference 24 hours later when, they were sure, he would jump into
the fray.

''The reason other people got mixed signals was because I was giving myself
mixed signals,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''I was divided against myself. Mentally, I
was 100 percent committed to the race, but emotionally I wasn't.''

Concern Rooted in Past

Mr. Clinton said his main reason for not running - a concern about the effect
his campaign would have on his 7-year-old daughter, Chelsea - had deep roots.

''My father died, before I was born, in a car wreck, and my mother remarried
when I was 4 and it was a fairly difficult and stormy relationship. And then my
stepfather died when I was 21. I think that makes me a little more concerned
than I would otherwise be about the impact of prolonged absencses.

''I didn't want to take a chance on Chelsea,'' he said. ''I just didn't want her
to grow up wondering if somehow she was in second place for either one of us.
Because I was afraid it would affect how she related to everyone else for the
rest of her life.''

There was an overlap between the personal and the political, both Mr. and Mrs.
Clinton said, since children's issues would have been a centerpiece of a Clinton
campaign for President.

Another 'Cruel Irony'

''One of the big problems right now in this country is that people are not
paying enough attention to children,'' said Mrs. Clinton, who is 39. ''And it's
pretty hard for us to go out selling that message and not pay attention to our
own child. That's a contradiction that we also weren't very comfortable with.''

Mr. Clinton said there was ''another kind of cruel irony'' he and his wife
faced: the role Mrs. Clinton, as a professional with an independent following of
her own, would have played in the campaign.

''She had a whole different network of friends than I have,'' Mr. Clinton said.
''One of the reasons I thought we had a chance to win was because of her and
because of our relationship and because of what she's done and the friends she
has and the kinds of constituencies she can touch and involve.''

''If this were 40 years ago,'' Mr. Clinton said, ''Hillary would be home or
she'd be a schoolteacher and nobody would ever think she would go anywhere with
me.''

Hart Experience Stirs Reflection

Mr. Clinton emphatically denies that the new interest by the news media in
personal matters following the withdrawal of Gary Hart from the Presidential
race was a factor in his decision not to run.

But he says Mr. Hart's experience -Mr. Hart withdrew in the wake of newsreports
of his relationship with an actress and model - was something he and other
politicians had thought a great deal about.

''Most rational political people can deal with whatever rules they have to play
by,'' he said. ''But I think what most of the politicians felt was: What are the
rules?''

''What are these people doing?'' he continued, referring to the news media.
''Are they going to print rumors? Are they going to print rumors that are ten
years old or 15 years old? Am I going to have to spend the whole campaign
dealing with that and if they don't find anything it will still be debilitating?

''All the politicians talked about it - every time I went to Washington.''

'Return to More Balanced Life'

Mrs. Clinton said she believed that the questions surrounding Mr. Hart were
''symptomatic of a much deeper desire, not just on the part of the press, but of
people in general to return to a more balanced personal-public kind of life.''

''Although we never talked about this or thought about this - the decision we
made, which was so difficult to us, forced us to say: What is really important
to us right now?

''Here are the scales and they're both overloaded,'' she went on. ''Everything
we care about in the public agenda and everything we cared about in the personal
agenda. And when it came down to it, we weighed it in favor of the personal
agenda. In a funny way, that was symptomatic of what's going on
generationally.''

Mr. Clinton picked up the point. ''This is grossly oversimplifying, but
basically in the sixties, the sort of dominant mood was one of social
commitments, you were for or against civil rights, you were for or against the
war in Vietnam. And it was accompanied by a sort of loosening of the traditional
bonds that at least publicly bound private behavior.

''In the 70's,'' he went on, ''there was sort of a withdrawal from politics and
social commitment and a kind of wide dispersal of people doing basically
whatever they wanted to do in their personal lives.''

He went on: ''What Reagan reflected with all these family values and God and
mother and apple pie stuff, was a deeper yearning that was in almost all
Americans to try to get more grounded, and have more discipline and order and
integrity. Not goody-two-shoes integrity, but wholeness in their lives.''

His own decision not to run for President, he said, was part of this search. But
that did not make the decision any easier. ''It hurt so bad,'' he said, ''to
walk away from it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Chinese Act to Halt Exodus Of Vietnamese to Hong Kong

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 104 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Aug. 16


The Chinese Government ordered four southern provinces to act urgently to stop
the flow of Vietnamese settlers from China to Hong Kong, the New China News
Agency said today.

A Chinese official in Hong Kong was quoted as saying that the executive body of
China's central Government ordered the provinces to step up marine patrols.

Orders were also issued to punish severely anyone encouraging the settlers to
flee China and to squelch rumors of an amnesty for refugees in Hong Kong.

A Hong Kong official said last week that some of the Vietnamese reaching there
had mentioned such rumors as a reason for the exodus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Gore Touts Tennessee Roots in Southern Quest

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Aug. 15


Former Senator Ralph W. Yarborough, packing 84 years of Democratic fervor,
bounced on stage to the tune of ''The Yellow Rose of Texas'' and delivered the
introduction.

Albert Gore Jr., he declared, is a ''typical American'' - married and the father
of four children, a veteran of the Vietnam War, a farmer and a native of
Tennessee, ''our sister state.'' Yes, he is young, Mr. Yarborough acknowledged,
''but Jesus Christ never lived to see the age of this fellow.''

Senator Gore took the podium, every inch the smooth, 39-year-old scion of the
New South, by way of Harvard and a Washington preparatory school. ''I'm here as
a candidate for President,'' he told members of the Texas A.F.L.-C.I.O. in
Austin. ''I'm here as a Tennessean. I'm here as someone from this area, the
South and the Southwest.''

As late summer settles on Texas and the Deep South, Mr. Gore has come courting,
asserting a claim to the affection of a region. He does not lack confidence. ''I
believe very strongly that my candidacy offers the best chance of unifying our
party,'' he said. ''I believe I'm more electable than any of the other
candidates.''

Vanishing Opponents

This was supposed to be an election rich with destiny for Southern Democrats,
with the region exerting an early and important influence in the March 8
nominating contests, collectively labeled ''Super Tuesday.''

But so far, only Mr. Gore has reached for the prize. Gov. Bill Clinton of
Arkansas looked long and hard at the race, but turned away regretfully. Senator
Dale Bumpers of Arkansas thought about it, then thought again. And Senator Sam
Nunn of Georgia, probably the candidate closest to the hearts of many Democratic
leaders in the region, has shown few symptoms of Presidential fever.

While the others pondered, Mr. Gore plunged in, formally declaring his candidacy
in June in Carthage, Tenn., with his father, former Senator Albert Gore Sr.
proudly looking on.

Party leaders in the South, even those who wish him well, say his Tennessee
roots will earn him consideration from many Southern Democrats, but there are
limits to regional pride. Like the other candidates, he must still introduce
himself to much of the region, and he must move beyond the description that one
top Democrat described as common: ''the young fellow from Tennessee.''

'Electability' Part of Appeal

''He comes across very well,'' said Calvin Smyre, a Georgia state representative
who has watched Mr. Gore campaign. ''But the youth and the Southern aspect of it
have not caught fire yet.''

Donna Brazile, national field director for the campaign of Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, said: ''Gore just hasn't captured their
imagination. You don't hear Southern party chairmen going around saying, 'Gore,
Gore, Gore!' ''

Mr. Gore's supporters urge patience. ''We've finally got a Democrat we can elect
President,'' declared Buddy Temple, a prominent Texas Democrat, at a reception
in Austin last week. Mr. Gore himself presents his ''electability'' as a central
part of his appeal to whites as well as blacks, on whom the Rev. Jesse Jackson
is relying for support.

That quality is a deep obsession for many Southern Democrats, who have watched
Republican victories at the top of the ticket erode Democratic strength below.
In the 1984 campaign, many of the region's Democrats looked to Senator John
Glenn of Ohio as the ''electable'' candidate who would reclaim the conservative
Southern voter.

''We thought we had it won,'' said George W. Bramblett, a Dallas lawyer who
backed Mr. Glenn in 1984. ''But for some reason, he didn't have the spark.''

Now, in 1987, Mr. Bramblett was holding a reception for Mr. Gore at his home in
North Dallas, even though he remains uncommitted. ''I think Gore might have the
spark,'' Mr. Bramblett said. And what if Mr. Nunn were to enter? ''That could be
difficult.''

As he traveled through the region, Mr. Gore was asked repeatedly about Mr. Nunn.
''If Senator Nunn gets in, will you get out?'' a reporter asked in Austin. ''Of
course not,'' he said.

A self-described moderate, Mr. Gore talks about moving away from ''narrow litmus
tests'' in Democratic nominating politics. He says his reluctance ''to
automatically jump through a hoop'' will be a plus in the South.

In his trip through Texas, Mr. Gore was staking out the middle ground. He noted
that other Democrats had quickly declared their opposition to the nomination of
Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court, but he believed Mr. Bork ''deserves a
fair hearing.'' On the other hand, he noted that he had ''grave reservations''
about the judge, and that he had voted against the confirmation of William H.
Rehnquist as Chief Justice.

Mr. Gore underscored his commitment to a strong defense, but also to the pursuit
of arms control agreements, presenting himself as uniquely suited to negotiate
such agreements after years of study on the issue. He said that although the
nation's involvement in the Persian Gulf was the result of mistakes by the
Reagan Administration, ''Now that we're there, I personally think it would be a
mistake to respond to Iranian saber rattling by a sudden and precipitous
withdrawal.''

Difficulty With a Message

When pressed to specify the message of his campaign, he spoke disparagingly of
''a bumper sticker'' approach to politics.

When pressed again, he said, ''I'm the raging moderate, a fresh start for
America, the most electable candidate.'' One of his supporters, Dick Lodge, the
chairman of the Tennessee Democratic Party, said, ''It is harder to craft a
message as a moderate, centrist candidate, than as one who has an issue to grind
on day after day, such as Dick Gephardt on trade.''

Mr. Gore said he planned vigorous efforts in the Iowa caucuses and the New
Hampshire primary, and that he must do ''well'' in those states to build
credibility as a national candidate. He does not define ''well.''

Here in the South, his supporters say his campaign should get a boost if Mr.
Nunn decisively removes himself from the running.

For now, there are the Southern credentials so approvingly rattled off by Mr.
Yarborough, a friend and colleague of Mr. Gore's father. There is the courtship
and the pledge to ''spend more time in Texas than all the other candidates put
together.'' And there is the unblinking confidence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democratic Presidential candidate,
talking with Brandy O'Quinn during a campaign stop in Austin, Tex. (NYT/Zigy
Kaluzny)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ENVOYS TOLD TO CONVEY DOUBT OVER LATIN PLAN

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 17


Senior United States envoys to the five Central American nations were told at a
meeting here today that they should convey Washington's deep concern about a
regional peace plan adopted this month, Administration officials said.

The principal concern, officials said, centers on American distrust of the
Nicaraguan Government and whether it would abide by any agreement it makes. ''We
don't think any of these people need to be convinced that the Sandinistas cannot
be trusted,'' a State Department official said.

But even as Administration officials repeated their wariness that the plan
adopted by Central American leaders might help the Soviet-backed Sandinistas,
there were signs today that the plan had also caused problems for the Nicaraguan
Government.

A Call to Costa Rica

Diplomats said President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua recently telephoned
President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica, the principal architect of the
peace proposal, to explain why he traveled to Havana immediately after the
accord was signed in Guatemala on Aug. 7. The diplomats said Mr. Ortega had
complained that he had to get Fidel Castro's approval to ward off pressures from
hard-liners in his own Government.

''He said his purpose was to strengthen his internal position,'' an official
knowledgeable about the events said. According to one diplomat, Mr. Ortega said
he was principally concerned about challenges from Tomas Borge, Nicaragua's
Interior Minister, who controls the country's internal security and intelligence
organs.

Abrams Leads Discussion

Mr. Ortega was also seeking Mr. Castro's agreement to withdraw Cuban forces from
Nicaragua to comply with the accord's provisions that all foreign forces
eventually be withdrawn from the region, the official said. After the
Ortega-Castro meeting, a communique was issued in which Cuba expressed its
support for the Guatemala plan.

The discussion by United States officials in Washington today was led by Elliott
Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. More than
30 officials analyzed the regional accord in detail. Mr. Abrams has described
the accord as ''more a preliminary agreement than a final peace treaty'' and has
cautioned that it contains many ambiguities.

The Administration, which had earlier offered its own peace plan for the region,
has been forced to confront instead the accord that was signed in Guatemala City
by Guatemala, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Honduras and El Salvador.

A U.S. Campaign

As part of its response, the Administration is trying an intense diplomatic
effort to assess the accord and to shape it to its liking. The envoys are to
return to their postings Tuesday to relay the American concerns before the
Foreign Ministers of the five countries confer the next day in San Salvador.

The accord signed in Guatemala is designed to resolve conflicts throughout
Central America but is mainly focused on Nicaragua. It calls for scheduled
cease-fires, an end to outside aid for rebel groups, the establishment of
national commmissions to reconcile political differences, amnesties and movement
toward full democratic rights.

It is generally regarded as more favorable to the Sandinistas than the plan put
forward this month by the Administration and Representative Jim Wright of Texas,
the Speaker of the House. That plan calls for an end of military aid to
Nicaragua as well as an end to military aid for the Nicaraguan rebels, and would
seek an immediate suspension of emergency law in Nicaragua along with an
immediate cease-fire. It envisions negotiations to restore full civil rights and
elections in Nicaragua. Congress would be asked to resume aid to the rebels if
there was no agreement on negotiations by Sept. 30. #1973 Accord Cited An
Administration official said today that those attending the State Department
meeting were given copies of the 1973 agreement negotiated between Washington
and Hanoi and signed in Paris to end the Vietnam War. That agreement was used,
the official said, as a case study of how an agreement with ambiguous provisions
could be exploited and even ignored by a Communist government. In violation of
the 1973 accord, North Vietnam overran South Vietnam and united the two parts of
Vietnam under its banner in 1975.

In connection with its stepped-up diplomatic effort to play a role in the
shaping of any peace accord, the Administration hopes to have ambassadors in all
five of the countries by early next month. The United States is now represented
by ambassadors only in El Salvador and Honduras and by diplomats of lesser rank
in Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Guatemala.

Those attending the meeting today included Edwin G. Corr, Ambassador to El
Salvador; Everett E. Briggs, Ambassador to Honduras; Todd Stewart, charge
d'affaires in Costa Rica; John Moddernor, the charge in Nicaragua, and Jerry
Lamberty, the charge in Guatemala. Deane R. Hinton and James Michael, the State
Department's choices to be the Ambassadors to Costa Rica and Guatemala, also
attended. The Administration has not signaled its choice for ambassador to
Nicaragua to succeed Harry E. Bergold Jr., who was reassigned this summer.

The envoys to each of the five countries discussed how the Guatemalan proposal
would affect that country and how that Government viewed the proposal.

Security Interests an Issue

The meeting also focused on what senior officials have said are United States
security interests in the region involving the Soviet Union. Earlier, one
official was emphatic that Washington would not tolerate the introduction by
Moscow of jet fighters into Nicaragua. ''That is a U.S.-Soviet issue,'' the
official said. The Guatemala accord does not deal with that issue and officials
have cited this as a major ambiguity.

As the envoys gathered in Washington, the Administration renewed its
denunciation of the Nicaraguan Government for breaking up protests over the
weekend in Managua.

''The suppression of these demonstrations and the arrests of these political
leaders call into serious question the Sandinista Government's willingness to
fulfill the commitments made by President Ortega to democratize Nicaragua,'' a
State Department spokeswoman, Phyllis Oakley, said.

''The arrests of these political and human rights leaders and the brutal manner
and great speed with which the marches were suppressed, would seem to indicate
that the Nicaraguan Government wishes to intimidate and oppress the opposition
rather than fulfill its promises for democratization under the Guatemala
agreement,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Elliott Abrams (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Copters Prepare for a Gulf Convoy

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: MANAMA, Bahrain, Aug. 17


Minesweeping helicopters from the American amphibious assault ship Guadalcanal
carried out maneuvers off this Persian Gulf island today in preparation to
escort the next convoy of re-registered Kuwaiti tankers.

Four of the tankers, now flying the American flag, were waiting at anchor
tonight off the Kuwaiti port of Ahmadi, loaded and ready to move.

Among them was the supertanker Bridgeton, damaged by a mine during the first
convoy escorted by American warships. The convoys serve as a kind of shuttle
carrying Kuwait's oil to smaller ships outside the gulf.

The American escort operations began last month without benefit of minesweepers,
although it was known that mines were a danger to shipping in the gulf. A Soviet
tanker leased to Kuwait, the Marshal Chulikov, was also hit by a mine on its
first voyage.

Slipped Through Strait

The other re-registered tankers now waiting at anchor, which were escorted to
Kuwait on a second run, are the Gas King, the Sea Isle City and the Ocean City.

The Guadalcanal carrying the eight helicopters, Sikorsky RH-53D Sea Stallions,
slipped through the Strait of Hormuz Saturday night to elude the Iranian
Silkworm missile batteries on the shore. The ship arrived here, at the
headquarters of the American task force in the gulf, on Sunday evening.

In addition to the Guadalcanal, several Vietnam-era wooden-hulled minesweepers
are also being sent here to bolster the United States task force.

But the minesweepers are only a part of a growing buildup of more than a score
of American, British and French warships on their way to these tense waters,
including the American battleship Missouri. [Pentagon officials told The
Associated Press in Washington that the American warships, for the first time,
were carrying an unspecified number of helicopters drawn from the Army's Special
Operations Forces as well as the Navy minesweeping aircraft. In addition,
Pentagon personnel said the Guadalcanal was carrying two UH-1 Huey utility
helicopters and four AH-1 Sea Cobra helicopter gunships to support convoy
operations, particularly in event of attack by Iranian speedboats.] Journalists
Follow Ships The details of the ship movements came from telephone calls by
journalists to the many shipping agents, salvage offices and other maritime
businesses on the gulf. Another source is sightings by helicopters and small
boats chartered by television networks and photographers, particularly from a
British ITN television crew that has been at sea in a small boat at a cost of
$3,000 a day.

It is widely assumed that the Iranians have a more sophisticated watch on
activities in the area - not only normal military resources but also operatives
aboard the countless small fishing and utility boats that move through the gulf.

Seven people have been killed by mines in the last week, apparently dropped from
small boats outside the gulf at Fujaira in the United Arab Emirates, on the Gulf
of Oman.

The British captain and five crewmen of the small supply ship Anita were lost
when the craft was blown up by a mine on Saturday; a Saudi Arabia frogman was
also killed detonating a mine.

Copters Tow a Sledge

Shipping agents said today that many ships were moving farther south down the
coast toward Muscat, in Oman, in search of a safe anchorage.

The Sea Stallion helicopters seek out mines by towing a kind of flat-bottomed
sledge, about 10 feet by 15 feet, along the water. The sledge detonates the
mines it strikes. Two helicopters work in tandem, crisscrossing the same area.

But towing the sledges through the water on cables means that the helicopters
must fly low and slow. This would make them easy targets for Iranians hiding on
small boats and armed with the shoulder-fired, Soviet-made SAM-7 antiaircraft
missile.

The Iranians are also said to possess RPG-7 rocket-propelled antitank grenades
that could be used against slow helicopters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of minesweeper hull at Peterson Builders Shipyard in Wisconsin
(NYT/John Robert Williams)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AIR FORCE SEES BEAUTY IN UGLY DUCKLINGS

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


AS military scientists devise new ways to foil enemy radar, the Stealth program
is also addressing a need to make combat planes less conspicuous to the naked
eye.

Although scientific techniques are used in developing and evaluating camouflage
paint schemes for aircraft and other weapons, military artists also play a role.
Among them is Keith Ferris, a leading painter of aviation subjects who often
flies with Air Force missions to gain perspective for his paintings. He holds
five patents for military camouflage patterns and has been a part-time adviser
to the Air Force and Navy on camouflage for the past 15 years.

Among Mr. Ferris's contributions was to bring about the elimination of color
from the national insignia carried by most combat planes. Formerly a white star
superimposed on a blue disk flanked by red white and blue bars, the United
States insignia is now painted in outline using gray or black.

Avoiding Conspicuous Insignia

''The irony is that it was during the bicentennial year that I persuaded the
authorities to start eliminating red, white and blue from the national
insignia,'' Mr. Ferris said. ''But if you're going to camouflage a plane in the
first place, it makes sense to avoid conspicuous insignia and unit emblems.''

Partly as a result of Mr. Ferris's urging, most Air Force and Navy fighters are
now painted in several shades of gray, eliminating the more colorful patterns of
the past.

''One of the great mistakes of the past,'' he said, ''was the use of dark colors
in camouflage patterns. These included the dark green, medium green and tan
pattern that came into use during the Vietnam war. From a slight distance away,
that paint scheme made a plane look black. Viewed against a typical sky
background, the aircraft was in sharp silhouette, visible and conspicuous from a
great distance away. A light gray tone that matches the typical color of the sky
has a much better chance of avoiding detection.''

Mr. Ferris noted that in World War I, American combat planes were painted in
green and brown camouflage patterns, but in World War II, the Korean War and the
early part of the Vietnam war, the gleaming aluminum skin of the majority of
American airplanes was left unpainted. A much better choice of camouflage than
the one eventually used in Southeast Asia, he maintains, would have been a
nonreflective coat of light gray paint.

''The nonreflective quality of a paint finish is important,'' he said, ''but
it's difficult to persuade spit-and-polish commanders to use matte finish,
because it gets dirty quickly and looks very shabby. But shabbiness actually
helps concealment in the air, as the Navy now realizes. Today's Navy planes look
really grubby, but they're effectively camouflaged.''

Mr. Ferris also objected to a color devised by the Air Force for the initial
batch of F-15 fighters delivered in the 1970's. The entire plane was painted a
sky-blue color that Mr. Ferris believed would make the fighter dangerously
conspicuous in battle. He made his point in a painting of the F-15 that is now
part of the Air Force Art Collection, in which the fighter stands out starkly
against a pale gray sky.

Soon after Mr. Ferris presented his painting, the Air Force abandoned the scheme
and began coloring its F-15's gray. Today's F-15's are painted in two
''countershaded'' tones of gray, in which the lighter of the tones is applied to
parts of the airplane likely to be shaded from the sun; the effect is to reduce
the contrast presented by various parts of the plane to a distant viewer.

''It's important to avoid symmetrical camouflage patterns,'' Mr. Ferris said.
''The whole idea is to deceive the eye, so that even when an enemy catches sight
of you, he never can be sure what part of you he's looking at or how your plane
is oriented in the sky.''

In recent years, the Soviet air force also appears to have largely abandoned the
greens and tans often used in the past to camouflage its fighters. The latest
and best of Moscow's air-superiority fighters, the MIG-29, has been photographed
in Finland wearing a dull blue-gray paint finish. Soviet aircraft have retained
the red star as their national insignia, however.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Keith Ferris and an F-5E painted with one of his designs

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 19, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ADVERTISING

BYLINE: By Geraldine Fabrikant;
Videos Get Big Sales Campaign

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 640 words


FIVE years ago, when home video was still a fledgling industry, impulse buying
determined which videos consumers would choose.

But today's more sophisticated home video industry wants to shape those impulses
long before the consumer ever gets to the store.

Home video companies are pouring millions of dollars into advertising campaigns
to promote individual movie videos in an attempt to stir a relatively stagnant
market.

The expansion into consumer advertising by an industry that had focused almost
entirely on trade promotion is a major one.

*  For example, in a $1.6 million advertising campaign that is to begin next
month, HBO Video, a division of Time Inc., will promote rentals and sales of the
video version of ''Platoon,'' the Academy Award-winning film about the Vietnam
War. The campaign, by Cadwell Davis Partners, is aimed as much at women as at
men.

One of the six spots by the agency says: ''A time will come when a child will
ask you about the war in Vietnam. Know and understand. 'Platoon.' ''

The Walt Disney Company expects to spend around $25 million promoting videos of
its classic films, as well as such recent hits as ''Outrageous Fortune.'' Young
& Rubicam will buy the advertising time.

Over all, industry experts believe, $100 million or more will be spent by video
companies this year to promote their products.

The beneficiaries of all this spending are the agencies, where billings for the
home video business could dramatically rise.

*  At Paramount Video, for example, Robert Klingensmith, the president of the
Paramount Pictures division, said his company had switched its account to J.
Walter Thompson last year after relying on smaller boutique agencies when the
business was still new.

''We release 40 or 50 titles a year,'' he said. ''Because of our increased media
buys, we needed to know where to place spots. ''

At Christmas, when Disney's ''Lady and the Tramp'' will come out on video
cassette for the first time, the company will begin a $6 million advertising
campaign.

This week at the Video Software Dealers Association's convention in Las Vegas,
Nev., home video companies have been eagerly reassuring retailers that the
advertising budgets will increase. The retailers, as much as consumers, are a
key factor in the business.

In 1986, wholesale sales of video cassettes were $2.4 billion, according to
Steve Wilson, chairman of the Fairfield Group, a video research firm. Sales are
expected to increase 13 percent this year, but that is a much smaller increase
than in past years, he said.

*  Because of the capital investment required, retailers are reluctant to stock
video cassettes unless they can be sure there is a market for them.

By spending more to advertise to consumers, Mr. Klingensmith said: ''We can
reassure retailers that customers will come in and ask for the product. That
way, the retailer has an incentive to stock additional tapes.''

Some companies, such as Paramount, are advertising low-cost video cassettes.
Paramount was a pioneer in dropping the sales price of cassettes below $30 to
encourage consumers to buy videos instead of renting them.

But other companies, such as HBO Video, are promoting rentals in their marketing
campaigns, and selling ''Platoon'' for $99. The company's chief executive, Frank
O'Connell, said he believed that by promoting rentals, the stores would become
so inundated with customers that they would need to stock more cassettes.

Many of the commercials are inexpensive to produce because they rely heavily on
clips from the films. But not every studio is using film clips. Bill Mechanic,
senior vice president for video at Walt Disney Pictures, said his company had
decided against film clips to market its $29.95 cassette of ''Lady and the
Tramp'' because the ultimate buyer is the parent, not the child.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 20, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Supplying the Props for War Films

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, Aug. 19


When Stanley Kubrick wanted some palm trees, vehicles and military uniforms for
his movie ''Full Metal Jacket,'' he called Charley Biggs.

Some of the uniforms were on hand at Mr. Biggs's store, Charley's Militaria;
others, he had to manufacture. Mr. Biggs got the palm trees in Spain for
$30,000, the vehicles in Europe and then shipped them all to England.

''We had to make London look like Hue during the 1968 battle in Vietnam,'' Mr.
Biggs said recently in the cluttered office of his building here.

Bookcases are crammed with illustrated volumes of weapons. On one wall are
sketches of uniforms for a forthcoming movie. Another wall displays advertising
photographs of military equipment in use in Grenada, Honduras and Lebanon,
equipment his company can provide.

The office is housed toward the rear of a 13,000-square-foot building on an acre
and a half. In the front is a somewhat typical military surplus store, and the
rest of the building holds barrels, boxes, bins and racks of military equipment
and uniforms. He plans an addition.

Customers Include Governments

''We're really a four-part operation,'' Mr. Biggs said. ''We have a walk-in
store. We have a mail-order business, probably about the fifth-biggest military
surplus mail-order outfit there is. We have our sales to governmental units,
Federal, state and local, and to some foreign countries. And then we have our
movies.''

Mr. Biggs opened Charley's Militaria in 1969, shortly after serving with the
25th Infantry Regiment in Vietnam. It was while he was in the service that he
met Fred Rexer, an actor and screenwriter. Through his relationship with Mr.
Rexer and others, Mr. Biggs began supplying military equipment to Hollywood prop
companies.

''We've supplied equipment to maybe 20 movies since the late 1970's,'' Mr. Biggs
said. ''I imagine we've helped equip at least 100 TV shows. Whatever it takes,
we get the job done.''

Among the other major films for which Mr. Biggs has supplied equipment or
uniforms are ''Apocalypse Now,'' ''Uncommon Valor,'' ''Raw Deal'' and the
soon-to-be-released ''Hamburger Hill.''

Mr. Biggs's company was involved for about two and a half years with ''Full
Metal Jacket,'' and spent about 17 months on ''Apocalypse Now.''

While he has thousands of military items stored at his main building and in
warehouses, the company also makes a lot of its equipment. Charley's Militaria
has its own casting machines to turn out rubber and aluminum guns and grenades.

Real Guns Too Expensive

''When you're putting 150 men in the field, you can't afford to give each one of
them a real gun,'' Mr. Biggs said. ''Then, too, some of the equipment has to be
the 'drop' type, like you see a guy fall from a building or something. And the
grenades clipped to the chest need to be soft for when the actor falls on
them.''

When he needed thousands of yards of fabric to make Vietnam-era uniforms, he
couldn't find any and so he went to a mill and contracted for the fabric.

''That has turned out good for us,'' he said. ''It's a stock item we keep on
hand now.''

Mr. Biggs has developed contacts throughout the world to supply equipment he
doesn't have. ''We don't have any tanks, for instance, but I know where we can
get them,'' he said.

In supplying equipment and props for movies, Mr. Biggs primarily deals with the
producer but also works with the director, art director, costumer and set
designer. He and his staff of 19 often spend hundreds of hours on research to
make sure that every piece of equipment and uniform is authentic.

''I try to work from photographs of the action if at all possible,'' he said.
''We'll interview hundreds of soldiers who were there to find out what outfits
were in the battle and who all was there. The Vietnam veterans are the ones now
going to see those movies, and they're quick to spot something that isn't
authentic.''

Other Wars, Other Orders

The company has also helped equip World War II and Civil War films as well as
supplying material for films featuring foreign armies.''Right now, we have a
call for a lot of Soviet gear and we're casting that now,'' he said.

There are tricks to making the props: A soda can gets a coat of paint and a cap
and becomes a smoke grenade; a spray can, in the same manner, is turned into a
trip flare; a new pair of boots, after being sandblasted and treated with a
chlorine spray, appears well-worn.

Mr. Biggs doesn't advertise; he depends on word of mouth for movie and
television contracts. And his company is doing well, he said.

''Our net worth now is about $3 million,'' he said. ''That's not bad considering
that I started 18 years ago with only $750.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 20, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Apocalypse Now' to Be Re-released

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Aug. 19


Spurred by the success of such recent films about the Vietnam War as ''Platoon''
and ''Full Metal Jacket,'' United Artists is re-releasing Francis Coppola's 1979
movie ''Apocalypse Now'' in six cities next week.

''Apocalypse'' thus becomes the second movie to try to take advantage of the
public's revived interest in the Vietnam War. ''Go Tell the Spartans,'' which
was a critical success and a box-office failure in 1978, will be re-released in
Los Angeles in September.

''Apocalypse Now,'' starring Marlon Brando, Martin Sheen and Robert Duvall, and
loosely based on Joseph Conrad's novel ''Heart of Darkness,'' was nominated for
eight Academy Awards. It won Oscars for its cinematography and for sound, but
lost the major awards of best picture, director and screenplay to ''Kramer vs.
Kramer.'' ''Apocalypse'' was one of the first films to have electronic music in
its soundtrack.

'More Philosophical'

''It wasn't really a Vietnam movie in the sense 'Platoon' is,'' Mr. Coppola
said. ''It was more philosophical and less realistic. I took 'Heart of Darkness'
and dressed it in the clothes of Vietnam, but it was mythical operatic style
about any aggressive war in any time or period.''

New 70-millimeter prints will be shown starting Aug. 28 in Los Angeles, San
Francisco, San Jose, Calif., Seattle, St. Louis and Cincinnati -cities in which
the movie did particularly well in 1979.

''If the six cities show us there is money to be made, we'll expand it,'' said
Andy Fogelson, president of marketing for United Artists. ''It wouldn't be
utterly shocking to me if people came. I think there's a significant public
appetite for a visual understanding of the Vietnam War. Where do you go but
'Apocalypse Now' for the ultimate visual experience?''

Like the original 70-millimeter prints, the new prints will have no logo or
credits. Ticket buyers will be given a printed program.

Both ''Go Tell the Spartans,'' which was directed by Ted Post and stars Burt
Lancaster as a ''military advisor'' in the early years of the war, and
''Apocalypse Now'' have already been released on video cassette. Their reissues
flout the Hollywood wisdom that no film that has become available on cassette
can be successful in theaters.

A Huge Budget for 1979

At $31 million, a huge sum for a 1979 film, ''Apocalypse'' was as controversial
for its budget as for its pyrotechnics. The movie earned over $100 million
worldwide and shared the top prize at the Cannes Film Festival, but Mr. Coppola
had to put up his house, car, and profits from ''The Godfather'' as security for
the ever-rising budget. Mr. Coppola and United Artists are still arguing over
outstanding bills.

Fred Roos, co-producer of ''Apocalypse,'' said re-releasing the movie had been
considered since long before ''Platoon.'' ''All the time we get requests for
'Apocalypse Now' to be shown on college campuses and revival theaters,'' he
said. ''The Imax theater in Toronto runs it and it knocks your socks off in that
sound system.''

Mr. Roos paused, then added, ''There was such hullabaloo when the movie opened.
People were reviewing the budget. Now people will be able to look at the movie
for itself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'DIRTY DANCING,' A CATSKILLS ROMANCE IN 1963

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words


IN their time, almost all forms of popular American music and dancing, from the
foxtrot and the tango through rock-and-roll and all of its variations, have
scandalized the members of an older generation, whose own sexuality had earlier
been liberated by tamer means. As music, lyrics and dance steps have become more
and more sexually explicit, fathers and mothers from coast to coast have felt
alienated, and worried that pop music was leading their children straight to
hell. As it was with the bunny hug, danced to a ragtime tune in 1910, so is it
today when Madonna sings ''Papa Don't Preach.''

This culture generation gap has produced its own Hollywood genre. Most of these
films have been quickies on the order of ''Don't Knock the Rock'' (1957) and
''Twist Around the Clock'' (1962), but there have occasionally been more
ambitious if not much better films (Herbert Ross's ''Footloose,'' 1984). Though
music is the subject of each film, sex is the subtext. In the final reel,
generations reconcile; initially stuffy oldsters end up rocking, rolling or
twisting the night away, showing the young that, though creaky of joint and
infirm of body, they can still do ''it.''

''It'' is also the subject of ''Dirty Dancing,'' which opens today at the
National and other theaters.

''Dirty Dancing'' is a nicely bittersweet genre movie set at Kellerman's
Mountain House, a Grossinger's-like Catskills resort hotel, in the summer of
1963. President Kennedy was still alive, America's stake in Vietnam had not yet
become divisive, and socially conscious young people were going on freedom
marches in the South and joining the Peace Corps.

The film is about Frances Houseman (Jennifer Grey), nicknamed Baby, a pretty
middle-class teen-ager who finds her adult identity in her first love affair -
with Johnny Castle (Patrick Swayze), the hotel's dance instructor. For a girl of
Baby's conventionally liberal, Jewish background (she's planning to study
''third world economics'' in college), Johnny, a young man from the wrong side
of the tracks, exemplifies the freedom expressed through a new and as yet
socially unacceptable form of dancing. This ''dirty dancing,'' a phrase used
only in the film's title, features a lot of steamy body contact and pelvic
thrusts, which unleash emotions supposedly left withered by mambos and
cha-cha-chas.

Taking a formula that is itself creaky of joint and infirm of body, Eleanor
Bergstein, the writer, and Emile Ardolino, the director, have made an engaging
pop-movie romance of somewhat more substance than one usually finds in summer
movies designed for the young.

I suspect that one's responses to ''Dirty Dancing,'' to its period details, even
to its state of mind, will depend on the associations one brings into the
theater. What is undeniable, however, is a basic decency of feeling, shaped, in
part, by the film's obligations to its optimistic genre.

Baby, as written by Miss Bergstein and played by Miss Grey (''Ferris Bueller's
Day Off''), is no bubble-brained teen-ager, but a bright, inquisitive young
woman who's on her way to being her own person. Miss Bergstein is much better on
creating character than in re-imagining formula events. Baby's liberation comes
through her forbidden association with the womanizing Johnny Castle, after his
partner, Penny (Cynthia Rhodes), becomes pregnant and Baby agrees to substitute
for her in a mambo demonstration at another hotel.

There's a really quite awful subplot about Penny's abortion, financed by money
that Baby has borrowed from her conventionally liberal doctor-father, and about
the arrogant young Ivy League fellow who is responsible for Penny's condition.

Given the limitations of his role, that of a poor but handsome sex-object abused
by the rich women at Kellerman's Mountain House, Mr. Swayze is also good. He's
even convincing when he must admit, in one of the film's lesser moments, that
''the reason people treat me like nothing is because I am nothing.'' He's at his
best - as is the movie - when he's dancing.

The movie makes a lot of good use of period music, to which some not very
evocative new songs have been added. The dancing itself, especially the dirty
dancing, choreographed by Kenny Ortega, looks very contemporary, or, at least,
as contemporary as ''Saturday Night Fever,'' but it has a drive and a pulse that
give the film real excitement. Though the film takes place in 1963, just a year
after the twist was all the rage, the twist itself seems already to have come
and gone at Kellerman's Mountain House. The women's clothes also look
surprisingly mid-80's and, in 1963, would anybody have used the term ''wimp''?

These anachronisms aren't especially important, except that Miss Bergstein has
been so specific about the film's period. She seems to want ''Dirty Dancing'' to
be seen as a fond goodbye to a comfortable, liberal American way of life before
the country was radicalized by the assassination of President Kennedy and by the
increasingly bitter anti-Vietnam War movement. That's loading a small movie with
rather more than it can carry without a lot of highly detailed program notes.

''Dirty Dancing'' works best when it's most direct and unpretentious. It has the
kind of sweet simplicity that somehow always eludes John Hughes (''Sixteen
Candles,'' ''Pretty in Pink,'' ''Ferris Bueller's Day Off''). Mr. Ardolino,
whose background is in theater and in television dance films, doesn't clutter
the film with extraneous, sentimental detail, nor even with too much colorful
(and familiar) detail about life in your usual Catskill resort hotel. He also
obtains excellent performances from his cast, which, in addition to Miss Grey,
Mr. Swayze and Miss Rhodes, includes Jerry Orbach, as Baby's father; Jack
Weston, as the owner of Kellerman's, and Lonny Price, who is especially funny as
Mr. Weston's arrogant, wimpish grandson.


''Dirty Dancing,'' which has been rated PG-13 (''Special Parental Guidance
Suggested for Those Younger Than 13''), includes some vulgar language and a lot
of dancing that is comparatively erotic.

Watch Your Step

DIRTY DANCING, directed by Emile Ardolino; written by Eleanor Bergstein;
director of photography, Jeff Jur; choreography by Kenny Ortega; music by John
Morris; edited by Peter C. Frank; produced by Linda Gottlieb and Ms. Bergstein;
released by Vestron Pictures. At Gemini Twin, Second Avenue at 64th Street;
National Twin, Broadway at 44th Street; 86th Street East Twin, near Second
Avenue; 57th Street Playhouse, at Avenue of the Americas; 23d Street West
Triplex, near Eighth Avenue; Loews 84th Street Six, at Broadway. Running time:
86 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.

Frances (Baby) Houseman... Jennifer Grey; Johnny Castle... Patrick Swayze; Jake
Houseman... Jerry Orbach; Penny Johnson... Cynthia Rhodes; Max Kellerman... Jack
Weston; Lisa Houseman... Jane Brucker; Marjorie Houseman... Kelly Bishop; Neil
Kellerman... Lonny Price; Robbie Gould... Max Cantor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Patrick Swayze and Jennifer Grey

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 22, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Appears to Hinder an Emigration Accord

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Aug. 20


As American hopes of restarting a legal emigration process from Vietnam have
been rising over the last month, Vietnamese officials here appear to be putting
obstacles in the path of agreement.

In an interview Wednesday, Luu Van Tanh, vice director of the Consular Affairs
Bureau, which handles emigration here, said that only family reunification cases
would be considered in the near future, ruling out thousands of political
prisoners or other applicants associated with the former South Vietnamese
regime.

The hopes of many Amerasian children may also be affected by what a city
official here described as a demand that American fathers claim their children
before they will be allowed to leave.

Officials say there may be 10,000 Amerasian children in the country, most of
them in their middle to late teens. Many do not know who their fathers were.

Number of Refugees Increasing

The delays over legal emigration comes as the number of people trying to flee
Vietnam in boats is increasing in the region, refugee officals say. In Ho Chi
Minh City, formerly Saigon, people talk openly about arranging passages on these
dangerous voyages.

The refugees are one of three rough categories of emigrants at issue between
Vietnam and the United States, which have no diplomatic relations. The others
are Amerasians and applicants under the Orderly Departure Program, which was
begun in 1979 with the assistance of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

Under the Orderly Departure Program, Vietnamese can go to France, Canada,
Australia and other countries, although most seek American visas for family or
political reasons.

Interviews of applicants for Orderly Departure were halted by Vietnam in January
1986. People have continued to leave Vietnam at the rate of about 200 a week,
however, as officials clear a backlog of nearly 20,000 emigrants.

Optimistic on New Interviews

After a meeting in Hanoi in July between the American program's Bangkok-based
director, Bruce Beardsley, and Vietnamese officials, both sides were optimistic
that interviews could resume soon.

Mr. Tanh said the Americans had been asked at the meeting to explain why 4,000
applicants had not received an answer to their visa requests. The United States
is reported to have resolved many of those cases, and to have proposed a date to
resume interviews.

But Mr. Tanh said Vietnam also wanted to make ''adjustments'' to the overall
program, involving office accommodation and interviewing methods. Vietnamese
officials say most Western Governments conduct interviews that are too long and
demand time-consuming, detailed health screening.

He said this created a ''bad psychological atmosphere.''

Restrictions on Meetings

Mr. Tanh added that American officials would not be permitted to come to Vietnam
under United Nations auspices in the future.

''They will have to come as representatives of the American Government,'' he
said. Even so, they would not be empowered to hear cases of released political
prisoners, other former associates of the defeated South Vietnamese Government
or employees of American organizations in Vietnam.

Those cases would have to be discussed at a higher level he said. He added that
this would be among the humanitarian concerns President Reagan's special envoy,
John W. Vessey Jr., on a visit to Hanoi this month, agreed to consider in future
Vietnamese-American meetings.

In a separate interview, Nguyen Duy Lien, a newly elected Deputy Mayor of Ho Chi
Minh City who is in charge of social welfare, said that the resettlement of
Amerasians was being held up because ''we must have the father's request'' to
let them go.

Sent to Orphanages

Residents of Ho Chi Minh City say that many Amerasian children were rounded up
in May and sent to orphanages, labor groups or other institutions. The fact that
they have not yet returned to the streets, where many lived by begging from
Westerners, indicates that many may be in custody.

Mrs. Lien said Vietnam had created ''all the favorable conditions'' to
resettlement of Amerasians, known here as ''con lai'' or half-breeds.

The United States had failed to respond to Vietnam's overtures, Mrs. Lien said.
Americans, individually or in relief organizations, say they have offered many
ideas to Hanoi on how to move the children, but there has been no follow-through
from Vietnam.

Mrs. Lien declined to comment on these American views.

''I have every right to blame the other side,'' she said. ''No one has the right
to blame us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 22, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DALAT JOURNAL;
CITY OF MIMOSA, UNTOUCHED BY WAR

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: DALAT, Vietnam, Aug. 15


The church bells are first to greet the dawn as it seeps into the darkness of a
wet and chilly morning in the Central Highlands. Hundreds of people respond to
the call at a 5:15 mass in Dalat Cathedral and at smaller churches or the
chapels of crumbling monasteries in the surrounding hills.

To the light of kerosene lamps and candles, Roman Catholic worshipers bundled
against the damp mountain air in an assortment of old coats and scarves chant
and pray their way through a once-foreign ritual they have made Vietnamese.
There are no missals or hymnals, and no organ on weekdays.

In its churches, its flower gardens and its villas set among pine trees, the old
hill station of Dalat, more than any other place accessible to a foreigner in
Vietnam, seems untouched by half a century of occupation and war.

At the Dalat Palace hotel, the manager, Thai Vien, is smoothly formal in mended
suit and vintage tie as he moves among his clientele at table, shaking hands in
the manner of a French host.

Memory Books of 3 Regimes

Mr. Vien, like Dalat, has known three regimes: French colonialism (with its
Japanese interregnum), the brief experiment known as South Vietnam and then
Hanoi's conquering socialist republic.

Mr. Vien keeps memory books -one of them an old, tan leather-bound volume and
two newer models with appropriately red plastic covers -that record half a
century of enthusiasms:

''Nous quittons Dalat avec regret,'' a Frenchman wrote - ''We leave Dalat with
regret.''

''An outstanding spot in a shrinking universe!'' said the American of the next
epoch.

''I have been told there is only one Dalat,'' a Malaysian Ambassador added in
1982. ''This is indeed true. There will never be another.'' No Battles Fought
Here A city of immutable pleasure is not a description with which all the
leaders of Dalat's 100,000 people feel comfortable.

They tell a visitor that they have always shared the country's struggles. But
they acknowledge that there were no battles here, and no crowds of American
troops on rest-and-recreation sprees who might have attracted saboteurs.

Would-be revolutionaries who joined the Communist-backed student underground at
Dalat University in the 1960's mostly finished their studies and took their
degrees. After the fall of South Vietnam in 1975, they - along with their peers
who had spent the war years training in Cuba or elsewhere in the Soviet bloc
-found jobs in the new order.

Dalat is a young city, especially by the measure of Vietnamese history. It was
built in the 1920's and 30's as a French colonial summer capital that Vietnamese
could enter only with permission. It was a refuge of imperial France in the same
way Simla and other hill stations in India, Sri Lanka or Malaya were to the
British in those malarial, pre-air-conditioning days when empires could be
beastly places.

Blind to the impending end of their Southeast Asian world, homesick French
administrators and settlers built leisure homes in Dalat in the styles of their
provincial origins.

''They had architects who worked in the Savoie, Norman, Alsace, Basque and
sometimes Belgian styles'' said Le Kim Ngu, a former French-language teacher who
is now deputy director of tourism.

Communists Now Use Palaces

The group-travel business is a new venture for Dalat, which has known
pleasure-seekers - Communist Party leaders now use its imperial palaces - but is
unaccustomed to hordes.

''We want to restore the villas, but need to do research on their differing
architectural origins,'' he said.

While a young city chronologically, Dalat is not a youthful place. There is
little entertainment and limited employment for the young, residents say.
Retired people seem most attracted by the tranquillity and the healthy
atmosphere of the town, once used as a French sanitorium.

Duong Quang Tin is an exception. Mr. Tin, who is 26 years old, cultivates a
propsperous market garden on a rural hillside near the Valley of Love, with its
lake created by the former Saigon regime as part of a water project. His
vegetable, fruit and flower farm is a sideline; Mr. Tin is a long-distance truck
driver by vocation.

The few acres of land belonged to his parents, Mr. Tin said, as he offered
visitors generous tumblers of his own strawberry wine. Like many people in
Dalat, Mr. Tin says he found that private ownership and entrepreneurship have
continued unabated in the new Vietnam.

In fact, recent economic changes encourage more ''family economies'' like his.
Mr. Tin, who once planned to emigrate to France under the Orderly Departure
Program, thinks he might change his mind and remain on his beautiful hillside
here if present trends continue.

Stawberries for the Nuns

Strawberries - but in jam, not wine - are also a mainstay of the Buddhist nuns
at the Linh Phong Pagoda, on a hilltop in Dalat town.

There, peace has also reigned unbroken since the mid 1940's for their nuns'
order which, uncharacteristically for Vietnam, is part of in a religious
minority in Dalat, where by official figures about 70 percent of the people are
Roman Catholic.

At the pagoda, surrounded by fruitful orchards, gardens and groves of the mimosa
trees that are a hallmark of Dalat, Hue Thanh, a nun who is nearing 70, said
that in any case, people in religious orders are not the best sources of worldly
information.

''We live by our own energies, making our cakes and jam,'' she said. ''A nun's
life everywhere is always the same.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of A bicycle and a horse cart, still the main means of
transportation (Times/Barbara Crossette); Map of Vietnam

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 22, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMAARY: SATURDAY, AUGUST 22, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words



INTERNATIONAL/2-5

Sgt. Clayton Lonetree was convicted on all 13 counts of espionage by a
court-martial jury after a trial that had lasted two weeks. He is the first
United States marine to be tried for spying.    Page 1

A U.N. meeting will be boycotted by the United States. The conference will
discuss how money saved under future disarmament agreements could be used to
stimulate economic development.    1

Nicaraguan rebel leaders pledged to accept the terms of a regional peace treaty
signed by five Central American countries. They made the pledge at a meeting
with the Salvadoran President, Jose Napoleon Duarte.     2

Iran is taking advantage of a lull in attacks on Persian Gulf shipping to
increase oil exports and bolster its war-pressed economy, Western diplomats say.
The Iranians are reportedly exporting more than 2 million barrels a day.    3

A second autopsy on Rudolf Hess was performed as his son and his lawyer
continued to express suspicion about the official account of the Nazi leader's
death in Spandau Prison.     5

In Tokyo, officials played down the diplomatic significance of the expulsion
orders handed to two Japanese in Moscow. Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone
insisted that the expulsions were unjustified.     4

In the Philippines, the anniversary of the killing of Benigno S. Aquino Jr. was
the occasion for introspection over the nation's progress since his widow
assumed the presidency 18 months ago.    4

In Zimbabwe, a house of Parliament voted to abolish the practice of reserving
seats in Parliament for the country's tiny white minority. Officials sang and
danced in the aisles when the vote was announced.    5

When Iranian religion and politics become one     3
Better Syria ties sought by U.S.     3
Dalat Journal     4
Vietnam appears to hinder emmigration accord     4

Miner killed, 20 hurt in South African strike     5

 NATIONAL/6-8, 28, 33

In another sign of slowing inflation, the Labor Department reported that
consumer prices rose a modest two-tenths of 1 percent in July. It was the
smallest monthly rise in the Consumer Price Index this year.    1

The U.S. economy grew modestly in the spring. The 2.3 percent annual rate was
lower than the growth of the first quarter, the Government said. Analysts
attributed the weaker second quarter to a disappointing trade performance in
June.    35

In a comprehensive banking plan, the chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation proposed eliminating almost all Federal banking laws that restrict
the nation's bank holding companies.    1

The survivor of the airplane crash in Detroit, Cecilia Cichan, has become the
focus of concern from relatives and physicians who worry as much about her
emotional recovery as her physical convalescence.    1

Most victims of crash identified     7

Enforcement of a security regulation under which clearances would be revoked for
any official who declined to sign a disputed pledge of secrecy was suspended by
the Reagan Administration in a surprise move.    8

In Washington, a helicopter plunged into the Potomac River, killing three
passengers and injuring the pilot. Witnesses said the aircraft was hovering
above the water when it appeared to lose power.    7

A task force on pornography being run by the Justice Department is leading an
effort to stem the distribution of obscene materials. But critics say that the
wave of prosecution carries the threat of censorship.    6

Gary Hart is not reconsidering resuming his collapsed campaign, a senior aide to
Mr. Hart said. But there were reports that supporters of Mr. Hart were promoting
the idea of his re-entering the campaign.    7

In appeals for women's support, five Democratic Presidential hopefuls addressed
or plan to address the National Women's Political Caucus. But the potential
candidacy of Representative Patricia Schroeder dominated conversation.     6

A rabies epidemic among raccoons and other wild animals in eastern Maryland is
being fought by wildlife specialists using the benefits of a natural geographic
barrier and an program of immunization.    6

Museum planned for Titanic artifacts     8
Special security inquiry for homosexuals barred     8

REGIONAL/29-31

A transcript of a conversation between Representative Mario Biaggi and Meade H.
Esposito that was wiretapped was unsealed by a Federal judge. Prosecutors
contend the conversation shows the two tried to obstruct justice.    1

Four Bronx youths arrested in the murder of the head of the New York City school
custodians' union were hired to do the killing by another Bronx man who was
found shot to death on Staten Island last Saturday, the police said.    1

The debate at the Century Club over whether to admit women is causing tempers to
flare at the Manhattan club. The dispute is causing rifts among friends, and
many members have threatened to resign.    1

Six people were shot in the head in a South Bronx apartment during a
drug-related robbery, the police said. Three died at the scene, while three
others, including a 13-year-old girl, were given a chance to survive.    31

Some service stations are cheating consumers by selling regular gasoline at
premium prices in New York City, according to a report released by the Federal
General Accounting Office.    29

A building's recovery in the Bronx is credited to the work of one woman, Ramona
Munoz. ''If everybody fought like Mrs. Munoz fought,'' one nearby resident said,
''then maybe there wouldn't be any housing problem in New York City.''    29

The Regency Theater will close before Sept. 3 to become a first-run house for
the giant Cineplex Odeon Corporation. It is one of a dwindling number of
film-revival houses long treasured by old-movie buffs.     9

Russians arrive for conference      29

Anatomy of shelters deal     29

Priest pleads not guilty in ticket theft case      30

New head of Probation Department named      31

Prosecutor to assert police corruption on L.I.     31

New company plans to use Brooklyn Navy Yard     31

Signature requirement in New York election law struck down      50

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 22, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Defeat for American Express

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


A mid-sized Indianapolis bank has won a contract to provide financial services
to American military personnel in three European countries, defeating the
American Express Company, which has handled the job for 40 years.

The bank, the Merchants National Corporation, won a $26.8 million Defense
Department contract to manage 134 bank branches serving 528,000 military and
civilian employees and their families in West Germany, Greece and the
Netherlands for two years, starting no later than next February.

After that, the Government has three one-year options to renew the arrangement,
according to Maj. David Super, a Defense Department spokesman. He would not
elaborate on why the switch had been made. The department confirmed the change
yesterday after it was reported in The Indianapolis Star.

'A Little Complacent'

A source close to Merchants National, who asked not to be identified, said,
''Obviously, if the Pentagon goes from a Goliath in financial banking services
to a small untested company out in the Midwest, the conclusion you can draw from
that is that American Express got a little complacent.''

American Express, until now the largest purveyor of military banking services
overseas, will still manage roughly 60 military bank branches serving 100,000
military personnel in the Pacific, Britain, Iceland, Panama and the Indian Ocean
island of Diego Garcia, said Jack Saverino, senior vice president and general
manager for military banking at the company. The division is part of American
Express's international bank.

He added that American Express also recently lost its management contract
covering military bank branches in Japan and Okinawa to the National Bank of
Fort Sam Houston, San Antonio.

The financial services company has operated overseas bank branches for American
service personnel since 1947. With thousands of them still abroad after World
War II, the military had sought the company's help in providing retail banking
services such as accepting deposits, selling traveler's checks to service
personnel sending money home, converting dollars into local currency, and acting
as the military's payroll agent.

American Express's commitment to the military sometimes meant dangerous
assignments. For example, an American Express bank was the only one to operate
in the combat zone in South Vietnam in the late 1960's. ''No other bank would
accept the location,'' Mr. Saverino said.

The banking business at a military installation differs in one respect from that
at regular retail outlets. The Government typically owns the bricks and mortar
and puts its capital at risk. It awards outsiders only the right to manage the
branches, on a cost-plus basis.

''They're not doing banking, they're just managing these branches,'' said Ken
Puglisi, a senior vice president with Keefe, Bruyette & Woods.

Merchants National, a $4 billion holding company that owns 115 branches, had
never before sought an overseas military contract, said Robert Fesler, its chief
financial officer. But it has managed two bank branches for more than 60 years
at Fort Benjamin Harrison, near Indianapolis. Military banking, he added, ''is
neither a big part of our business nor is it new to us.''

The contract would not ordinarily have been available for two years, because
American Express's contract had been renewed only a year ago, according to
people familiar with the bidding process. But Merchants National learned about
nine months ago that the Defense Department might be taking bids.

The bank enlisted the help of Senator Dan Quayle, Republican of Indiana, who
wrote to the Defense Department on April 10 to request a copy of the cost and
technical proposals that American Express had submitted when the contract was
last awarded.

When Merchants National had asked for the information on its own earlier,
American Express had protested in writing to the Defense Department on the
ground that its proposals contained sensitive information about its business
strategy and should not be provided to its competitor. It could not immediately
be learned whether Merchants National subsequently obtained the documents.

''I think there was one bit of information that came back as a result of the
letter, but I have trouble remembering,'' said Otto Nicholas Frenzel 3d,
Merchant National's chairman.

Two or three other potential bidders showed some interest, but in the end the
choice was between American Express and Merchants National.

Mr. Frenzel said he thought that his bank would now control 60 to 70 percent of
the military banking facilities worldwide. ''We worked at it,'' he said of
winning the contract, ''and we had some bells and whistles that they just hadn't
been up to speed on yet.'' He cited the bank's automatic teller machines, its
banking software, and some of the other ''little things we've done out here in
the hinterland.''

American Express officials would not comment on why the company lost the
account. ''We're in the process right now of requesting a debriefing session,
which we are entitled to under the law as to the particulars,'' Mr. Saverino
said. ''Until such time, our position is that we do not believe it would be
appropriate to make a comment.''

But he added that the decision did not reflect dissatisfaction with his
company's performance. ''In our case we were there for 40 years,'' he said. ''I
assume we had the ability to perform.''

Analysts said the loss of the contract was not expected to have a significant
impact on American Express's earnings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of headquarters of Merchants National Corportion in Indianapolis
(AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Pragmatism and Dogma Vie As Vietnam's Regional Rivals

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Aug. 20


For more than a decade, a power struggle has been going on in Vietnam that many
Vietnamese seem to regard as the final stage of an unfinished revolution.

The picture of this struggle that emerges from several weeks of interviews with
officials, journalists and business people in both state and private sectors is
partly one of a test of wills between Hanoi's orthodox Marxists - whose ideas of
development are rooted in the Soviet Union's Stalinist era or the most radical
period of Chinese Communism - and a group of more pragmatic and flexible
leaders.

Communism is not being challenged here. But Vietnamese say openly that the party
has lost the public's confidence. If it fails to regain this, ''who knows what
will happen,'' an editor said.

Inevitably, this clash has involved a broader confrontation between the
isolated, undeveloped, agrarian culture of northern Vietnam and the
cosmopolitan, entrepreneurial south. Those differences predated the introduction
of Communism to Vietnam by Ho Chi Minh half a century ago.

Process Began in 1975

As described candidly by many Vietnamese, the process of unifying the nation
seems in retrospect to have begun rather than ended in 1975 with the fall of
this city, formerly Saigon. In the end, much that is southern may prevail. But
the battle is not over.

In a new atmosphere of outspokenness in Vietnam today, details are emerging of
the machinations behind leadership struggles that led in December 1986 to the
naming of Nguyen Van Linh, a northerner who spent much of his career in the
south, as general secretary of the Communist Party.

Those who have observed the power struggle at close range over the last 12 years
tell Orwellian stories of armed economic police sent to ferret out people who
were suspected of encouraging free enterprise or otherwise undermining the
official policy of total state control of goods and services.

''We lived in terrible times from 1975 to the early 1980's,'' the owner of a
small bakery said. ''We were afraid of everything.''

Editors recount tales of unwritten pacts among journalists to protect vulnerable
new political thinkers from entrenched hard-liners.

Old Jobs, New Masters

''In the first few years after unification, we had certain duties,'' said Tuat
Viet, an editor of Saigon Giai Phong, the local Communist Party newspaper. Mr.
Viet, a southerner educated in Hanoi who was sent back to the south after 1975,
said those duties involved promoting North Vietnamese policies and persuading
people here to go on working for new masters with no managerial skills.

Mr. Viet said, ''But by 1978, we began to see the contradictions between
improving production and the backward system of management we had. Journalists
in this city began to recognize that we needed some changes.

''In 1975, Ho Chi Minh City was the most developed economy in Vietnam,'' he
said. ''But can you imagine that a few years later this city, in the middle of
the fertile Mekong Delta, had to rely on grain imported from abroad? People
could not accept that.''

Crusading politicians and journalists focused their attacks on a system of state
subsidies that was stifling or even reversing economic growth, while leading to
large-scale corruption and the abuse of political power.

'Oppressed by Officials'

''To be frank, we were being oppressed by party and state officials -only they
had the power to oppress,'' said Huu Tho, deputy editor in chief of Nhan Dan,
the Communist Party daily paper.

The critics also zeroed in on the Ho Chi Minh generation's enthusiasm for
large-scale, Soviet-supported industrial and energy projects, which ran counter
to Vietnamese traditional economic patterns - and in any case have delivered
almost no results.

Vietnam now ranks 161st among 164 nations measured by the United Nations in per
capita gross national product, a provincial official in Phu Khanh said in an
interview, repeating the figure several times.

In discussing the degree to which Vietnam has swung along behind sucessive
Soviet policies, Vietnamese journalists and others say that the struggle between
orthodox Marxists and pragmatists was well under way by the late 1970's, before
the Gorbachev era in the Soviet Union.

'Vietnamese Are Very Clever'

''Economic renovation must be in line with with our country's traditional
practices,'' Mr. Tho said. ''History tells us if you just imitate others, you
fail.''

But Vietnamese add that the example set by the Soviet party leader has been a
prop of tremendous value to like-minded people here.

''The Vietnamese are very clever,'' a Government official said. ''We make use of
these Russian ideas for our own purposes.''

For the moment, most Vietnamese say confidently, the pragmatists led by Mr. Linh
are not only in control, but also very popular.

Mr. Linh, whom southerners now credit with quietly supporting heretical economic
practices - small private enterprises, in particular - while head of the
Communist Party here in the late 1970's, was apparently purged from the
Politburo by hard-liners in 1982. His return in 1985 marked the beginning of two
years of steady change.

Orthodox Marxists Powerful

But followers of the orthodox Marxists, symbolized in most Vietnamese minds by
the late party leader, Le Duan, and his immediate successor, Truong Chinh,
remain powerful.

Diplomats say Mr. Chinh - the architect in the 1950's of a disastrous attempt at
forced collectivization -fought up to the eve of the Sixth Party Congress last
year to block Mr. Linh's ascent.

Foreign visitors still encounter old-style party cadres in Government offices -
or don't meet known hard-liners because they refuse to be interviewed by
journalists from democratic countries.

''The resistance to change is still large,'' an editorial board member at Saigon
Giai Phong said in a conversation at the newspaper office. ''The obstacles are
many.'' Among these he listed the entrenched bureaucrats whose jobs may now be
threatened.

'Struggle Is Still Complex'

''The struggle is still complex,'' Mr. Viet said. ''A zigzag route may be
unavoidable. But the present trend is clear. This is a demand of 60 million
people, 60 million people who refuse to continue living with a stagnant
bureaucracy.''

The story of Ngyuen Thi Thi, who is 65, gives life to the political abstractions
now being discussed in Vietnam.

Mrs. Thi, who runs a successful food processing network based on smallscale
family businesses, is no capitalist. Her Communist credentials are impeccable: a
guerrilla at 18, she ran as a courier between the North Vietnamese and their
southern operatives.

Her husband was beheaded under the regime of President Ngo Dinh Diem in 1959,
she said. On her office wall are pictures of her meeting in 1968 with Ho Chi
Minh. She is a Socialist Hero with seven medals to her credit.

In Charge of Rice Distribution

But she is also a southerner.

After 1975, when Hanoi moved its team into the south, Mrs. Thi was put in charge
of rice distribution for Ho Chi Minh City.

As she visited small outlets around the city, she quickly discovered that many
shopkeepers had other skills. She turned over 1,000 of her 7,000 distribution
points into small factories that made noodles, cookies, cakes, starch and other
cereal.

''In 1980 and 1981, the Economic Police decided that I was making a mistake by
establishing this network,'' she said. ''I was told this was contrary to
socialist economic management.

''One day, about 60 armed police surrounded my office,'' she said. ''But
luckily, I did not go to jail. Nguyen Van Linh and Vo Van Kiet were in Ho Chi
Minh City then. And they gave me the green light to go ahead.''

Mr. Linh was in disgrace within a year, the victim of hard-liners. But by 1985
he and Mr. Kiet, now head of national economic planning, had re-emerged in major
roles, their policies vindicated.

''The hard-liners are still strong,'' she said, ''but they are unlikely to be
able to reverse the present trend.

''We believe in these new leaders,'' she said, ''because they once shared our
difficulties.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VISIT BY SWEDE TO UNDERLINE BETTER U.S. TIES

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Aug. 22


A recent improvement in Sweden's political relations with the United States will
be formally underlined early next month when Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson goes
to Washington for the first state visit there by a Swedish Prime Minister in 26
years.

''The relationship has been transformed,'' said the United States Ambassador to
Sweden, Gregory J. Newell, alluding to past disagreements over issues like the
Vietnam War, Central America and disarmament. ''We've replaced public crossfire
with sitting down for a reasoned dialogue.''

Both Governments stress that the invitation to Mr. Carlsson is not a personal
one and that the process of mending diplomatic relations began before he became
Prime Minister in February 1986.

Yet most political analysts here say Mr. Carlsson's restrained style and
overriding concern with domestic issues has eased the diplomatic reconciliation
with Washington. His flamboyant predecessor, Olof Palme, who was assassinated in
February 1986, was known for his fiery speeches and his interest in
international issues.

'The Tone Has Changed'

''With Carlsson, the tone has changed somewhat, and that has helped smooth
relations with Washington,'' said Nordal Akerman, a director of the Swedish
Institute of International Affairs, a Government-supported research
organization.

But while the style and presentation may have changed, Swedish policies
generally have not. In an interview in his office Thursday, Mr. Carlsson noted
that differences between the United States and Sweden remain, particularly over
American policy toward Nicaragua.

''We think the U.S. is breaking international law, and we regret the support of
the contras,'' he said. ''So there are areas where we still disagree, but this
will not prevent a dialogue.''

He said the Washington visit, which is to begin Sept. 9, is ''of great
importance.''

Of particular interest to Sweden, a neutral nation that campaigns
internationally for disarmament, are the current negotiations between the United
States and the Soviet Union aimed at eliminating medium-range nuclear weapons in
Europe.

Missile Pact a 'Step Forward'

A superpower pact on medium-range missiles, Mr. Carlsson said, would ''be an
enormous step forward'' that would likely enhance the image of the Reagan
Administration in Sweden and in much of Europe.

''That would create a feeling of optimism not seen in many years,'' Mr. Carlsson
said, noting that he hoped an agreement on medium-range forces would lead to
further steps toward disarmament. Medium-range rockets travel from 600 to 3,000
miles.

On bilateral issues, perhaps the best example of Stockholm's closer working
relationship with Washington was a Swedish Government decree in June 1986, after
consultations with American officials, to restrict the re-export of foreign
high-technology equipment that has military uses. In the past, Swedish companies
have been fined for selling sophisticated American equipment to the Eastern
bloc.

Moreover, the Swedish decree has been rigorously applied, according to Mr.
Newell, who has been Ambassador here since December 1985. Shipments of American
high-speed computer and telecommunications components from Sweden have been
stopped and turned back by customs officials in recent months, Mr. Newell said.
He did not mention the names of Swedish companies involved.

In return, the Pentagon in the spring removed Sweden from a list requiring
review of such high-technology sales. Being taken off the list reduces the red
tape involved in transactions. In addition, the Commerce Department announced in
May that it would simplify controls on American high-technology exports to
Sweden.

''We've found an attentive ear and a willingness to deal with these issues
constructively,'' Mr. Newell said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CONVOY BEGINS VOYAGE DOWN GULF

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: MANAMA, Bahrain, Aug. 22


Four re-registered Kuwaiti tankers, including the mine-damaged Bridgeton,
slipped away from Kuwait before dawn today under American naval escort,
beginning their dangerous voyage back down the Persian Gulf.

The Navy, citing security considerations, has refused to give out any
information on ship movements. But shipping sources in the gulf said tonight the
convoy had dropped anchor for the night near the Manama light, about 50 miles
northeast of here.

The Navy warships had escorted three other tankers of Kuwait's oil fleet, now
flying the American flag under a Reagan Administration plan to protect Gulf
shipping, to Kuwait's Ahmadi port Friday night. The convoy had crept through the
Strait of Hormuz under cover of darkness overnight Wednesday in the third such
trip.

Last month, the supertanker Bridgeton, intended to shuttle oil through the
strait to smaller ships, struck a mine on the first voyage of the re-registered
Kuwaiti ships through the gulf.

U.S. Fleet Grows

Since then, the Navy, which had been unprepared to defend against mines, has
rushed equipment to the area, including the amphibious assault ship U.S.S.
Guadalcanal, with Sea Stallion mine-hunting helicopters aboard. The floating
dock U.S.S. Raleigh passed through the Suez Canal Friday en route here, carrying
four wooden-hulled Vietnam-era minesweepers.

Eight other mine sweepers, dating back to the Korean War, have been reactivated
from the Naval Reserves to send to the gulf.

With the arrival of the battleship Missouri, which is expected any day, the
American fleet in the region will have grown to nearly 40 vessels.

The Navy has named Rear Adm. Dennis M. Brooks as the overall commander for the
fleet.

Admiral Brooks, who will take as his flagship the aircraft carrier U.S.S.
Constellation in the Indian Ocean, will outrank the Middle East Task Force
commander, Rear Adm. Harold Bernsen. Admiral Bernsen, who had commanded only a
half-dozen ships in the gulf, was deemed too junior for the swelling fleet.

Departure of Convoy

The overall commander responsible for the force in the region, which is
understood to include Air Force, Army and Marine personnel and such special
operations units as the Navy's SEAL commandos, is General George D. Crist of the
Marines. General Crist is the commander of the rapid deployment Central Command,
based in Tampa, Fla.

Journalists traveling through Kuwait's harbor in small boats this morning, found
that the Bridgeton and three smaller ships that had arrived in the second
navy-escorted convoy up the gulf, were no longer at their moorings.

The Bridgeton was understood to be partially loaded, while the other three
ships, the Gas King, the Sea Isle City and the Ocean City, were fully loaded.

The convoy that arrived in Kuwait Friday night, the third to travel up the gulf,
included the 295,000-ton Townsend and two smaller, liguefied-gas carriers, the
Gas Queen and Gas Princess. The convoy that left this morning is the second to
make the return run.

Reports of Distress Call

Although the Navy has maintained a news blackout since the first convoy, a
Pentagon-organized pool of journalists, including a television crew, a
wire-service reporter, a still photographer and a radio broadcaster - was sent
by helicopter to the Guadalcanal today.

Ship radios in the area this evening crackled with reports of nine people in the
water calling for help, with rescue operations underway. At least one suggested
a helicopter had gone down.

A spokesman for the American Embassy here quoted Navy officials as saying that
none of its helicopters had been lost and that the pool reporters were safely
aboard the Guadalcanal. [A report by the Iranian press agency IRNA received in
London Sunday said that an American helicopter carrying several American
reporters and photographers had crashed in the Persian Gulf Saturday, Reuters
reported from London. IRNA said the Iranian Navy had picked up five bodies but
did not know the exact number of casualties.] The American effort to protect
Kuwait's shipping has, in effect, put the United States on the side of Iraq,
which is supported by Kuwait. ---- Navy Confirms Convoy's Voyage WASHINGTON,
Aug. 22 - The U.S. Navy's Central Command confirmed that another convoy of
vessels under American naval protection had left Kuwait without incident today
on the trip out of the Persian Gulf.

The Navy said four vessels, the tankers Bridgeton, Sea Isle City, Ocean City and
the liquefied petroleum gas carrier Gas King, are being escorted by the
destroyer U.S.S. Kidd and the frigates U.S.S. Hawes and U.S.S. Klakring.

NEW AIR RAIDS IN GULF WAR

 NICOSIA, Cyprus, Aug. 22 (AP) -Iran and Iraq announced air raids on each
other's industrial and military installations day in an intensifying air war.

The official Iranian press agency, monitored here, said Iranian warplanes bombed
two targets in northern Iraq and one in the south.

Iraq responded today with what its press agency called a ''devastating raid'' by
about 40 Iraqi fighter-bombers on a petrochemical plant at Bandar Khomeini, an
Iranian port.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, AUGUST 23, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


INTERNATIONAL      3-17

 2,,q>The decision to protect oil tankers of Kuwait in the Persian Gulf did not
seem momentous to policy makers and few alternatives were considered, a
reconstruction of the decision based on interviews shows.      Page 1

 A power struggle in Vietnam has been going on for more than a decade. The clash
has involved a confrontation between the agrarian culture of northern Vietnam
and the cosmopolitan south.      1

 Before his court-martial conviction on spying charges, lawyers representing
Sgt. Clayton J. Lonetree said they planned to put the Marine Corps justice
system on trial in appeals that could continue for years.      11

 A South Korean shipyard worker died after a battle with riot policemen in the
southern island of Koje. It was the first death since a wave of labor unrest
began sweeping the country.      3

 In the Philippines, a national debate over the presence of two American bases
has begun with the filing of two bills that would bar nuclear weapons. Such a
ban could render the bases useless.      6

 In the first formal loan default by any country since the international debt
crisis began in August, 1982, Western banks have reportedly notified North Korea
that it is in default.    3

 Canada's Conservative Government of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney will mark the
third anniversary next week. But instead of celebrating, most of the
Conservatives in the Commons are predicting they will be routed in the next
election.      16

 The President of Burkina Faso, Capt. Thomas Sankara, 38 years old, is shunned
by Africa's older leaders as the continent's enfant terrible. But to much of
Africa's younger generation, he is a young man to their liking.      10

 South African miners are fired      4
 Peru's battles: drugs and terror      8
 Plan is unveiled to verify accord      9
 U.S. convoy begins trip in gulf      14
 Sudan's Government collapses      15
 Swedish leader to visit U.S.      17

 NATIONAL      18-21, 24-34, 46-49

 2,3.3,q>Tight restrictions on air traffic at nine airports, including some of
the fastest-growing fields in the country, were proposed by the Government,
responding to concern over an increase in near-collisions.      1

 Air travelers seem undaunted despite concerns about the recent rash of
near-collisions as well as the fatal crash last Sunday of a Northwest Airlines
jet near Detroit, interviews in five cities show.      30

 President Reagan has lost influence on Capitol Hill so markedly that he may be
forced to focus his attention this fall on goals that do not require
legislation, senior White House officials said.      1

 Charges of stealing rare documents from the Library of Congress and the
National Archives against Charles Merrill Mount are an extraordinary turn in the
life of a scholar whose career once held much promise.      28



 Patricia Schroeder's potential bid for the Democratic nomination for President
is being tested. It seems not much has changed since Geraldine A. Ferraro ran
for Vice President and was quizzed about her cooking.      24

 Farming without chemicals, once considered impractical and idealistic has
gained ground, moving closer to the mainstream of American agriculture. ''It
verges on the artistic,'' one farmer said.     18

 Advertising campaign backfires in Maryland      18
 U.S. education costs put at $308 billion in 1987-88      18
 U.S. drinking habits unchanged      19
 South leads the nation in felony conviction rate      20
 Debate over birth rates      25
 Funds transferred by Falwell      27
 Two die in Boston parade      28
 Cooling costs rose for July      29

 Regional      35-38, 41-44, 52-54

 2,,q>Agreement on a highway project and waterfront esplanade on the West Side
of Manhattan was announced by Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch. The agreement sets
out for the first time a high-level consensus view of the project.      1

 In a collaboration on a book to be entitled ''His Eminence and Hizzoner,''
Mayor Koch and John Cardinal O'Connor will each argue his position on abortion,
child care, homosexual rights and other issues on which church and state meet.
     1

 A triple-murder conviction should not be reinstated on the former middleweight
boxing contender Rubin (Hurricane) Carter, a Federal appeals court ruled,
upholding the decision of a lower court judge.      38

 In Westchester, Hamilton Fish 3d is preparing a race for Congress, something
his ancestors have been doing for generations. But, unlike his ancestors, he is
running as a Democrat. And his grandfather promises to work to defeat him.
42

 Rochester teachers would get a raise of 40.2 percent over three years - an
unusually steep increase for an urban school district - under a tentative
agreement. Under the pact, some teachers could eventually earn up to $70,000 a
year.      43

 An escaped inmate was shot to death in a Staten Island parking lot. He was shot
as many as 18 times, allegedly by a former friend seeking revenge, the police
said. The inmate fled Rikers Island a month ago.      35

 The Talk of Chautauqua      38
In Jersey, shore debris brings dread      38
 Haitian youth fears deportation      41
 What the new schools chancellor can do      42
 Middleman role in Conlin killing disputed      44

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE GARDEN;
CONSIDER DIVISION AND REPLANTING

BYLINE: By JOAN LEE FAUST

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 64, Column 3; Style Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


DIG, divide and replant perennials that are well established and overgrown,
especially astilbe, phlox, veronica and daylilies. If there are bare sections in
the lawn, dig the earth carefully to a depth of a few inches, rake the soil
smooth and broadcast quality grass seed; keep these sections moist until seed
germination. Harvest tomatoes, sweet corn, squash and beans. Trim hedges. Mail
nursery orders for hardy bulbs, perennials, dwarf conifers, azaleas and
evergreens for planting next month.

Torenia

Take a close look underneath torenia plants. If this sprightly annual was
planted in the same place last year, quite likely tiny seedlings will be popping
up under the shelter of this year's plants. These volunteer seedlings are
excellent to dig up, plant carefully in pots and grow on as winter house plants.

Those who have never become acquainted with this delightful annual may want to
consider it for next year. It is commonly called wishbone flower or bluewings.
It is easy to grow in either full sun or in areas touched with a only a few
hours of morning or afternoon sun. Southern gardeners consider this annual a
particular prize since it substitutes for pansies which often fade out in the
southern heat.

Some gardeners even say that this delightful annual resembles snapdragons.
Perhaps. There is at least a family resemblance, since both belong to the
Figwort Family. But torenia is more subtle and in some ways, prettier. The
flowers are charming. Tubular in form, the larger upper lip is pale blue, while
the smaller lower lip is a velvety darker blue with a yellow center. When the
plant is growing well with enough soil moisture, there are so many blossoms, the
leaves are often hidden beneath.

The name wishbone flower is attributed to oddly-shaped stamens, two of which
curl inward to suggest a wishbone. The genus, Torenia, was named for Olaf Toren
who was with the Swedish East India Company.

Although there are probably several species, the one most familiar to gardeners
is Torenia fournieri which is believed to be a native plant of South Vietnam.
There is a subspecies, T. f. nana compacta, which is dwarf and flowers
continuously until frost.

Don't be surprised, if during late September, torenia's leaves acquire a red
tone. Cooler nights have something to do with this.

Seed Pods

Be careful when working around the garden now. Many of the plants, particularly
annuals - and weeds -are forming seed pods. Careless movement can knock these
seed pods and encourage them to open and scatter their seed. It's nature's way
of self-propagation. And gardeners wonder where their weeds come from?

If there has been an especially delightful garden flower this summer, watch for
the seed pods. It is a good idea to keep empty envelopes handy when working
outdoors, just in case. When seed pods are brown, they split open. The trick for
gardeners is to harvest seed pods just before this happens, but when seed is
fully ripe. Experience is the teacher to know ''when.''

 Questions/Answers

BRICKS/MOSS

How can we plant moss to grow in our brick walk? We can't cope with all the
weeds. D.L., Douglaston, N.Y.

Moss usually comes in naturally if soil is acid, moist or poorly drained. The
best way to ''introduce'' moss is to find it in the garden and lift chunks of it
out. Cut the moss into small pieces and pack the pieces tightly between the
bricks. Keep the areas moist and the moss may start to spread or it may not.
Gardeners often have a different question and ask how to get rid of moss which
is growing between bricks as moss/algae growth often makes patios and walks
slippery. A commercial product called De-Moss, can be used; follow the label
directions.

CLIVIA

How can I get my clivia plant to bloom again? It's been two years? Ms. E.H.B.,
Kinnelon, N.J. Is the plant allowed a rest period during the winter months?
Clivia needs a dormant, cool period when it is watered sparingly and kept as
cool as possible, around 55 degrees. The rest period begins when days start to
get shorter and ends when days lengthen and there is more sunlight to spur new
leaf growth. When new growth begins, feed the plants with water-soluble
fertilizer.

MINT INDOORS

I have potted up mint from my garden and brought the pots to a windowsill in
Manhattan. What should I do when the plants die back in fall? Do I store the
pots? H.L., Manhattan.

The mint plants will not ''die back,'' but will keep growing because they have
been potted up and brought indoors to a warm room. Cut the mint back as you use
it and the plants should last over winter. Outdoors mint will die back as
weather cools and the growing season ends. Mint is perennial; roots live over
winter and new growth will sprout in spring.

IMPATIENS INDOORS

I have enormous impatiens plants. Is there any way to have them survive inside
during winter? Will the roots live over if I cut the tops back? R.N., Rochester,
N.Y. A few favorite impatiens plants can be potted up, cut back and brought
indoors as house plants for the winter months. But it will be impossible to save
them all. Even though impatiens is grown in partial shade outdoors, give the
plants full sun indoors. Impatiens is a tender annual and the first frost will
blacken plants; the roots cannot survive northern winters. However, impatiens
set seed generously and quite often at this time of year, seedlings of the
previous year's plants can be found at the base of the current year's impatiens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
Caricature In the Hands Of Red Grooms, And Satirists Of the Jazz Age

BYLINE: By JOHN GROSS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words


I f HAPPINESS, AS FREUD once said, is the delayed fulfillment of a childhood
wish, Red Grooms must surely be a happy man. Whatever other pleasures his art
may afford, it draws much of its appeal from a fondly remembered world of
rainy-day pastimes - cutouts, pop-ups, paper dolls, toy theaters, models that
any boy or girl can assemble with a scissors and glue. And beyond that, in a
more general way, there are a brightness and boldness and racy popular idiom
that any boy or girl can appreciate.

The Grooms retrospective at the Whitney Museum (Madison Avenue at 75th Street)
through Oct. 18 offers a wide conspectus of his work. The elaborate
''sculpto-pictoramas'' of city scenes, done in collaboration with Mimi Gross,
inevitably predominate, all the more so since they are accompanied by honky-tonk
soundtracks; but personally I find a little ruckus can go quite a long way, and
my own preference is for the smaller, calmer works.

The portraits, for example - Picasso with a Cinzano ashtray full of stubs;
Apollinaire sitting awkwardly hunched up at a cafe table; Alfred Jarry, with
demurely lowered eyelids and - to all appearances - not a subversive thought in
his head; Buster Keaton and friends; an elderly Frenchwoman in the Metro, with a
face that looks as though it has been pieced together from bits of fruit.

Most of these figures, like most of the ones in Mr. Grooms's larger pictures,
have something droll or distorted about them; and yet you seldom find yourself
thinking of them as out-and-out caricatures. They tend to be both too
good-humored, and too insistently toylike in their construction.

The circular portrait of Sarah Bernhardt, for instance, shows her with her hair
(or wig) looking like a cheap orange rug. In the hands of another artist, this
might come across as a biting comment on human vanity or the delusions of an
aging grande dame. Here, however, it is simply a deliberate piece of artifice,
like an inn sign or a heraldic device; along with the tondo-like shape of the
painting, it heightens our sense of being confronted by a kind of icon, and a
very striking one.

It is true that most of Mr. Grooms's portraits proper are either of friends or
of people he admires, subjects for whom his affection must naturally outweigh
any impulse to mockery. But then his cityscapes and street scenes rarely qualify
as hard-line satire, either. They are boisterous rather than violent; they
rejoice in the world that they mimic even as they point up its grotesque or
outrageous aspects.

This is not to say that he doesn't sometimes hint at a grimmer or more sinister
reading of the world he portrays. He has also made a few forays into political
art, of a not very convincing kind. (They are represented at the Whitney by the
anti-Vietnam War tableau of 1967, ''Patriot's Parade.'') Yet even his models of
villains, or those he sees as villains - a Lyndon Johnson, a Richard Daley -
look positively benign if you think, say, of the gruesome puppets in the
television program ''Spitting Image''; and he is not really the man to go to if
you want to collect evidence of urban desolation. He depicts some stony places,
but high spirits and a sense of carnival keep breaking through.

Skewering the Rich

An earlier generation of pictorial commentators on the American scene are
currently on view at the Philip Morris branch of the Whitney (120 Park Avenue at
42d Street). The exhibition ''The Social Graces: 1905-44,'' which is showing
there through Sept. 24, brings together prints and drawings by John Sloan,
Reginald Marsh and a dozen or so other early 20th-century graphic artists who
used their art, at least sporadically, to satirize the rich and elicit sympathy
for the poor.

Compared with the art of Red Grooms, much of this work looks rather tepid;
compared with a James Gillray, a Daumier, a Georg Grosz, much of its satire
seems rather tame. Some of the pictures have a touch of real ferocity -a drawing
by Marjorie Organ, for example, that shows a group of plump women wrapped in
furs, strutting around like a flock of pigeons; but most of them, considered as
calls to action, are about as inflammatory as the cartoons in The New Yorker
(which is in fact where one of them, an amusing fantasy about Palm Beach by
Julian de Miskey, originally appeared).

If you don't approach the show with inappropriate expectations, however, it
offers a rewarding half hour. Its emphasis, after all, is made clear by the
title ''The Social Graces'': whatever their politics, the artists - in terms of
the work that has been selected, at least - were primarily preoccupied with
Society rather than society, with the follies and presumptions of the
fashionable world.

A man like John Sloan, for example, had broad and heartfelt social concerns, but
the etchings by which he is represented, notably those from his masterly 1905
series ''New York City Life,'' derive from the tradition of robust comic
observation you can find in Victorian graphic artists of the Punch school like
John Leech. The Minnesota-born artist Adolf Dehn, who did bring a touch of
Grooms-like verve to his depictions of night life in the 1920's and 30's,
refused to think of himself as a social critic: ''Preposterous things are about
me - I comment on them, that's all.''

The show also has the virtue of setting you thinking about one or two neglected
reputations. The drawings by Guy Pene du Bois have a strength that suggests he
is an underrated figure (but then, more importantly, so does his splendid double
portrait ''Mr. and Mrs. Chester Dale Dining Out'' in the Metropolitan Museum);
and though the prints by Peggy Bacon are rather disappointing - except as
footnotes to social history -they prompted me to look a little further and make
one minor but engaging discovery.

Peggy Bacon's death earlier this year (at the age of 92) caused very little
stir, but in her heyday she was well known as both an artist and a writer; her
friend Edmund Wilson wrote an essay in praise of her - her poems in particular -
that can be found in his collection ''The Shores of Light.'' Such of the poems
as I've read don't seem to me to be as good as Wilson claimed; but trying to
track down other examples of her work I have come across a book, published in
1934, that does give you the sense of an exceptional personality: a collection
of pencil portraits of celebrities of the day, from Gershwin to La Guardia,
called ''Off With Their Heads!''

The drawings themselves are solid and satisfying, but it is the brief notes that
accompany them that are really memorable. A few sample phrases may convey
something of their pungency - ''Pert lips of specious sweetness'' (Dorothy
Parker); ''Hungry, fiery, dancing mind, glitteringly unoriginal'' (the lawyer
Morris Ernst); ''Expression like an old procuress'' (General Hugh Johnson of the
National Recovery Administration) -but the descriptions need to be read in their
entirety to reveal Peggy Bacon as the master of verbal caricature that she
plainly was.

Guy Pene du Bois makes an appearance, incidentally (''Rich pot-roast effect''),
and so does Peggy Bacon herself: ''Personality lifeless, retiring, snippy,
quietly egotistical. Lacks vigor and sparkle.'' Not really.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of ''Eugenics Again'' by Guy Pene

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS AND TRENDS

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1468 words


LAST week, James O. Freedman, 51 years old, began his duties as 15th president
of Dartmouth College. A former dean of the law school at the University of
Pennsylvania and, most recently, the president of the University of Iowa, he has
moved from a major public research university with 30,000 students to a
predominantly undergraduate Ivy League institution with only 4,500.

''We must strengthen our attraction for those singular students whose greatest
pleasures may not come from the camaraderie of classmates but from the lonely
acts of writing poetry, or mastering the cello, or solving mathematical riddles,
or translating Catullus,'' Mr. Freedman said in his inauguration speech last
month.

He recently talked with Edward B. Fiske, education editor of The New York Times.
Following are excerpts from their conversation.

Question. When you gave your speech, there were those who said, ''Has he taken
leave of his senses?'' What was your point?

Answer. High school students see Dartmouth as a place which is male-dominated,
which is outdoorsy, which is conservative, which is ''group action.'' That
stereotype, I think, hurts Dartmouth in attracting students who could take rich
advantage of the faculty and the library and the opportunities here. . . .

Every impression I have from students applying to college is that one regards a
half dozen other Eastern schools as more desirable if one is primarily an
intellectual. And I'd like to see Dartmouth included in the list of the schools
that the most intellectual high school students consider seriously.

Q. One of the trustees was quoted as saying that your job is to lead Dartmouth
out of the sandbox. What did he mean by that?

A. I think what he meant was that my opportunity and obligation was to raise the
sights of Dartmouth College intellectually and to focus the discussion on
questions of academic significance. . . . What I hope we are able to do at
Dartmouth is to emphasize that the life of the mind is the central thing that
this place is about . . . .

Q. As you know, there are a couple of books on the best-seller list,
particularly ''The Closing of the American Mind'' by Allan Bloom, that say that
the quality of American undergraduate education leaves a great deal to be
desired.

A. I have a great deal of respect for Professor Bloom's book. I think he is
right in suggesting that education is primarily about book learning. I think he
is right in suggesting that education is about knowing alternative answers and
thinking about them. And that literature and the great books are an essential
method of doing that. But I have concerns about his strident emphasis on what he
believes is relativism. Q. What does he mean by that?  A. I think what he means
is that education, in his view, gives the sense that all cultures are equally
valuable, all answers are equally valuable. He clearly believes in a number of
absolutes. Or believes that it is the role of liberal education to seek those
absolutes. I take the position that it's necessary to seek after truth, but that
absolutes can be very dangerous doctrines.

We fought some wars over some absolutist kinds of notions that were not seen
with sufficient shades of gray. Part of the function of a liberal education is
to help students see all shades and all sides of an issue.

Avoiding Absolutism

Q. Can you give an example of the kind of absolute that he would affirm but that
you would have some doubts about?

A. One of the things that Professor Bloom does is essentially conclude that most
of the major minds of modern social science are not useful. And he dismisses
Sigmund Freud, Max Weber, Hannah Arendt, John Rawls, Margaret Mead. He takes a
view toward the utility of the social sciences in helping us understand human
beings in society that essentially dismisses them. I think that's too absolutist
a view.

Q. You have discussed the dangers of not developing the private self. What do
you mean by that?

A. I'm very concerned that one thing liberal education does not sufficiently
address is the need for students to develop both a private self and a public
self, and to find a way to have those selves converse with each other and form a
whole human being.

We read, on all sides today, that students are entirely interested in
vocationalism and careerism. If that's the case, those students are not
sufficiently developing a private self, a self that can be alone at 3 o'clock in
the morning, as Fitzgerald says.

It's important that students develop the capacity to be alone with themselves,
to address grief, to address questions of tragedy in their life, to address the
questions of the relationship between the generations in their own lives. And I
worry that too many of today's undergraduates are primarily concerned with
things which don't give them much opportunity, as part of a liberal education,
to develop their private selves. Q. Why has that come about?  A. Students bring
to college a certain set of values and goals which are formed in the family and
in society and in the schools that they've attended. And I think all of those
institutions are placing students under very great pressure to look out for
their careers as a priority above all others.

Q. What ought to go into a general education?

A. I think general education clearly needs to expose students to the great works
and achievements of Western civilization and Eastern civilization. We've lagged
far behind in this country learning about Eastern civilization, and I am one of
those who believes that we are on the threshold of the century of the Pacific.

Q. It looks as though education is going to become an issue in the Presidential
campaign. Are there questions that you think could profitably be addressed?

A. One issue is clearly the declining number of minorities who are going on to
higher education. That seems to me to be sowing the seeds of a national tragedy.

A second issue is the urgent need of colleges and universities for scientific
buildings. The scientific infrastructure in this country is deteriorating.
Federal support has virtually been withdrawn, and it's essential that that be
reversed. Q. What other topics are important?  A. One of the things I very much
hope that leaders in higher education can do in the years ahead is to encourage
a greater commitment to effective citizenship on the part of their graduates.

I had the good fortune of attending law school at a time when John F. Kennedy
was President. It was also a time in which law students had heroes, and those
heroes were people who were not only lawyers, but they were citizens - people
like Felix Frankfurter, Learned Hand, Thurgood Marshall, Abraham Lincoln.

Emulating the Heroic

Q. You think we need more heroes?

A. I think students need heroes, period. When I meet with students again and
again and ask who their heroes are, the question strikes them as being as odd as
can be. I've made three trips to the People's Republic of China, meeting with
students there, and asking them who their heroes are. Answers come back fairly
quickly. Q. Who are the heroes in China? A. The students in China immediately
tell you Zhou Enlai and Deng Xiaoping. They think a few more minutes and then
they tell you Richard Nixon and Albert Einstein -and those four names have
recurred during the three trips I've made in the last five years.

Q. What sort of heroes do you think would be likely ones for American college
students?

A. I hope their heroes would be people who were men and women of both thought
and action. I think again of Thurgood Marshall. I think of Robert Coles, the
Boston psychiatrist. I'd like them to think about people whose lives are
committed to thoughtful reflection, as well as to effective action.

Q. When students do come up with heroes, whom do they tend to name?

A. Lee Iacocca. . . . I usually don't even get an answer. Q. Any others besides
Iacocca? A. I can't think for the moment of a name that's been mentioned more.

You don't get a President of the United States. You don't get a current
political figure, you don't get writers, novelists, poets or playwrights.

Q. One of the questions that people sometimes ask is, ''Where are the real
leaders in higher education, who are not only running their own institutions but
are involved in national issues?''

A. I think you have found them. I think people like Derek Bok and Hannah Gray
are very much of that mold . . . .

University and college presidents have spoken out on a great many issues
relating to the Vietnam War, relating to the draft, relating to the segregation
of the races, relating to a great many of the Federal proposals on higher
education, relating to the future of science in this country - and those are not
issues with an interest limited to the educational community.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James O. Freedman (The Dartmouth/Daniel P. Estabrook)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: AUGUST 23, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1448 words


$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   4    PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                $19.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles
                international terrorists in England, Ireland and
                America.

 2      2   9    PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
                (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
                creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and
                lawyers.

 3      3   12   MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
                Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
                psychotic fan.

 4      4   8    WEEP NO MORE, MY LADY, by Mary Higgins
                Clark. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Love and
                murder at a swank California health spa.

 5      5   9    DIRK GENTLY'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE
                AGENCY, by Douglas Adams. (Simon & Schuster,
                $14.95.) A private eye's search for a missing cat
                takes him on a trip through space and time.

 6      6   15   THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
                (Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
                Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.

 7      7   29   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                (Morrow, $18.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall
                a woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 8      8   23   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                way to the 80's.

 9      9   10   SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                Four scientists explore the mysteries of an alien
                spaceship found on the floor of the South Pacific.

10     12   11   MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow.
                (Morrow, $17.95.) The many-faceted relationship of
                the 35-year-old narrator and his uncle, a famous
                botanist.

11     11   40   THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                relationships in South Carolina and New York City.

12            1  SARUM, by Edward Rutherfurd. (Crown, $19.95.)
                Ten centuries of English history seen through the
                experiences of five families.

13     10   11   EMPIRE, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.50.)
                Turn-of-the-century Washington, from the point of
                view of a young woman newspaper publisher.

14     13   11   THE TIMOTHY FILES, by Lawrence Sanders.
                (Putnam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran turned
                detective checks out dubious entrepreneurs for
                Wall Street firms.

15     16   15   HEIRESS, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                Two sisters - one legitimate, one not - vie for
                their father's affection and fortune.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   4    SPYCATCHER, by Peter Wright. (Viking, $19.95.)
                The autobiography of a former senior member of
                the British secret service.

 2      2   17   THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by
                Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
                of liberal arts education during the past 25 years.

 3      4   7    THE GREAT DEPRESSION OF 1990, by Ravi
                Batra. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) An economist's
                dire predictions about the coming decade.

 4      3   20   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
                Siegel. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A surgeon stresses
                the importance of the patient's mind and emotions
                in treating serious illness.

 5      5   12   CULTURAL LITERACY, by E. D. Hirsch Jr.
                (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) The information -
                geography, history, literature, politics - that you
                need to read with.

 6      6   3    CALL ME ANNA, by Patty Duke and Kenneth
                Turan. (Bantam, $17.95.) The autobiography of the
                actress and show business personality.

 7      8   38   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 8     12   9    LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien
                Cheng. (Grove, $19.95.) China's Cultural Revolution
                as experienced by a wealthy woman accused of
                spying for the West.

 9      9   26   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his home.

10     11   12   THE DIFFERENT DRUM, by M. Scott Peck.
                (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A psychiatrist's
                prescription for personal and communal peace.

11 *   10   15   HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon.
                (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the
                octogenarian industrialist and philanthropist.

12     14   8    THE SPY WORE RED, by Aline, Countess of
                Romanones. (Random House, $18.95.)
                Recollections of a woman from upstate New York
                who served as an undercover agent in Europe
                during World War II.

13      7   2    WITNESS TO A CENTURY, by George Seldes.
                (Ballantine, $19.95.) Recollections of a veteran
                journalist.

14     15   10   EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Jimmy and Rosalynn
                Carter. (Random House, $16.95.) The former first
                couple tell what they're doing to make the most of
                the rest of their lives.

15 *   13   3    AND A VOICE TO SING WITH, by Joan Baez.
                (Summit, $19.95.) The memoirs of the folk singer
                who became a political activist in the 1960's.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      3  102   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 2      1   7    THE 8-WEEK CHOLESTEROL CURE, by Robert
                E. Kowalski. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) How to lower
                your blood cholesterol level without drugs.

 3      2   3    HOW TO MARRY THE MAN OF YOUR CHOICE,
                by Margaret Kent. (Warner, $14.95.) Ways to find a
                mate.

 4            3  MEN WHO CAN'T LOVE, by Steven Carter and
                Julia Sokol. (M. Evans, $15.95.) What women can do
                about men who fear a commitment.

 5      4   9    SIBLINGS WITHOUT RIVALRY, by Adele Faber
                and Elaine Mazlish. (Norton, $14.95.) Ways to cope
                with bickering between one's children.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

YOU MUST REMEMBER THIS, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $19.95.)
An unhappy family, inward violence in a gritty urban setting, a mad uncle-niece
love affair, the McCarthyite persecution of a used-furniture seller - these are
the elements of the remarkably productive Ms. Oates's 18th novel.

CLOAK & GOWN: Scholars in the Secret War, 1939-1961, by Robin W. Winks. (Morrow,
$22.95.) How Yale, where Mr. Winks teaches history, not only produced many of
the men who created the O.S.S. and the C.I.A., but submitted some of its
academic programs to conversion (or subversion?) to the purposes of
intelligence.

CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE: The Secret Life of Anthony Blunt, by Barrie Penrose and
Simon Freeman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) The first biography, by two
very industrious journalists, of the British art historian unmasked as a Soviet
spy in 1979.

LITTLE EDEN: A Child at War, by Eva Figes. (Persea, $14.95.) A Gloucestershire
backwater where children fled the bombing of London is the setting of Ms.
Figes's uneasily nostalgic memoir.

DON'T TREAD ON ME: The Selected Letters of S. J. Perelman, edited by Prudence
Crowther. (Viking, $19.95.) The letters -interesting, charming, sometimes
beautifully written - show the great humorist as the grouch his readers knew and
loved all along.

ILLUMINATION NIGHT, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $18.95.) Panic attacks,
irrational presences and childhood mysteries abound in this intelligent novel
about six characters whose lives intersect for a while on the island of Martha's
Vineyard.

WHO WROTE THE BIBLE? by Richard Elliott Friedman. (Summit, $18.95.) This fresh
approach to the four-source ''documentary theory'' of the authorship of the
Torah argues that Jeremiah wrote Deuteronomy and that Ezra edited all five
books.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Q & A

BYLINE: By STANLEY CARR

SECTION: Section 10; Page 4, Column 4; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words



Vietnam

Question: Please name any groups sponsoring tours to Vietnam. -M. G. B., New
York

Answer: A few tour companies that operate programs in Asia and the Pacific have
begun to send small groups on tours to Vietnam. They have been putting packages
together since the Vietnamese Government decided last year to allow American
tourists to visit. Philippine Airlines, working with a tour company in Manila,
Philippine Impex International, says it has scheduled monthly departures through
next March. Its prices of $2,083 a person (double occupancy) for a 10-day
package and $2,823 for 17 days, include round-trip flight from American cities
to Manila and then on to Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon). Hanoi is also
visited. The airline says the tours are escorted and rates include visa, hotel
accommodations, three meals a day, sightseeing and travel within Vietnam by
plane and bus. Two nights are spent at the Inter-Continental Hotel in Manila.
Reservations may be made through travel agents or Philippine Airlines
(212-575-7854 or 800-554-5444).

Orient Flexi-Pax Tours offers seven- and nine-day tours of Vietnam from Bangkok
as an extension of its other packages in the Orient. The seven-day visit focuses
on Ho Chi Minh and Hanoi and costs $1,179; the nine-day itinerary also takes in
Da Nang, Hue, Dalat and other cities and is $1,659. Domestic flights on Air
Vietnam as well as hotels, all meals, sightseeing and guides are included, along
with round-trip flight from Bangkok on Thai Airways International or Air France.
Orient Flexi-Pax Tours (630 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017; 212-692-9550 or
800-223-7460) says accommodations are comfortable but not luxurious. It prefers
to work with travel agents.

Lindblad Travel (Post Office Box 912, 1 Sylvan Road North, Westport, Conn.
06881; 203-226-8531 or 800-243-5657) has scheduled a series of 16-day tours from
Seattle, starting in November, that combines Vietnam with Cambodia (visiting
Angkor Wat) and Thailand. Price of $2,500 includes flights in Vietnam and
Cambodia but not international air fares.

Italian Island

Question: I have tried unsuccessfully to obtain information on visiting Procida
in the Bay of Naples. Please give details for the visitor, including
accommodations. - M. A. M., Queens

Answer: Procida, two miles long, offers a quieter alternative to its much
busier, larger island neighbors of Ischia and Capri. It has attractive rolling
landscapes, with much of the terrain devoted to grapes and citrus fruits, and
rocky coves and inlets and several beaches. Fishing, rather than tourism, is a
major occupation. This volcanic island may be reached by boat from Naples,
Pozzuoli, Ischia and Capri. Among hotels is the Arcate (16 Via Marcello Scotti;
telephone, 8967120), the largest, with 38 rooms, which has a restaurant and
private beach. The Riviera (36 Via Giovanni da Procida; 8967197), with 23 rooms,
and L'Oasi (16 Via Ellery; 8967499), 16 rooms, both have a restaurant. Rooms for
two cost $25 to $40 a day. Among the island's pensiones is Savoia (32 Via
Lavaddera; 8967488).

A list of apartments and small villas for rent the year round can be had from
the Tourist Information Office (93 Via Roma, 80079 Procida; 8969624). Procida
does not have a telex number but messages may be sent by telex to the tourist
office in Ischia Porto on Ischia (telex number, 991464), which keeps in touch.

There are frequent boat services. Naples is about an hour away; a hydrofoil does
the journey in 35 minutes.

Mexico

Question: We would like to visit American settlements in Mexico with the idea of
perhaps relocating in one of them. Where are they? Are there any sources of
information? -F. A. F., Spring Hill, Fla.

Answer: One of the largest concentrations of North American residents is found
around Lake Chapala, about 35 miles southeast of Guadalajara. The lake, the
largest in Mexico, is on the central plateau, a region favored by many
foreigners for its pleasant climate the year round and clean air. The Chula
Vista Country Club, which is populated almost entirely by Americans, Canadians
and British, the resort town of Chapala and Vista del Largo are among
communities there.

Other areas with a substantial colony from the United States include San Miguel
de Allende, the colonial town that has attracted Americans since the
establishment of an art school there in the 1930's. It now has several cultural
institutions. Guanajuato, near San Miguel, has many American residents and so do
the areas around the cities of Oaxaca, Morelia and Mazatlan, the port on the
Pacific coast. A retirement community modeled after the Sun City areas in
Florida and other states and a more expensive country club-style property are
planned north of Mazatlan.

One source of information for visitors is the Newsletter on Travel and
Retirement published by Lloyd Wilkins (Apartado Postale 31-70, Guadalajara
45050, Jalisco, Mexico). It gives information on cost of living, medical
facilities and other topics and reports on specific areas where Americans have
settled. The annual subscription is $12 for six issues.

A 1983 book, ''Travel and Retirement Edens Abroad'' ($12.95), published by
Scott, Foresman of Glenview, Ill., has a section on Mexico. The book has been
revised and a 1988 edition, to be published in conjunction with the American
Association of Retired Persons, is scheduled to appear next January.
''Fielding's Mexico'' ($12.95) and ''Mexico'' in the Insight Guides series
($15.95) will probably be useful to someone planning an exploratory trip.

New Hampshire

Question: Do you know of any small inns in New Hampshire where we could play
tennis on the property? - B. B. K., New York

Answer: Among several are the Dana Place Inn (20 Pinkham Notch Road, Jackson,
N.H. 03843; 603-383-6822), which has two hard-surface courts, and the Franconia
Inn (Easton Valley Road, Franconia, N.H. 03580; 603-823-5542), with four clay
courts. Another is the Inn at Crotched Mountain (Mountain Road, Francestown,
N.H. 03043; 603-588-6840), two clay courts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STATE'S CONDOM MAKERS ENJOYING A SALES BOOM

BYLINE: By RALPH GINZBURG

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 2, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: LITTLE FALLS


STAGNANT since the introduction of the Pill two decades ago, condom sales -
spurred by concern over AIDS - last year jumped 33 percent and are continuing to
rise.

Except for sexual abstinence, the Surgeon General of the United States, Dr. C.
Everett Koop, has said, condoms offer the only known protection against acquired
immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS.

John H. Silverman, president of Tinton Falls's Ansell-Americas, the world's
largest manufacturer of condoms, called AIDS ''a condom marketer's dream.''

Ninety-five percent of the condoms sold in the United States, and a significant
portion of those sold worldwide, are made by New Jersey-based companies.

The industry began with Julius Schmid, a destitute German immigrant who bought a
troubled sausage casing business here in 1883 with his last $50. He converted it
to making condoms, using the same animal intestines that had been used for
sausage skins. In 1900 he switched to rubber. Other entrepreneurs followed.

The Schmid factory, now part of Schmid Laboratories Inc. in Little Falls, is one
of America's two largest plants, producing 150 million condoms yearly under
several brand names - including New Jersey's most popular, Ramses.

''Condom marketing in the United States is a two-horse race,'' says Mark Klein,
vice president of Schmid's chief competitor, the Youngs Drug Products
Corporation of Piscataway, recently acquired by the Carter-Wallace
pharmaceutical conglomerate. ''It's us with Trojans and 53 percent of the
market, and Schmid with Sheiks and Ramses with 41 percent.''

About 450 million condoms a year are distributed in the United States, selling
at prices ranging from 35 cents for those made of latex to $1.50 for those of
animal membrane. Retail sales total $200 million a year.

Despite the large output, only 350 people work in the highly automated
factories.

To make condoms, penis-shaped glass or metal forms travel through a machine 600
feet long, alternately dipped in latex and dried until the material is 0.003 of
an inch thick.

During manufacturing, condoms are passed through an aqueous electrolyte while 10
volts are applied. If current penetrates a condom - rubber is an insulator - a
pinhole is indicated and the condom is rejected.

To test for strength, samples are removed from the production line and inflated.
They must be able to contain at least two cubic feet of air.

Finally, the condoms are sealed individually in plastic or foil envelopes and
packaged in quantities of 3, 12 or 36.

Marketing has undergone drastic changes in the last two years.

''Formerly, under hypocritical laws, condoms were labeled 'For Prevention of
Disease Only,' '' Mr. Klein said. Only the prophylactic aspect could be
described; the contraceptive aspect was unmentionable.

''Then the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the hypocritical laws and we began to
stress condoms as contraceptives, both in labeling and advertising. Now, with
the AIDS epidemic, we're back to stressing the prophylactic features.'' Schmid,
which only two years ago was flying airplanes over beaches with streamers
reading ''Plan Ahead with Ramses,'' has abandoned that approach.

''At that time we were all talking contraception,'' said Schmid's president, Don
W. Falk. ''Now we're all talking AIDS.''

Another radical change in marketing has been the emergence of female buyers.
Women once constituted less than 5 percent of the market; they now make up 35
percent and are the fastest-growing segment.

The surge in female demand for condoms has been accompanied by increased
distribution at supermarkets and five-and-dime and convenience stores.

Surveys show that women are less squeamish about buying condoms than men,
probably because they are accustomed to buying personal health products like
sanitary napkins and douches. They also disclose that many women taking
birth-control pills also insist that their male partners use condoms, for
prophylaxis.

''I'll do a lot for love, but I'm not ready to die for it,'' says the woman in a
print advertisement for LifeStyles condoms, an Ansell product. A LifeStyles ad
has also been running on several television stations across the country.

In many drugstores, condoms are now found next to feminine hygiene products.
When they are not in that spot, they are often at the checkout counter or in
front of the pharmacist, a position that helps retailers to control shoplifting
(condoms are among a drugstore's most popular products for thieves).

At CVS, a chain with 75 drugstores in New Jersey, pilferage is dealt with by
deliberately keeping shelf inventory low and replenishing it frequently.

''It poses a dilemma for us,'' said Gary Charboneau, head of marketing for CVS.
''We must control theft but we don't want to discourage honest folk from buying,
especially since many feel timid over the product to begin with.''

Condom sales at CVS in the first six months of this year exceeded those for the
previous six months by 25 percent.

Msgr. James McHugh, vicar for parish and family life of the Archdiocese of
Newark and national director of the Diocesan Development Program for Natural
Family Planning, said that the church's ban on the use use of condoms ''has not
been modified in light of the AIDS epidemic and it will not be.''

''We believe that condoms, by promoting immoral sexual behavior, are actually
accelerating the spread of AIDS,'' he said. ''The efficacy of condoms is
questionable. Their use gives people a false sense of security.''

Condom manufacturers have traditionally avoided direct conflict with the church.
Still, they are beginning to express pride in their work, even, perhaps,
aggressively.

''Condoms as a product provide the only defense against AIDS,'' said Mr. Falk of
Schmid.

''Think of it: By 1991, just four years from now, more Americans will be dying
each year from AIDS than died during the entire Vietnam War.

''I can tell you that our employees are mighty proud of their work against the
horrible killer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of worker checking condoms at Schmid Laboratories in Little Falls
(Ralph Ginzburg)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'Most Dangerous Game' Is Gaining as a Sport

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: JIM THORPE, Pa., Aug. 23


After a day of rain that made the lush pine-crowned forests here feel like a
steamy jungle, men hunted men, seeking the exhilaration that comes from shooting
an enemy - with a paint ball.

''It's everybody's dream to sneak up and get right behind your man and blow him
away,'' said Bob Phelan, an elevator mechanic who is a lieutenant in the Army
Reserve. ''That's the ultimate kill. He never knows what hit him and he's
dead.''

Dead, as in out of the game, which has a variety of names, including Splatball
and the National Survival Game. One of the fastest growing sports in the
country, it is an adult version of capture the flag and hide and seek with a
wide streak of warfare wrapped in.

''I fell in love with it the first time I played,'' said Steve Davidson, an
artificial intelligence researcher for the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company who is the captain of one team, the Muthers of Destruction. ''It's like
getting addicted. You have to come every week and get your adrenalin rush.''

Competing for a Big Cash Prize

This weekend the Muthers and 17 other teams from as far away as California came
to this town in the Poconos, 30 miles northwest of Allentown, to compete for
$14,000 in the second annual North American Championships, one of several major
national tournaments.

In the game played here, two teams of 15 people, wearing camouflage fatigues and
heavy boots, engaged in a series of 45-minute mock-battles in which they tried
to capture the enemy's flag. They slithered through thick woods and deep mud,
enjoying the vicarious thrills of combat, ambushing and eliminating enemies with
air guns that fire harmless gelatin capsules filled with water-based paint.

Mr. Davidson and other aficionados say Splatball is like chess for the
physically active. They say it requires physical stamina for running through the
woods and strategic thinking for devising tactics,teaches the importance of
teamwork and patience and provides a harmless outlet for built-up frustration.

''It's fun and it's nonviolent,'' said Eddie Walker, a network service manager
for the New York Telephone Company who is the captain of another team, the Ace
of Spades. ''I'm a pacifist. I couldn't do war for real. If I ever saw anybody
shot, I'd flip out. I couldn't handle it.''

But many critics denounce the game as ''morally obscene.'' They say it
trivializes violence and war, inuring devotees to the horrors of killing and
implicitly promoting violence as a way to solve problems.

'More Harm Than Good'

''I see it doing far more harm than good,'' said Dr. Leonard Berkowitz, a
professor of psychology at the University of Wisconsin in Madison who is a
specialist on aggression. ''The evidence is clear that there's no beneficial
catharsis and that there can be a reduction in the inhibitions against violence.
In the long run, players may be just a little more nasty, aggressive.''

The game was invented six years ago by three New England friends - Charles
Gaines, the author of ''Pumping Iron,'' Hayes Noel, a stockbroker, and Robert
Gurnsey, a ski shop owner - as a way to settle a long-running argument about
whether a person with city survival skills could adapt them to the woods.

For the first battle, in June 1981, they invited a group of 14 friends from
diverse backgrounds to the New Hampshire wilds, where they competed
individually. The game was won by a professional forester, Ritchie White, who
never unholstered his pistol and never killed anyone. Instead he stealthily
walked through the woods, avoiding his enemies and collecting their flags.

Three players who were writers found the game so exhilerating that they
published articles about it. The response was so overwhelming that hundreds of
games were soon being played around the country. Although no comprehensive
statistics exist, organizers estimate that 35,000 people now play the game every
weekend in this country. It has also become popular in Japan and is now being
marketed internationally.

In the process, Splatball has become a growing business. There are at least
three magazines devoted to the sport. In what is perhaps the clearest sign of
the game's popularity, sports companies are lining up to sponsor some of the
best semi-professional teams. The game has also spawned a number of indoor
versions, like laser tag, designed to appeal to children.

'Built Up the Esprit de Corps'

Recently a number of companies have started organizing games among employees to
increase communication and build camaraderie. After Duquesne Systems, a software
company based in Pittsburgh, took over its major rival, CGA Inc., last year, it
staged battles at its national sales meeting as a way to integrate the new
employees.

''It really built up the esprit de corps,'' said William Gossman, Duquesne's
vice president for marketing. ''It made the outsiders really feel like they were
part of the company. By the end of that day, any signs of 'You're from a
different company,' were completely washed away.''

Paul Fogal, president of Skirmish, which sponsored the competition here, said
devotees come from all social and economic groups. But at least 85 percent are
men, most in their late 20's and early 30's. While many currently serve in the
military, he said, few Vietnam veterans play.

''Our best market is the New York financial district,'' said Mr. Fogal. ''It has
lots of aggressive and competive people. But the only common denominator is love
of competition. Everyone of the guys out here is very competitive, more
competitive than normal.''

In recent years, however, the game has become increasingly militaristic. Tanks
and booby traps, paint-grenades and paint-mines are now part of many battles.

The weapons also are becoming more advanced. Tippman Pneumatics, a former
manufacturer of machine guns, recently introduced the SMG-60, an automatic gun
that fires 600 paint-ball rounds per minute. That has offended many purists and
has stirred a heated controversy among players.

''Many say it's becoming an arms race,'' said David Freeman, president of
Tippman. ''They say it's who's got the best gun, not who's got the best strategy
and the most athletic ability.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walter Knights of the Grim Reapers leaves the battlefield
after being ''killed'' in Splatball tournament in Jim Thorpe, Pa. (NYT/Bill
Cramer); Photo of Neal Rossow, left, and Russ Peters of the Tasmanian Devils
take a break between games. (NYT); Photo shows contestant keeping a sharp
lookout for enemies during the competition. (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
A Swedish Visit

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson of Sweden, who is scheduled to come to Washington
in the second week of September at the invitation of President Reagan, will be
the first Swedish head of government to pay an official visit to the White House
in 26 years. The last one was Tage Erlander, who was received by President
Kennedy in 1961.

The long dry spell is attributed by Swedish and American officials alike to the
distaste developed by the United States Government for Mr. Carlsson's immediate
predecessor, Olof Palme.

Even before he took over from Mr. Erlander in 1969, Mr. Palme had drawn sharp
resentment because of his outspoken criticism of the American military
involvement in Vietnam. That was followed by Sweden's granting of asylum to
American draft evaders and deserters.

Mr. Palme was assassinated in Stockholm in March 1986. Since he took over as
Prime Minister, Mr. Carlsson has concentrated on domestic issues. Educated in
economics and political science, he spent a year at Northwestern University in
Evanston, Ill., in the late 1950's. After visiting Washington he will visit
Illinois, attending a Scandinavian Day celebration in Elgin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. NAVY ESCORT FIRES IN WARNING IN GULF ENCOUNTER

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: MANAMA, Bahrain, Aug. 24


A United States Navy destroyer fired machine gun bursts across the bows of two
small wooden sailing boats today as she helped bring four reregistered Kuwaiti
tankers out of the Persian Gulf. They were the first shots fired by a Navy
vessel since the gulf convoy mission began.

The firing on the unidentified sailing boats was one of two encounters today
involving the Navy flotilla. In the other incident, an Iranian warship, ignoring
radio warnings, came to within two and a half miles of the convoy but turned
away after the American forces made radio contact.

The incident involving the sailing boats, traditional Arab craft known as dhows
that are used in the region for fishing and trading, was announced by the
Pentagon in Washington.

Boats Fail to Heed Warnings

The announcement said that the destroyer Kidd fired warning shots at the two
small wooden boats of ''unknown nationality'' after they had failed to heed
verbal warnings and flares fired in their direction. Then the boats turned and
sailed away, the Pentagon said. It did not give a location for the incident.

Once before since the escorts began July 20 have American forces reportedly
opened fire in response to a perceived challenge. That was on the weekend of
Aug. 8, when a Navy fighter plane was said to have fired two missiles at a
suspected Iranian warplane and missed. The incident was never confirmed by the
Pentagon.

The other incident today, the encounter with the Iranian warship, provided tense
moments but ended peacefully.

Helicopters from the amphibious assault ship Guadalcanal scrambled to fly over
the Iranian ship, said to be a 2,500 ton amphibious landing craft, and the
frigate Jarrett broke away to position herself between the Iranian ship and the
tankers.

Exchange With Iranian Ships

Then, according to shipping industry personnel monitoring the radio calls, this
exchange ensued:

The Crommelin, another American frigate: ''Iranian naval warship, this is U.S.
Warship 37. I am at the head of a column of three ships transiting the Arabian
Gulf. Request your intentions, sir.''

Iranian ship: ''We're operating in international waters and we have no
actions.''

The Crommelin: ''Roger. Thank you sir. Have a good day.''

Iranian gunboat: ''And you have a good day.''

The encounter this morning with the Iranian vessel, according to a pool report
filed by Richard Pyle of The Associated Press from the Guadalcanal, came as
sailors were standing down from general quarters, a full battle station alert,
called as the convoy entered the channel leading through the Strait of Hormuz.

As the ships neared the narrow passage, within range of the Iranian Silkworm
missles on the eastern shore, this order came over the intercoms: ''This is not
a drill. This is not a drill. General quarters. General quarters. All hands, man
your battle stations.'' The convoy being escorted down the gulf left Kuwait
before dawn Saturday. It included the Bridgeton, the sixth largest supertanker
in the world, which was damaged by a mine July 24 in its trip up the gulf and
the smaller Sea Isle City, the Ocean City and the Gas King.

Ships Pass 2d Convoy

As that convoy steamed clear into the Gulf of Oman today, another three-tanker
convoy passed going north and into the protection of the American Navy escort,
marine shipping agents in the region reported.

This convoy, the Tom Middleton, the Surf City and the Chesapeake City, cleared
the Strait by midafternoon and by nightfall had sailed past the emirate of Ras
al Khaima in the Gulf, the shipping agents ships monitoring the transmission
said.

The movements of the tankers have been shrouded in secrecy and confusion.

The American Navy's efforts to protect half of Kuwait's 22-tanker oil fleet, now
reregistered as American ships, is part of what the Reagan Administration says
is an effort to reassure moderate Arab states in the region and to head off
possible Soviet expansion in the area.

The escort effort - which in effect, puts the United States on the side of Iraq
and its allies, including Kuwait -has been marred by difficulties beginning with
the Bridgeton's collision with hitting a mine. Although mines, which can be
tossed off the countless small boats working in the region, were a well-known
hazard, the Navy was not equipped to deal with them.

The Guadalcanal, with Sea Stallion helicopters equipped with mine sweeping gear
was rushed to the area in the vanguard of a growing fleet, including old wooden
minesweepers from the Korean and Vietnam wars that will total close to 40 ships.

Britain, at first reluctant to join the risky American effort, is also sending
additional ships. It announced tonight that it would also allow reregistering of
Kuwaiti tankers under its flag, thus apparently spreading the protection of its
naval force in the area over the emirate's shipping.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Killings of Vietnamese Baffle California Police

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 24


Six years of efforts to solve a series of killings and arson fires involving
Vietnamese refugees have had one main result: frustration for the
law-enforcement authorities here.

A key to the puzzle, officials say, is discovering the identity of a group that
says it was meting out ''punishment'' of the victims for pro-Communist acts.

Since the killing here in 1981 of a social worker with leftist sympathies, a
group calling itself the Vietnamese Party to Exterminate Communists and Restore
the Nation has taken responsibility for killings and arsons its communiques say
are aimed at eradicating ''agents of the Vietnamese communists'' and
contributing to ''the overthrow of the barbarous and inhumane regime'' in
Vietnam.

Motives and Membership Obscure

The authorities in several cities in California say they are not certain that
the organization really exists, and if it does, how many people belong to it.

''There is a lot of speculation as to who they might be,'' said Anthony R.
Crittenden, a criminal intelligence specialist with the Asian gangs and
organized crime section of the California Department of Justice. ''No one seems
to really know.''

The officials cannot even be sure that if the group exists, it is motivated by
politics, operating as it does against the backdrop of a community plagued with
extortion plots, personal vendettas and organized gangs.

In this environment, even an act as seemingly political as labeling someone a
Communist can lie outside politics; among the strongly anti-Communist refugees,
such a label can instead be a simple and powerful tool of blackmail and
extortion, police officials say.

'It's a Serious Problem'

Based on the sketchy evidence of the group's communiques and a handful of
witnesses to the crimes, investigators are now less skeptical than they once
were about the likelihood that an organized group is committing the crimes,
though the motives are still obscure.

''At one time we suspected the letters were bogus, but no longer,'' Mr.
Crittenden said. ''It's a serious problem.''

Lieut. John A. Woods of the Police Department in Garden Grove, a Los Angeles
suburb where a Vietnamese magazine editor was killed earlier this month, said
the appearance and style of the group's communiques ''is very, very
consistent.''

''It appears to be an underground group,'' he said, but added, ''it would be
nice if someone would come forward and say something.''

'People Were Glad He Was Dead'

Detectives investigating the crimes said the character of the refugee community
has presented them with obstacles they would not ordinarily face.

In one case, for example, the killing a Vietnamese social worker was never
prosecuted because a district attorney felt that Caucasian witnesses would have
difficulty identifying Asian suspects, according to Inspector Napoleon Hendrix
of the San Francisco Police Department's homicide unit.

And investigators looking into the case received little cooperation from the
Vietnamese community because, Inspector Hendrix said, ''The victim supported the
North Vietnamese and the people were glad he was dead.''

In the latest action for which the group has taken responsibility, the
Vietnamese language magazine editor in Garden Grove, Tap Van Pham, died Aug. 9
when a fire swept through the magazine's small office where he also lived.
Officials said a flammable liquid, probably gasoline, had been spread about and
ignited by hand.

Canadian Companies a Target

In a letter mailed from San Jose, 50 miles south of here, and received by two
Vietnamese newspapers in Garden Grove, the group said it had burned the building
to punish Mr. Pham for accepting advertising from Canadian companies that send
money and goods from refugees to relatives in Vietnam. Such companies are seen
by many in the community as aiding the Communist Government.

The group emerged on June 4, 1981, when it sent a letter taking the
responsibility for a fire that destroyed a company involved in transporting
gifts from refugees in America to Vietnam.

Its second communique came after the shooting on July 2, 1981, of a Vietnamese
social worker outside his San Francisco apartment by a young Asian man wearing a
white windbreaker.

The social worker, Lam Trong Duong, put out a small newspaper that reprinted
articles from the Vietnamese Communist Party newspaper, and he collected the
poetry of Ho Chi Minh.

'Death Penalty' Declared

After his killing, which has never been solved, a letter was received at a
Vietnamese newspaper in Garden Grove announcing that the organization had
decided to ''declare the death penalty'' against Mr. Lam and that the killing
had been carried out by a member of the group in San Francisco.

The case was complicated by the fact that another group calling itself the
Anti-Communist Viets Organisation also took the responsibility for the slaying,
asserting it was punishing Mr. Lam for ''odious crimes against Vietnamese
people.''

Nine months later, the police arrested a young Vietnamese refugee whom Mr. Lam
had befriended and given a job. The refugee was charged with murdering Mr. Lam,
but the case was dropped on the day of trial after defense lawyers learned that
a key eyewitness changed his mind about the identification of the gunman.

Accusations and Punishment

The organization also said it carried out the shooting of a 72-year-old
restaurant owner and his wife, who had willed their estate to the Government of
Vietnam ''to heal wounds and to rebuild the country.''

The restaurateur, Nguyen Van Luy, said he and his wife were shot by a young
Asian man who stepped out from behind a tree in front of his San Francisco home
and said in Vietnamese, ''You came home early today.'' Mr. Luy's wife, Pham Thi
Luu, was killed, and the crime remains unsolved.

In a communique postmarked Las Vegas, the Party to Exterminate Communists and
Restore the Nation said it had decided to ''punish Nguyen Van Luy by bullets''
and accused him of collecting foreign currency from Vietnamese refugees and
sending it to the Vietnamese Government.

The group also said it had been responsibile for shooting Tran Khanh Van, a
former South Vietnamese official, who was killed March 20, 1986. Mr. Van was
shot in Westminster, a Los Angeles suburb. He had received a threatening letter,
a copy of which was also sent to a San Jose Vietnamese language newspaper.

Douglas K. Zwemke, an officer with the intelligence unit of the San Jose Police
Department, said Vietnamese refugees have developed more willingness to tell the
police what they know about crimes in their community.

''But they are afraid of retribution,'' Officer Zwemke said. ''My information
comes from people with a sense of trust and confidence and they are extremely
afraid.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Miller Quits as U.S.O.C. Chief

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: INDIANAPOLIS, Aug. 24


Less than six months before the start of the 1988 Olympics, the executive
director of the United States Olympic Committee resigned his position today.

George D. Miller, a former Air Force lieutenant general who was hired in October
1984, cited ''personal reasons'' for his departure from the post in which he was
responsible for implementing the policies of the committee's officers and for
managing the staff. But several sources familiar with the situation said he left
because of growing friction with U.S.O.C. officers.

''Let's say I'm not startled,'' said one of Miller's close associates, who asked
that his name not be used. ''There have been indications for almost a year that
things were not going well.''

Work Is Praised

In a statement released by the U.S.O.C., Robert Helmick, the committee's
president, praised Miller for his work, acknowledging his success in having
raised nearly $135 million since the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, a time during
which, he said, ''the public and our corporate sponsors sometimes thought we
were very wealthy.''

''We were fortunate to have George's talents with us,'' he added, ''and we wish
him well.''

However, several sources indicated, Helmick himself might have been a factor in
Miller's resignation.

One person who recently worked closely with both of them and asked not to be
identified, said a basic disagreement centered on how Miller interpreted his
job. Miller, this source said, wanted to operate autonomously, like a corporate
chief executive officer. Helmick, an attorney, pushed for more discussion and
consultation with him and other U.S.O.C. officers.

A second official felt that their personalities might have clashed.

''George was a military man, and that's how he wanted to run things,'' this
source said. ''He was not very flexible. It was easy to see where he and Helmick
wouldn't get along.''

Reached by telephone at his office in Des Moines, Helmick denied that the job
interpretation had been an issue. But he acknowledged that they often had
opposing points of view.

''George and the officers and myself, indeed, had differences of opinion,''
Helmick said. ''That's neither surprising nor unexpected in an organization like
this. But we were always able to work them out. There were no differences I know
of between him and myself that necessarily would have led to a resignation.''

Miller did not respond to repeated messages asking for his comments.

A major difference of opinion took place last week during the Pan American
Games.

When the State Department denied the visa request of an athlete from Chile on
the basis of information that he had been involved in killings as a member of
the Chilean intelligence service, Helmick, who is also a member of the
International Olympic Committee, predicted ''severe consequences'' for future
attempts by American cities to stage major international competitions. He cited
the I.O.C. charter, which holds that any accredited athlete should be allowed
entry into another country.

Some countries, Helmick said, might express their objections to the State
Department action by voting against United States cities, such as Anchorage,
which is campaigning to be host of the 1994 Winter Olympics.

Opposite Reaction

Miller's reaction was the opposite. ''I don't see it as a hindrance,'' he said
of the effect of the visa denial on Anchorage's chances to be the host for the
Games.

When told of Helmick's response, Miller was surprised and said that such
comments ''are not helpful in resolving the situation.''

Miller joined the U.S.O.C. after a distinguised military career, at the end of
which he was the deputy commander of the Strategic Air Command. Earlier, he had
been a combat pilot, with experience in Vietnam. He retired from the Air Force
in September 1984 and was named to succeed F. Don Miller, who is no relation,
with the U.S.O.C. a month later.

Miller's contract was due to expire next year, just after the Summer Olympic
Games in South Korea.

The U.S.O.C. said in its statement that Baaron Pittenger, the assistant
executive director and a rival for the post when Miller was appointed, would
replace Miller on a temporary basis until a search committee could find a
permanent successor. Its recommendations are due Oct. 24 at the U.S.O.C.'s
meetings in Oklahoma City.

Helmick said that Miller's departure would cause a minimum of disruption in that
''the staff is in place.''

''His resignation will not hurt us,'' he said. ''If he was going to leave before
Seoul, this was the best time.''

He added that Miller would, however, serve as a consultant to the U.S.O.C.
through the Seoul Games.

In the U.S.O.C. statement, Miller said he was proud of what the committee and
amateur sports has accomplished during his tenure and that he would ''continue
to contribute in any way I can'' to the Olympic movement in the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George D. Miller (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WHO HOLDS KEY TO PEACE IN CENTRAL AMERICA;
Who's Democratic

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


To the Editor:

Your Aug. 10 news analysis of the Arias plan for peace in Central America (front
page) repeats the sort of disinformation and innuendo that not only reporters
and editors but politicians and diplomats accept without question, after years
of the Reagan Administration's campaign about the ''lack of democracy'' in
Nicaragua.

The Sandinistas won an election in 1984 that was recognized almost everywhere
but in the United States and its satellites as one of the fairest in Central
America in this century. Eighty percent of the people voted, and Daniel Ortega
Saavedra received 63 percent of that vote. This is the reason for the strong
hold of the Sandinistas on the country, not that they have been ''running the
country as a one-party revolutionary state.''

In Nicaragua there are seven political parties, five more than we have in the
United States. The Sandinistas fall in the middle of the political spectrum, not
on the extreme left. Furthermore, in Nicaragua each political party is awarded
seats in the National Assembly in proportion to the number of votes it receives
in an election. We have no such proportional representation in this country, so
that a third party has little chance of gaining a foothold here. So much for
''political pluralism'' and ''free organization of political parties.''

When reporters and editors speak of ''a return of press freedom'' in Nicaragua,
they ignore the certainty that Nazi- or Japanese-funded publications would not
have been allowed in this country during World War II. Nicaragua is at war. It
has lost nearly 50,000 of its people to the contras (about what the United
States lost in Vietnam, though that was a far smaller percentage of our
population). Under the circumstances, a newspaper subsidized by the United
States, as La Prensa was, would be quite a luxury.

Rather than going after the mote in the Sandinistas' eye, perhaps we should
attend to the beam in our own. I have been to Nicaragua, and what I have seen
and heard there convinces me the Sandinistas would like nothing better than a
''return'' to a democracy that in some ways is more democratic than our own.

GILBERT J. BLACK
Lewisburg, Pa., Aug. 10, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Who Holds Key to Peace in Central America

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 485 words


To the Editor:

''Will the Diplomatic Spirits Come?'' (editorial, Aug. 8) notes that the
Guatemala agreement of Central American presidents on the Arias plan is a
breakthrough, but concludes, ''the key is what Washington and Managua do next.''
Many others, including some of the Central American representatives themselves,
have also said that the fate of the peace agreement depends on what Washington
does.

I suggest that this view misreads the historical background, the political
situation in the United States and the significance of the Guatemala agreement.

Our country's persistent meddling in Nicaragua flows from a mistrust of that
country's ability to manage its own affairs in a responsible manner. Whether by
the presence of United States marines early in the century, or through the
unquestioning obedience of the Somoza family, iron control was demanded and
obtained. In the 1979 revolution, Nicaraguans finally demanded independence from
United States domination. Since nothing in recent history has changed our
Government's decades-old mistrust of Nicaragua's ability to govern itself,
negotiations between Washington and Managua would never begin to resolve the
dispute. Such negotiations aren't the answer.

The northern giant is helpless. Unable to invade directly because of memories of
Vietnam and the fear of alienating all of Latin America, yet unable to halt the
contra war because of nervousness about Managua's defiance of the Monroe
Doctrine, Washington has no choice but to continue its present distasteful
course. Would a Democratic President really make any difference?

In this frozen scenario, enter the Guatemala agreement. Earlier peace proposals
came from outside - from the United States or the Contadora nations. This
agreement is significant because it was formulated and proposed by a Central
American president and was considered and adopted by all five Central American
leaders, meeting by themselves. The words of Guatemala's President, Vinicio
Cerezo Arevalo, should be heeded: ''We want to become the principal actor of our
own history. We're asking foreign nations to respect our own will to construct
peace.''

No one should be misled by the ambiguities of the agreement. There is tremendous
pressure on Central America to fill in the details. As long as real progress is
being made, it will be impossible for the Reagan Administration to get more
contra aid out of Congress. The flowering efforts of the Central American
leaders will provide the United States with the proof it demands of the capacity
of Central Americans for self-government. But if the talks stall, Congressional
nervousness will feed the contra war.

Attempts to predict the future are sheer folly. But sometimes the present shows
only one way forward. Central Americans, not North Americans, hold the key to
peace in Nicaragua.

WILLIAM L. SCHLOSSER
Indianapolis, Aug. 10, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 26, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Where Tet Meant Death, Life Goes On

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: HUE, Vietnam


On the narrow, green coastal plain that winds north from Da Nang to the 17th
parallel, once the dividing line between two Vietnams, war stories are told not
by soldiers alone.

Some of the fiercest fighting of the ''American war'' took place here, and every
adult is, to one degree or another, a veteran: the 50-year-old Buddhist monk in
his vegetarian kitchen; the poet, an aristocratic woman of 78, tending her
orchards; the young man, barely 30, who sailed away in a rickety boat 10 years
ago and has come back to embrace the parents who suffered because of his choice,
and the former soldier from Hanoi, still heartbroken by the loss of his first
love, who married another while he was at war.

In early 1968, at the time of Tet, the lunar new year, Hue and Da Nang were at
the center of a fierce offensive, a campaign that is now regarded as an attempt
by Hanoi to conquer the northernmost southern cities.

The former North Vietnamese soldier, now living here, and others say troops had
been sent into the area in 1967 to prepare for the campaign. Hue seemed ready to
fall; it had been a center of Buddhist and student protest against the regime of
President Ngo Dinh Diem, who was assassinated after a coup in 1963.

American and South Vietnamese troops dislodged the Communist forces in more than
a month of heavy fighting, and Hue and Da Nang remained in Saigon's hands until
the war ended in 1975.

Residents of Hue are unexpectedly neutral when speaking with an American about
the events of 1968. Outside and occasionally inside Government offices, the
battles are called simply ''the war,'' not the standard ''American war of
aggression.''

One Government official in a coastal town south of here said people understood
that many Americans had come here to fight for something they believed in.
Sometimes, the Vietnamese seemed to be blaming Americans less for what happened
here than Americans blame themselves.

While a provincial official in Hue, recounting the city's architectural history,
told a visitor that ''nothing was added in the 30 years of the puppet regime,''
townspeople pointed to the American-built roads, the bridge linking two halves
of the city across the Perfume River, the Hue Central Hospital, and the Huong
Giang Hotel, once American officers' quarters and now the focus of the city's
plan to build a tourist industry.

People in Hue also say they are aware that American forces made a difficult
decision to spare the temples and palaces inside the walls of the 19th-century
Citadel, Hue's landmark. They acknowledge that the complex was used by Hanoi's
army and the Vietcong to shelter troops and store ammunition.

War Continues to Kill

The Tet campaign continues to exact a deadly toll, said Nguyen Dinh Ngo, the
lieutenant governor of Binh Tri Thien Province, of which Hue is the capital.

''Even this very minute, while we are sitting here talking, somewhere in the
province someone is getting killed by the war,'' he said.

Mr. Ngo said 4,000 to 5,000 people have died in peacetime defusing or stumbling
on unexploded ordnance. Thousands of bombs and mines have yet to be discovered,
he added.

Mr. Ngo said another 230,000 have been affected by toxic chemicals.

Mr. Ngo did not identify the chemicals, and this was not an area sprayed by
American defoliants. A few American scientists - especially Dr. Arnold Schecter
of the State University of New York at Binghamton - are trying to help the
Vietnamese clarify and analyze the type and extent of chemical exposure they may
have suffered, a corollary to work being done in the United States on Agent
Orange.

Emotional Damage Continues

The young man returning from a new life in the West - under Hanoi's recently
relaxed attitude toward ''boat people'' who want to visit home and family - said
the war had an effect on more than bodies and buildings. It had altered the
psychology of the people he remembered, he said.

This young man said that on this trip, for the first time in his life, he
quarreled with his mother. He had chided her for behaving uncharitably to
members of the family, he said.

''She said to me - and she was angry - 'You have no idea what life has been like
here, and you can't tell me what to do,' '' he recalled.

In the garden of a spacious riverside family compound, Nguyen Dinh Chi took a
different view. Tong Chi, the pen-name by which she is known, said that little
has changed in Hue except that the Vietnamese people are finally free.

Mrs. Chi was the wife of a mandarin in Hue in the court of the last kings of
Vietnam. She was among those who made the decision after 1968 to join the
rebellion against Saigon and the Americans. After the end of the war, she came
back to her family home and began to turn its orchards into a sustaining
business.

This year, she spent six months in France, visiting relatives. She hopes to
visit Boston, where a sister lives, but that will have to wait until diplomatic
relations are established between Hanoi and Washington, she said.

At the 17th-century Bao Quoc pagoda and monastery, the abbot, the Venerable Duc
Thanh, recalled the American era kaleidoscopically.

Two-thirds of his monastery was destroyed by American bombing, he said. He
avoided the question of why this happened. At another pagoda, someone said
matter-of-factly: ''The VC were there, and who could tell the VC to leave?''

Hundreds, possibly thousands, of people were reported killed by Communist forces
during the Tet offensive because they refused to cooperate, or had been singled
out earlier as potential obstructions. Officials here deny the charge, or refuse
to discuss it, as do ordinary Vietnamese, who say only: ''The people know what
happened.''

'They Were Good People'

Many of Hue's Buddhist temples became part of the war, by choice or
circumstance. It was from the Thien Mu Pagoda that the monk Thich Quang Duc went
south to set fire to himself on a Saigon street - a widely publicized act that
brought world attention to Vietnam in 1963. Saigon was renamed Ho Chi Minh City
after the war.

The car in which the monk was driven is now up on blocks at the pagoda, on
permanent display, complete with a picture of the immolation.

On the other hand, the Venerable Duc Thanh, whose monastery is famous for its
vegetarian kitchen, orchids and bonsai trees, recalled how young American
soldiers came to his temple to learn Zen Buddhism. ''They were good people,'' he
said. ''I have heard there are many Zen temples in America now, and I would like
to visit them one day.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese Buddhists outside a temple in Hue on Vu Lan, the
second most important Buddhist holiday. (NYT/Barbara Crosette); the Perfume
River (NYT/Barbara Crosette) (Pg. A10); map shows locations of Hue and Da Nang,
where some of the fiercest fighting of the Vietnam War took place (NYT) (Pg.
A10)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 26, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words




International    A2-11



A senior C.I.A. official testified that William J. Casey swept aside his
objections to the brokers and operatives chosen by the White House for the
secret arms dealings with Iran.

    Page A1



Differences over foreign policy between Secretary of State George P. Shultz and
the White House have not been resolved despite the President's overhaul of the
Administration's national security apparatus.    A1



Saudi Arabia sought the offensive in the war of invective with Iran, opening its
borders to the world press to issue a denunciation of ''criminal gangs'' and
Iranian ''conspiracy'' in the rioting last month in Mecca.    A1



A U.S. arms proposal was offered to Soviet negotiators in Geneva. The plan,
which is less sweeping than earlier American proposals, is likely to bring the
two countries closer to an arms agreement.    A1

In Vietnam, war stories are told not by soldiers alone. On the plain that winds
north from Da Nang to the 17th parallel, once the dividing line between two
Vietnams, every adult is, to some degree, a veteran.    A1



In Seoul, six students were seized in the most politically significant arrests
since the Government announced sweeping democratic initiatives two months ago.
    A7

Costa Rica's President was invited to address Congress next month by
Representative Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House, as part of a broad
legislative effort to build support for a Central American peace accord.    A3



Contra leaders may suggest that President Reagan suspend their military aid on
the condition that the Nicaraguan Government move to open the political process
in accord with the peace accord.    A3



Moscow journal

    A4



Soviets call for new international fund for third world countries

    A9



Glasnost tested in victorian setting

    A10



National    A12-17, B4-5



A test of space shuttle boosters will be conducted for the first time since the
Challenger disaster. Morton Thiokol, which makes the rockets, welcomes this
chance to show that it is capable of helping to get the shuttle flying again.
    D1



In a victory for the tobacco industry, an appeals court ruled that the health
warnings on cigarette packages protect companies from certain lawsuits in the
second favorable decision for the industry in four days.    D1



The military services are searching for ways to indoctrinate their members in
values that would help them resist the temptations that have led to such
problems as military personnel spying for the Soviet Union.    A12



George Bush attacked Congress as having sought to ''micromanage'' Administration
efforts in the Persian Gulf and Central America. Bob Dole, the Senate minority
leader, criticized Mr. Bush's comments.    A13



Greycliff journal: A Navajo family at a Montana rest area is one of hundreds who
wander the back roads and front roads of most Western states for months every
summer, selling their homemade jewelry and trinkets as did generations before.
    A12



A review of every stamp produced in the United States over the last decade is
being undertaken. Officials are worried that unauthorized markings may have been
etched into the master dies from which millions of stamps have been printed.
A17

Otter recolonization under way

    A12



Mabus wins Mississippi governor's runoff

    A14



Lawyer says Hahn will testify in inquiry

    A15



U.F.O. crash reports called false

    A17



Titanic salvors defend effort

    B4



Rehabilitating inmates and horses

    B4



Washington Talk    A16



Studying 'human factor' in accidents like Detroit plane crash

Seminar on diplomacy

Regional    B1-5



Welfare rolls have been reduced in New York State by new job training and
employment programs when most states have been reporting increases, the State
Social Services Commissioner said.    A1



A crackdown on underage drinking begun almost a year ago by city and state
officials in New York City bars has left the problem far from solved,
law-enforcement officials and teen-agers themselves agree.    A1



A youth with a semiautomatic rifle who was ''target shooting,'' sprayed a subway
car with 14 shots as the train pulled into an elevated station in Brooklyn, the
police said. A passenger was wounded in the right eye, they said.    B1



A feud over control at emergencies between officials of New York City's police
and fire departments intensified as Mayor Koch, a police union president and the
fire commissioner broke their silence on the issue.    B1

Contamination of the Hudson River by such chemicals as lead and arsenic is
caused more by runoff from farms and roads than it is by discharges from
factories, according to a new study by an environmental research group.    B1



The U.S.O. is about to move for the second time since February into a new Times
Square home. This time, its quarters are permanent - at least for a year. It
expects to move to the mezzanine of the Ninth Federal Building on Broadway.
B3



About 100 public-defense lawyers converged on a Manhattan courtroom in a show of
support for a colleague, who had just been cited for contempt and sentenced to
two days in jail by a judge.    B1



The Big Duck will be preserved. Suffolk County plans to spend several thousand
dollars to maintain the food stand, a 20-foot-high local landmark and national
symbol of roadside architecture, officials said.    B2

Special prosecutor dismissed in Suffolk County

    B3



Koch administration failed to meet housing contract goal

    B3



D'Amato says Giuliani is considering Senate race

    B4



A compassionate woman is 100

    B5


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET AIDE IS COOL TO REAGAN SPEECH

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: CHAUTAUQUA, N.Y., Aug. 26


A senior Soviet official said today that he was disappointed by President
Reagan's address on East-West relations and accused the United States of trying
to ''walk away'' from its earlier proposals for a system of monitoring adherence
to a treaty that would ban two types of nuclear missiles.

President Reagan's speech in Los Angeles was shown on a large screen in an
auditorium at the Chautauqua Institution in western New York State to hundreds
of spectators at a six-day conference here on United States-Soviet relations.
Scores more huddled outside under umbrellas in a cold rain.

Afterward, three Soviet officials responded to the speech, and then, with three
American officials, took questions from participants in the conference organized
by John Wallach, foreign editor of Hearst newspapers.

''I waited for constructive proposals - there weren't any,'' said Yevgeny M.
Primakov, head of the Institute of International Economics and International
Relations in Moscow. ''I waited for a constructive tone - there wasn't any.''

''But I did find a bright side,'' he said. ''He said we are far from American
standards of democracy. I say, 'Thank God.' ''

Nikolai V. Shishlin, a member of the staff of the Soviet Communist Party Central
Committee, said he was disappointed by the President's speech and also sharply
criticized it.

Turning to the issue of verifying the adherence to a nuclear-arms reduction
treaty, Mr. Shishlin said: ''What the President said about control worried me
greatly, that even on-site inspection is not a panacea. Today, as we have heard,
the American side is in essence trying to walk away from verification.''

Speaking in an ironic tone, he said he was pleased that Mr. Reagan found time to
make the speech during his vacation. ''That is the only complimentary thing I
can find to say,'' he said.

In Geneva on Tuesday, the United Sates offered a new plan for monitoring an
accord to eliminate medium-range and shorter-range nuclear weapons. The plan
would involve fewer intrusive on-site inspections that previous American
proposals and was intended as a compromise.

Referring to the President's call for the Soviet Union to display more openness
and to change its policy regarding Eastern Europe, Afghanistan and Nicaragua,
Mr. Shishlin said, ''I would like both the American Administration and the
Americans themselves to understand one thing: The United States will not act as
a teacher for the Soviet Union, just as the Soviet Union is not going to teach
the United States.''

Mr. Shishlin noted that the President ''said much about human rights.'' He
continued: ''From Reagan's speech, it is clear that American democracy is
perfect. But we are happier than the Americans. We don't consider our democracy
to be perfect. We hope it will grow and that day by day, there will be more
freedom, more openness, more democracy.''

In his speech, Mr. Reagan suggested that the Soviet Union publish details of its
military budget. Mr. Primakov said that Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir F.
Petrovsky had indicated in a speech to the United Nations Tuesday that the
Kremlin was willing to do that.

''It would seem that the President does not know what is going on in New York,''
Mr. Primakov said.

Vitaly L. Churkin, an aide to Anatoly F. Dobrynin, the Soviet Communist Party
secretary for foreign affairs, also mentioned the President's suggestion about
the Soviet military budget.

''Sometimes the process of negotiating with the United States is that of calling
their bluff,'' he said. ''What if the Soviet Union opens its military budget?
Will the United States agree to the proposal we have been making for years to
lower those military budgets and use the money to help the developing
countries?''

Mr. Churkin also had strong criticism for Mr. Reagan's call for a ''crusade for
freedom that would spread democracy and promote democratic institutions
throughout the world.''

''I don't know about you Americans,'' he said, ''but we remember that in the
name of democracy, Vietnam was subjected to many years of torture, that a
fascist coup was engineered in Chile, that defenseless Granada was being crushed
and that at this time, people are being killed in Nicaragua.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of visitors to the conference in Chautauqua, N.Y. listening to
broadcast of speech by President Reagan. (NYT/Joe Traver)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Bork On the Presidency

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The Iran-contra affair has just reminded us of a reality of modern American
government: To a degree quite unforeseen by the Framers of the Constitution, the
President has the initiative in our system. He acts; Congress reacts. Power is
centered in the White House. So is the risk of its abuse. A Supreme Court
nominee's approach to issues of Presidential power is therefore highly
significant. Judge Robert Bork has made his exceptionally clear. He takes a
sweeping view of what Presidents can do, beyond the control of Congress or the
courts.

Some examples:

* As a law professor in 1978 Mr. Bork testifed against a bill to control
electronic surveillance in this country of Americans or aliens suspected of
foreign intelligence activity. The bill called for a special court to issue
warrants. Mr. Bork said the President had power as Commander in Chief to order
such wiretapping and eavesdropping, and it was unconstitutional to limit his
power by requiring warrants.

Mr. Bork predicted that the bill would put an impossible burden on judges and
result in leaks. Congress passed it, the law has worked smoothly, and there have
been no leaks.

The man Judge Bork has been nominated to replace, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr.,
took a very different view on the related issue of internal security
surveillance. Writing for a unanimous Court in 1972, Justice Powell held that
warrants were constitutionally required in such cases. He rejected the
Government's claim that ''internal security matters are too subtle and complex
for judicial evaluation.''

* In 1971, during the Vietnam War, Mr. Bork wrote in the American Journal of
International Law that Congress had no power to keep President Nixon from
sending troops into Cambodia, as he had done. If Congress permits U.S. military
activity in a region, he said, it cannot limit the commander's discretion to
send troops into this country or that.

* Judge Bork dissented last year when the Court of Appeals gave a narrow reading
to a statute that lets the executive exclude foreign visitors when their visits
might be ''prejudicial to the public interest.'' He emphasized the need for
deference to the President's great power in foreign affairs. That decision,
Abourezk v. Reagan, will be reviewed by the Supreme Court.

* As a judge he has taken a very strict view of ''standing,'' the status needed
for anyone to get access to the courts. In 16 cases in which his court has been
divided on the right of access, he voted every time to deny it. If no one can
get to court to challenge a governmental action, then of course the executive
can carry on without having to defend its lawfulness.

In 1984 a bipartisan group of senators and representatives sued to challenge
what President Reagan claimed was a pocket veto of legislation. The issue was
whether he could kill a bill by simply not signing it, without returning it to
the Capitol, when Congress was in a temporary recess. The Court of Appeals held
that he could not - that a pocket veto could be done only after Congress had
adjourned.

Judge Bork, dissenting, argued that the members of Congress had no standing to
raise the issue in a lawsuit. Let them fight it out politically, he said. Again
there is a contrast with Justice Powell. He wrote in 1979 that it was better for
the courts to resolve a dispute between the other branches of government than to
let Congress and the President battle on in ''mutual intransigence.''

* In 1975, as Solicitor General, Mr. Bork declined to take to the Supreme Court
an earlier Court of Appeals decision limiting the pocket veto. But he also
refused to accept the decision as a general rule. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the
plaintiff in the case, denounced what he called ''Presidential imperialism.''
President Ford settled that dispute in 1976 by saying he would use the pocket
veto only when Congress had finally adjourned.

* Secrecy is an important element in the power of the modern Presidency. In nine
cases in which the Court of Appeals divided on issues of access to government
information, Judge Bork voted in every case to deny access.

* Finally, there is Judge Bork's well-known view that a special prosecutor
independent of the President is unconstitutional. In his opinion the separation
of powers is so absolute a doctrine that only a President can direct the
investigation of his own wrongdoing or his subordinates'.

A newspaper column cannot begin to detail Judge Bork's views on Presidential
power. Nor, in fairness, can it convey the eloquence or passion of his words.
But for anyone concerned with the delicate balance of power and freedom in our
system, the consistent thrust of his views in one direction must be troubling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Airborne Delivery

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 46 words


An Army Chinook helicopter carrying a Shawnee helicopter to the deck of the
Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum. The Shawnee, flown from Philadelphia to become
part of the museum's permanent collection, is of the type first used by American
forces in Vietnam. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MSGR. JOSEPH H. HARNETT DIES; LED CATHOLIC RELIEF SERIVCES

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 446 words


Msgr. Joseph J. Harnett, who directed refugee relief projects for the Catholic
Relief Services for almost four decades, died Wednesday of cancer at St.
Joseph's Villa, a priest's nursing home attached to the Mercy Hospital in Darby,
Penn. He was 76 years old and lived in Immaculata, Pa.

The monsignor's work on behalf of those made homeless by war, depression or
natural disaster began in France immediately after World War II and spanned
Europe, the Middle East, North Africa and Asia before ending with his retirement
in 1984. At the time of his death, he was chaplain of Immaculata College.

Father Harnett's assignment to France came four years after the founding of
Catholic War Relief Services in 1943. In his 37 years in the field, the number
of countries served by the relief service grew from 12 to 73.

After completing his assignment to France, he was transferred in 1948 to
Trieste, Italy, then part of the Free Territory of Trieste, where he was
appointed director of the service's local relief efforts for refugees from
Eastern Europe. He remained in Trieste until 1954.

That year, which signaled the end of French power in Indochina, he was sent to
Saigon, where he established the first American voluntary aid program in
Vietnam.

Many Honors Abroad

Two years later he was elevated to monsignor and was named director of all the
service's Far East programs, which covered 12 countries in an arc from Pakistan
to South Korea. Based in Saigon, he held the postfor a decade.

In 1966, Monsignor Harnett was assigned to Rome and given even wider
responsibilities as director of all Catholic Relief Services activities in
Europe, the Middle East and North Africa. He remained there for 18 years, until
returning to Philadelphia and retiring in 1984.

The governments of France, South Vietnam, the Philippines and the city of
Trieste all honored Monsignor Harnett for his achievements. So did his hometown
of Philadelphia, which cited him for ''his outstanding and humanitarian
services'' in 1960.

Joseph John Harnett was born Dec. 23, 1910 in Philadelphia. He graduated in 1930
with a bachelor of arts degree from St. Charles Seminary in Overbrook, a
Philadelphia suburb. The same year, he went to Rome, where he studied at the
Lateran Seminary before being ordained in 1935. He returned to Philadelphia and
taught at St. Thomas High School in Philadelphia and at the St. Charles Seminary
before embarking on his career with the Catholic Relief Services.

Survivors include a sister, Mary Veith of Philadelphia, and four brothers:
Daniel, of Malvern, Penn.; John, of Merion, Penn.; William, of Washington's
Crossing, Penn., and Gerald, of Richmond,

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Msgr. Joseph J. Harnett

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words




>Ellen Barkin Works

''I had never played a woman with a job before,'' Ellen Barkin said.

The actress, who has made a vivid impression in such roles as Robert Duvall's
daughter in ''Tender Mercies,'' as Timothy Hutton's wife in ''Daniel'' and as
the young wife in ''Diner,'' was discussing the appeal of her latest role -
Assistant District Attorney Anne Osborne, investigating police corruption in New
Orleans in ''The Big Easy.'' ''My job in movies up to this point,'' Miss Barkin
said, ''has basically been to get through the day, and this was the first time I
was playing somebody who had a kind of life that was not so much ruled by their
emotional state. It was something I've been wanting to do for about a year.''

The Bronx-born Miss Barkin said she was also attracted to the movie's sense of
humor. ''The only time people are encouraged to laugh is when they're seeing a
comedy,'' she observed. ''I know in life - the people I'm surrounded with,
anyway - are just witty people. They say witty things. You don't have to
necessarily be in a funny situation when that's happening. That was apparent to
me reading the script and got bigger as Jim McBride reworked the script.''

Mr. McBride, the film's director, worked with Miss Barkin and her co-star,
Dennis Quaid, who plays an easygoing police detective, during three weeks of
rehearsal that preceded 50 days of shooting that began in October 1985.

''When I got to New Orleans,'' said Miss Barkin, noting she had first thought of
Anne Osborne stereotypically as straitlaced and prim, ''I was introduced to an
assistant district attorney named Patricia Head. She broke down all my
preconceived notions. She looked like me, as opposed to what I thought she
should look like. She was young. She was a triathlete. She was not what I
expected. So after meeting her I kind of relaxed into the knowledge that it was
O.K. for this woman to be a real woman as opposed to me turning her into
something I wasn't. I just put more of myself into her.''

Since ''The Big Easy,'' Miss Barkin has completed ''Siesta,'' in which she
portrays a daredevil - a female Evel Knievel. She described it as a film about
''female obsession, love and death.'' And sometime this fall, she hopes to do
''Happy All the Time,'' written by Julius Epstein of ''Casablanca'' fame - about
an intellectual Jewish woman from New York who comes to an emotional awakening.

Discussing her selection of roles, Miss Barkin said: ''I'm careful in the way in
which I choose to depict women in movies - not so much that they're working
girls or exhibit the new-found independence, because that's not usually what I
do at all. There are a whole lot of women in the world who don't have a lot of
people to connect to, like the women in 'Diner' or 'Desert Bloom.' That's more
important to me than portraying some kind of together woman of the 80's. They
don't need as much help. ''And I also feel when I act in a movie I never want
anyone in an audience to look at me on a movie screen and say, 'I wish I were
her.' I like them to look at the movie and say, 'She's just like me' or 'She
could be like me.' That Cosmo girl image is something I'm not interested in
perpetuating.''

Miss Barkin noted: ''I don't go to work that much. I'd rather stay home and read
a good book than go out and make a bad movie.''

Remembering Vietnam

An English director for a movie about American soldiers in Vietnam?

It may seem odd, but in the case of John Irvin and ''Hamburger Hill,'' opening
today (review on page C16), there's a reason. Mr. Irvin, whose credits include
the movies ''The Dogs of War'' and ''Turtle Diary'' and the television
mini-series ''Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy,'' saw the war close up in 1969 - the
year when the battle for Hamburger Hill took place in the Ashau Valley. At the
time, Mr. Irvin was in Vietnam for the British Broadcasting Corporation making a
documentary.

''About five years ago,'' he said, ''I was having breakfast at the New York Deli
with Marcia Nasatir, who is the producer, and we were just talking about my
background a bit and she discovered I had been a documentary director in Vietnam
and had been so shocked by what I saw in Vietnam that I stopped making
documentaries.

''She said she had a script called 'Hamburger Hill,' which no studio wanted to
make, and she was interested in my reaction to it. And I picked it up the same
day, read it the same day and I think I wept all the way through it. I rang her
up and said, 'I will do everything and anything in my power to get this film
made.' ''

Mr. Irvin said what impressed him about the script, by Jim Carabatsos, who is
also a producer of the film, was that ''I recognized so many of the characters
in the story.

''When I was in Vietnam, what impressed me most was how young the soldiers were.
They were mere kids.''

Mr. Irvin said that about the same time Oliver Stone finally won his long
struggle to put ''Platoon'' before the cameras, the money came through to film
''Hamburger Hill.''

''All I can say is the film is a labor of love,'' Mr. Irvin said. ''It was made
out of a great sense of compassion for the kids who fought there.''

As for the fact that ''Hamburger Hill'' is opening after such Vietnam War films
as ''Platoon'' and ''Full Metal Jacket,'' the director said: ''Obviously I like
to be first. I'd be dishonest if I said I didn't. On the other hand, when I was
at school running 400 meters, I was quite often laughed off the blocks, but I
frequently won.''

Next, said the director, ''I'm going to scrape the mud off my boots and put on a
new pair of shoes and make a thriller set in Palm Springs in 1948. It's based on
a Chandler unfinished novel wherein Philip Marlowe got married - 'The Springs.'
'' The role of the detective Marlowe, played by Humphrey Bogart in ''The Big
Sleep,'' has yet to be cast. But Mr. Irvin hopes to begin filming in November.

''I'm a huge fan of Raymond Chandler's,'' he said, ''and the idea of creating a
new Marlowe is too tempting to resist.''

Marriage and the Muse

Sociologists, analysts of marriageand chroniclers of nepotism may make of it
what they will, but the fact is this: four of the films in the New York Film
Festival beginning next month star the wives of the directors.

The prestigious closing-night attraction is David Mamet's ''House of Games,''
starring Lindsay Crouse. One of the retrospective films is Roberto Rossellini's
''Joan of Arc at the Stake,'' starring Ingrid Bergman. In the Russian film
''Tema,'' Gleb Panfilov directs his wife, Inna Churiokova; and in the Japanese
film ''A Taxing Woman,'' Juzo Itami, the director of ''Tampopo,'' once again
directs Noboku Miyamoto.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ellen Barkin in ''The Big Easy.''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DINER'S JOURNAL

BYLINE: By BRYAN MILLER

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 407 words


DOYERS STREET in Chinatown is a clogged little urban artery, barely more than an
alley arching between Pell Street and Bowery, that you would never find unless
highly motivated to do so. One reason to search it out is a humble subterranean
restaurant at No. 11 that produces some of the most authentically delicious
Vietnamese food I have found in New York City. Called Vietnam Restaurant, it is
a clean and gregarious little place run by a friendly young crew of
blue-jean-clad waiters.

The menu at this diminutive establishment, which changed ownership two years
ago, carries nearly 100 dishes. I sampled only eight, but all were fresh and
spirited. What the menu calls Vietnamese egg roll is a mixture of seasoned
ground pork and translucent noodles wrapped in a sheer sheet of brittle rice
paper. You dip it in nuoc mam, a salty fish sauce ($2.75). Another bright
appetizer is the grilled shrimp paste molded onto stalks of sugar cane ($5.95).
You roll some of the garlic-sprinkled paste in a rice pancake along with fresh
basil, lettuce and carrots, then dip it in a sweet sauce sprinkled with crushed
peanuts.

A real touchstone of Vietnamese kitchens for me is chicken with lemon grass,
which is delightful here - the acidic lemon hits the palate first, followed by
an undercurrent of hot sauce ($4.95). Another exceptional dish is the stewed
curried duck with noodles, which you season at the table with a peppery lemon
sauce ($4.25). Beer and a limited wine list are available. Vietnam Restaurant
serves from 11 A.M. to 10 P.M. Sunday to Thursday; 11 A.M. to 11 P.M. Friday and
Saturday. American Express accepted. Telephone: 693-0725.


Scandinavian dining will return to New York for the first time in many years
this October with the opening of Aquavit, at 13 West 54th Street. The 120-seat
dining room, in the landmark building where Nelson Rockefeller had his private
offices, will be in an atrium setting between 54th and 55th Streets. Aquavit is
principally owned by SSRS Overseas Holding Inc., a company that has 10 hotels in
Sweden.

''The restaurant will specialize in seafood from the North Atlantic,'' said
Christer Larsson, the Swedish-born chef who worked most recently at the Hyatt
Regency in Greenwich, Conn. ''We hope to be famous for our salmon dishes,'' he
added. Mr. Larsson estimates that lunch will cost $30 per person and dinner
between $45 and $50. Aquavit is scheduled to open in early October.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, AUGUST 29, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words



International   2-5, 32

 Philippine Government forces loyal to President Corazon C. Aquino crushed a
revolt by dissident soldiers Friday. The coup attempt was the most serious
assault yet on Mrs. Aquino's Government.   Page 1

 News analysis: The rebellion by disaffected soldiers reflects a deep discontent
within the military that has erupted in a series of threats and coup attempts
throughout President Aquino's tenure.   1

 U.S. officials expressed confidence that President Aquino would withstand the
immediate problems presented by the coup attempt against her Government, but
some expressed concerned about the longer-term implications.   5

 The Philippine rebellion's leader, Colonel Gregorio Honasan, is seen by
Filipinos as an example of the best and the worst in their military. Colonel
Honasan's whereabouts was unknown after the insurrection.   5

 The Saudi Government is preparing an unusual offensive against the Iranian
ruler, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, planning to challenge him as a braggart and
idolator in the theological councils of Islam, some ranking Saudis say.   1

 Iran's foreign policy is hardening, diplomats stationed there say. They are
detecting the change amid the clues sprinkled through the public pronouncements
and actions of the Teheran leadership.   2

 In Canada, Pierre Elliott Trudeau returned to Parliament for the first time in
three years since the end of his 15-year tenure as Prime Minister and his
virtual disappearance from public view.   1

 In South Africa, talks resumed between black mine union leaders and officials
of the giant Anglo American Corporation as employers dismissed another 13,000
miners in the 19-day-old wage dispute.   3

 A South Korean shipyard worker was buried almost a week after he died in a
clash with the police, but opposition groups failed to turn his funeral into a
day of protest. Nonetheless, the Government started a crackdown.   3

 A seminary in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, was permitted by the
Vietnamese Government to reopen and enroll 49 students. The numbers are small
compared with the need of the country.   4

 Mexicans feast on their first candidate breakfast    3

 Tenancingo journal    4



National   6-9, 28, 32

 An agreement with six airlines aimed at reducing delays at four of the nation's
busiest airports was reached by the Government. The agreements come after a
series of secret meetings over a two-week period.   1

 The fundamentalist Christians' drive to shape public education more to their
liking remains very much alive despite three major legal setbacks this summer,
authorities on both sides of the issue agree.   6

 Aliens who test positive for AIDS will be barred from immigrating to the United
States. The new policy also requires illegal aliens who are applying for amnesty
under the new immigration law to undergo AIDS testing.   32

 A lobbying effort by the President on behalf of the nomination of Judge Robert
H. Bork to the Supreme Court began. The President said that Judge Bork would
''take a tough, clear-eyed look'' at crime issues.   6

 Releasing some radiation might be safer than risking a ''catastrophic'' release
in a reactor accident, Vermont and Federal officials suggested as they debated
whether a Vermont plant's steel and concrete shell should be vented.   6

 A hydrogen explosion may not be preventable by the Government if a major
accident occurs at a nuclear plant here that resembles the Soviet Union's
Chernobyl reactor, according to a new study.   6

 The first test of a new booster rocket for the space shuttle was delayed again
after engineers found a series of software problems in the computer that runs
the firing. The test will be held no earlier than Sunday.   9

 The number of dead dolphins washing ashore along parts of the eastern coast
appears to be dwindling, but scientists were unable to say whether the disease
that has been ravaging the mammals had run its course.   8

 The American Medical Association led an effort to destroy the chiropractic
profession by depriving its practitioners of association with medical doctors
and calling them ''unscientific cultists,'' a judge ruled.   8

 Endangered owl is focus of Audubon Society meeting    8

 Union rebuffs G.M. on 2d proposal    9

 3 die for crimes in 3 states    9

 Monsanto ruling in dioxin case is upheld    9

 Constitution cited as bar to Reagan pension    28



Regional   29-31

 Mentally ill homeless people deemed ''incapable of taking care of themselves''
will be involuntarily hospitalized by New York City, Mayor Koch said. The new
policy vastly expands the city's treatment standards.   1

 Eastman Kodak prevailed upon the University of Rochester to rescind acceptance
to its business school of an employee of a rival. Kodak said it feared its
employees would be inhibited in the classroom.    1

 Police officers wounded in a shootout charged in a suit that they were injured
because the Police Department severely bungled its first attempt to arrest the
suspect. Three of six officers that had been wounded made the charges.   30

 Rudolph Giuliani has not ruled out running for senator, governor or mayor, he
said. But Mr. Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said a decision
would have to wait until pending government corruption cases are resolved.   31

 Two men posing as police officers investigating a murder have held up nine bars
and their patrons in Manhattan and Queens since July, the police said. The cash
taken has ranged from about $1,000 to $3,800.   31

 Mayor Koch expressed shock at ''the lack of outrage'' being voiced by the
city's religious and civic leaders about the burning of a couple in Prospect
Park, and wondered whether that stemmed from the fact that the victims were
white.   29

 A study of the Meadowlands and the surroundings of the sports complex will be
performed in an effort to allay fears that there are cancer-causing elements in
the area, New Jersey officials said.   29

 Renewal in Atlantic City slum    29

 Black-Hasidic patrols seek harmony in Crown Heights    29

 Therapy aids Chinatown youths    29

 Plan for Coliseum site is criticized in court    31

 Koch picks deputy as successor    31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

For Vietnam's Catholic Church, a Modest Revival

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The clamor of a basketball match that shatters the afternoon calm of a cloister
in St. Joseph's Seminary is, in a sense, the sound of a modest religious
revival. The young men at play are student priests.

This year, for the first time since 1982, the Roman Catholic Church in this
city, formerly Saigon, has been permitted to reopen the seminary and enroll 49
students.

The numbers are small compared with the need, and these priests will not be
ordained until 1993.

Vietnam has about 4.5 million Catholics, most of them in the southern and
central regions, seminary officals said. They are served by fewer than 2,500
priests.

Membership Up Among Young

Church membership is growing among young people, priests and seminary officials
say. This is evident at masses around the country.

Older and older men are ministering to younger and younger congregations, a
priest of the Redemptorist order in Hue said.

The church in the south, where hundreds of thousands of Catholics fled after the
French left North Vietnam to the Communists in 1954, has been a source of
concern to Hanoi.

David Marr, an American scholar at the Australian National University in
Canberra who recently made a study of religion in Vietnam, says at least 200
priests have been arrested since the South came under Communist rule in 1975,
with 50 or more still in detention, along with a similar number of Buddhist
monks and nuns.

In ''Church and State in Vietnam,'' a report in April for the Center for
International Policy in Washington, Mr. Marr wrote that some of the jailed
priests were former South Vietnamese military chaplains; others may have been
suspected of having links to anti-Government exile groups.

''In most cases, however,'' he concluded, ''they have probably incurred
Government wrath by ignoring warnings to limit their activity to prayers and
rituals. Instead, they tried to serve their flocks in whatever way seemed
beneficial at the time.''

Not Allowed to Run Services

The Catholic Church may no longer operate hospitals, schools or social services.
Religious orders are forbidden to recruit novices, though a seminary official
said the practice goes on clandestinely on a small scale.

This month, the newspaper Saigon Giai Phong, published in Ho Chi Minh City,
reported a spectacular confrontation between the followers of an 81-year-old
priest in Thu Duc district and security agents, who had come looking for him
after he was accused of training at least 1,600 Catholic militants to infiltrate
parishes.

The priest, the Rev. Tran Dinh Thu, was charged with reviving banned religious
groups, including the Legion of Mary and the Marian Sacerdotal Movement, the
paper said.

At a prosperous commune, his illegal printing press turned out lively pamphlets,
from which the newspaper quoted generously. One said:

''Other people have three enemies: the world, the flesh and the devil. We have
to face another enemy: the Communists, who undermine our religion and our
orders.''

Saigon Giai Phong said that Father Thu, while he was being pursued from May to
July, when he was finally arrested, continued to distribute leaflets that
instigated ''armed hoodlums armed with knives, scimitars and poles to manhandle
the Government agents on duty.''

Public Trial Expected

Father Thu and his followers are likely to get a public trial, the newspaper
said.

Outside the south, the church has been strongest in Hue, where Archbishop Nguyen
Kim Dien recently clashed with Hanoi when he opposed the establishment in 1983
of a Government-backed committee to oversee the church.

At the Hue Cathedral of the Mother of Perpetual Help, an unusual
Vietnamese-designed church with about 1,700 members, university students and
other young people volunteer to sing in the choir, teach Sunday school and raise
money through handicraft sales to keep the church running.

''Here we are, two old priests in our 70's in this big house,'' the Redemptorist
father said as he led a visitor through the halls of a deteriorating rectory.
''Who will replace us?''

The Rev. Huynh Cong Minh, the assistant director of St. Joseph's Seminary,
agrees that older priests worry about the future of the church. But he added
that there were plans to increase the number of seminaries in Vietnam to six in
the near future.

St. Joseph's is the second seminary to reopen in Vietnam since the church was
reorganized by Hanoi after it unified the country under Communism in 1975-76. It
is the first in the south.

Until now, the only seminary training priests was in Hanoi, Father Minh said.
The four proposed new seminaries will be scattered around the country.

Speaking in the presence of two Government interpreters, Father Minh said the
church in Vietnam had no problems with Rome, contrary to reports from the
Vatican. He acknowledged, however, that there was some disagreement over the
naming of bishops.

He and Le Can Chanh, the seminary's acting director, denied that Roman Catholics
faced discrimination in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of student priests playing basketball at the St. Joseph's
Seminary in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Not the First Woman

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


To the Editor:

That a woman, Mary R. Stout, was elected to head the Vietnam Veterans of America
is welcome news, but she is not, as you reported on Aug. 3, the first woman to
head a national veterans organization.

In 1979, the China-Burma-India Veterans Association elected Ethel Y. Sabalauskas
as its national commander. Again, in 1986, this World War II veterans
organization elected Elizabeth E. Gussak. Robert O. Muller, the Vietnam veterans
group's retiring president, in praising Ms. Stout, expressed his pride in not
being a member of a ''club for the old boys.'' Our club's members include women
and men in their 60's, 70's and beyond. We are proud of them, and also of our
daughters and sons who are members of the equally progressive Vietnam Veterans
of America.

MARTIN L. LEFKOVITS
  San Francisco, Aug. 10, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Iraqi Warplanes Resume Attacks On Iranian Shipping and Oilfields <u1013>

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Aug. 29


Iraq broke a 45-day informal Persian Gulf cease-fire with Iran today by bombing
Iranian offshore oil installations. An Iranian supertanker was left ablaze and
another ship may have been damaged off the Iranian coast.

Iran warned tonight of a ''crushing response'' to the Iraqi raids, which it
blamed in part on the United States.

The raids were the first on shipping in the gulf since the United Nations
Security Council passed a resolution on July 20 calling for a cease-fire and a
negotiated end to the seven-year Iran-Iraq war.

Iranian Retaliation Feared

Iraq said it would continue its attacks until Iran followed Iraq's example and
accepted the Security Council resolution.

The attacks raised the prospect of Iranian retaliation against shipping destined
for Arab ports in the gulf.

The Teheran radio quoted a military spokesman as saying that Iran ''considers it
its duty to give a crushing response to the Iraqi attacks.'' The radio added,
''The extensive military presence of the United States in the Persian Gulf and
Sea of Oman shows that Washington also supports the creation of crisis in the
gulf.''

Concern in Washington

Retaliatory attacks by Iran could involve the United States, whose warships have
been escorting re-registered Kuwaiti tankers through the gulf. [In Washington,
United States officials said they were concerned that the new Iraqi attacks
might increase the pace of the gulf war sharply. The officials also said they
were concerned about a resumption in attacks on oil tankers that would raise the
risk of a military clash between Iran and the United States. Page 14.]
Underscoring the importance of today's developments, President Saddam Hussein of
Iraq vowed tonight to keep up the attacks on Iran's oil exports.

'Destroy Economic Arteries'

''From now on, we will strike them in the sea and destroy all the economic
arteries which finance their military aggression,'' President Hussein said in a
speech broadcast over the Baghdad radio.

He said Iran had had time enough to respond to last month's Security Council
call for a cease-fire. He added: ''If they accept the resolution with good will,
we will give them a chance. If they do not implement all its items, we will
order the air force and ground forces to strike them.''

An Iraqi communique said ''tens of aircraft'' struck Iranian oil installations
in the lower gulf this morning.

The raids left the 237,807-ton Iranian supertanker Alvand on fire at an oil
loading platform on Sirri Island, where it had been taking on cargo, according
to shipping agents and other sources in the gulf. The Iraqi bombers also hit the
Rakhsh oilfield offshore and the nearby Lavan Island terminal.

This evening, a military spokesman said that Iraqi jets had also raided a
''large maritime target,'' the usual euphemism for a tanker or merchant ship, in
the northern gulf off the Iranian coast at about 4:50 this afternoon local time.
The spokesman did not say if the second vessel had been damaged.

The tanker war had been fairly quiet since early July, in advance of the
Security Council resolution on July 20 calling on both sides in the
seven-year-old war to accept a cease-fire.

But Western diplomats as well as Iraqi officials complained earlier this month
that Iran was taking advantage of the lull - and stalling over acceptance of the
resolution, prolonging the tacit truce - to step up its oil exports to two
million barrels a day from about 1.6 million barrels before the cease-fire.

Iraq's last air raid on an Iranian offshore installation was on July 15, at the
Rostam oilfield, near the Rakhsh field. In an apparent sign of impatience over
the Iranian diplomatic maneuvers, Iraq resumed attacks on economic targets
inland earlier this month.

Iraqi 'Right of Self-Defense'

Today's Iraqi war communique said that Baghdad was ''practicing its right of
self-defense against the evil Iranian regime which continued its aggression
ignoring the Security Council resolution.''

In recent days, Iraq had shown growing impatience. ''Iraq can't wait long,'' the
Iraqi Ambassador in Washington, Nizar Hamdoon, said on Wednesday.

And Baghdad's delegate to the United Nations, Ismat Kattani, told reporters this
week: ''It is obvious that Iraq cannot accept this procrastination and stalling.
Iraq fully reserves its position to attack any legitimate target any time it so
wishes. We are not going to attack any nonbelligerent ship going to a
nonbelligerent port. We will attack all Iranian ships, as all other Iranian
targets.''

The Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar, has said
that he was expecting an answer from the Iranians on the Security Council
resolution in the coming week. The United States, which pressed the resolution
as part of its gulf strategy, has expressed impatience with Iran.

Iran Stance on Resolution

An Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister, Mohtaba Mirmehdi, said on Friday: ''We do
not accept the resolution, but we do not reject it completely. That is what we
shall tell the United Nations.''

Speaking at a news conference in Oslo, Mr. Mirmehdi said that the ''most
significant shortage in the resolution is the inattention given to the Iranian
demands to condemn the aggression'' of Iraq.

The American strategy behind the resolution was to link it with a stronger
resolution, difficult to enforce, that would impose an international arms
embargo on either country if it violated a cease-fire agreement.

The United States is being drawn into the conflict through its agreement to
safeguard the re-registered Kuwaiti tankers with Navy ships, in effect siding
with Kuwait's ally Iraq.

Growing U.S. Buildup

The American commitment appears to have rapidly expanded since one of the
Kuwaiti tankers, the Bridgeton, struck a mine in the first convoy protected by
American warships. By next week there are expected to be at least 47 American
ships with 29,000 personnel in the area, one of the biggest military buildups
since the Vietnam War.

Iraq, which is desperate to end the draining war it launched with its invasion
of Iran in September 1980, has given conditional support to the United Nations
resolution.

In Baghdad, Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz told the state press agency today,
before the announcement of the Iraqi air raids, that any Iranian acceptance of a
cease-fire must include a formal agreement for an immediate withdrawal of forces
and an exchange of prisoners.

''Any Iranian agreement for a cease-fire only is not considered an acceptance
and thus does not force any commitment on Iraq,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''Either the
complete implementation of the resolution or things stay as they are.''

Responses for Iran

Iran could react to the Iraqi resumption of attacks on shipping in several ways,
diplomats and other observers in the area noted. Those could include an attempt
to turn the development into a propaganda victory, accusing Iraq of violating
freedom of the seas.

Iran could also put terrorist pressure on Iraq's Arab allies along the western
shore of the gulf, particularly Kuwait, through its clandestine network of
Shiite Moslem sympathizers.

Iran might also use mines, which are hard to trace, or attacks by speedboats to
strike at the American-escorted Kuwaiti tankers.

Iran's President, Hojatolislam Ali Khamenei, in a sermon in Teheran on Friday,
warned of attacks on the United States if the tanker war resumed.

''Everybody has realized,'' he said, ''that if America comes to the Persian Gulf
and the Iraqi regime resumes attacks on Iranian ships, then America will receive
such a blow that it will not be possible to repair it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Iran; photo of President Saddam hussein (AP) (Page 14)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ms. Rose to Wed Henry W. A. Jackson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 49, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 271 words


The engagement of Virginia Oliver Rose to Henry William Arthur Jackson, a son of
Mrs. Peter A. Jackson of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Mr. Jackson, has
been announced by her parents, Virginia R. McElman of Belleaire, Fla., and Evans
Rose of Sewickley Heights, Pa.

The bride-to-be, a graduate of Sewickley Academy, the Taft School and William
Smith College, is a preschool teacher at the Windmill Montessori School in
Brooklyn. She is a candidate for a master's degree in early-childhood education
at New York University. She was presented at the Cinderella Ball in Pittsburgh.
Her father is a managing partner in the Pittsburgh law firm of Rose, Schmidt,
Hasley & Disalle.

Ms. Rose is a granddaughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles J. Ramsburg of Sewickley
Heights and of Mrs. Oliver McClintock of Mars, Pa., and the late J. Evans Rose,
a lawyer. Mr. Ramsburg is Mayor of Sewickley Heights and the former president of
the Pittsburgh Gage and Supply Company.

The future bridegroom is a project planner in Mayor Koch's office. He graduated
from the Rumsey Hall School, the Middlesex School and Hobart College and
received a master's degree in public administration from N.Y.U. His father was
an Air Force captain in Vietnam.

Mr. Jackson is a grandson of Mrs. Franklin Bartlett Benkard of New York, a
former vice president of the Garden Clubs of America, and the late Mr. Benkard,
a partner in the New York law firm of Kelley, Drye & Warren. He is also a
grandson of the late Mr. and Mrs. Henry Louis Jackson of New York and White
Plains. Mr. Jackson was a consultant on men's fashions and a founder of Esquire
magazine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nancy C. Cox Married To Edward McSorley

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 50, Column 6; Society Desk

LENGTH: 132 words


At the Episcopal Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I., Nancy
Caldwell Cox, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Richard Graves Cox Jr. of Garden
City, was married yesterday to Edward McSorley, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
J. Howard McSorley of Ossining, N.Y. The Rev. Robert J. Broesler performed the
ceremony.

The bride, a graduate of Colgate University, is a candidate for an M.B.A. degree
at New York University. Her father is the vice president and general manager of
Harnden Inc., a machine manufacturer in Brooklyn.

The bridegroom, a vice president of Dillon, Read & Company in New York, is a
graduate of Bryant College and the Fordham University Graduate School of
Business. He was a corporal in the Marine Corps in the Vietnam War. His previous
marriage ended in divorce.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
HBO Turns To Vietnam's Trenches

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


AMERICAN TELEVISION AND THE VIETNAM War are once again prodding each other
warily.

Twenty years ago, TV news turned the conflict into the ''living room war,''
while TV entertainment generally shied away. It was too painful, too
controversial to be stuffed into the standard prime-time packages of
inspirational uplift. Now, this season, both commercial and cable TV are
preparing to tackle the Vietnam experience, from the vantage point not of a
divided domestic front but of the soldiers who went through the ordeal. A
consultant for one production, himself a veteran, notes that he is interested in
''not the fatigue, not the sweat, not the atrocities, not all that - it's the
brotherhood, the kinship.''

CBS will soon be unveiling - against NBC's popular ''Cosby Show'' - a new weekly
series entitled ''Tour of Duty.'' Network officials point out that the show's
sympathies will be entirely with the American foot soldier, the ''grunt.''
Despite programming restrictions against foul language, using drugs and graphic
violence, CBS is confident that ''Tour of Duty'' will capture the ''feel'' of
the war. ''We aren't going to wallow in grimness and negativity,'' a network
executive warns, clearly paving the way for the uplift brigades. One CBS goal is
to win back viewers from cable.

Cable-TV, however, has got an impressive jump on the network. Last night, the
pay cable service Home Box Office offered the debut of ''Vietnam War Story.''
Presented under the banner of HBO Showcase, which aims for original productions
of substance, the premiere of this potential series consisted of three
unconnected dramas, each essentially a one-act play. Each segment will be
presented separately on additional play dates in September. ''Vietnam War
Story'' also represents the producing debut of Nexus Productions, established by
the actor Georg Stanford Brown (''The Rookies,'' ''Roots''), his wife Tyne Daly
(Mary Beth Lacey of ''Cagney & Lacey'') and Edward Gold. Patrick S. Duncan, a
Vietnam veteran, is co-producer and supervising writer. The cable project is
pursuing a course remarkably similar to CBS's. Mr. Brown carefully stresses,
''We're not doing the war, we're doing characters.''

It would be easy enough to conclude that television entertainment's sudden
interest in Vietnam is inspired by the widespread attention lavished on such
recent feature films as ''Platoon'' and ''Full Metal Jacket.'' But something
else happened before either of these films was released. A monument to those who
died fighting in Vietnam was erected in Washington, and the occasion seemed to
hit a national nerve. Neglected and justifiably bitter, Vietnam veterans began
staging their own protests, marching together with pride, determined to
obliterate the unflattering images that had sprung up around them. Denied the
welcome-home celebrations given to earlier veterans, they were no longer willing
to be swept into some distant corner of the national psyche. And, in an
emotional outpouring of sympathy, the country responded. Here, then, was the
stuff of drama, of patriotic fervor. Television obviously sniffed the
possibilities.

The concept for ''Vietnam War Story,'' devised by Mr. Gold, was taken to HBO
more than a year and a half ago. A cast of largely unknown actors, most of them
too young to have vivid memories of the war, was recruited and then put through
a kind of mini-basic training in the marshy outlying areas of Savannah, Ga.,
where the segments were later filmed. Russell Thurman of Warriors Inc., a group
of Vietnam veterans, served as technical adviser. The immediate visible result
is a collection of performances that look remarkably authentic in addition to
being dramatically solid.

The segments, described in a preface as ''inspired by real life experiences''
recounted by veterans, are uneven. The most awkward is ''The Mine,'' written by
Mr. Duncan and directed by Mr. Brown. The story revolves around a big, sullen
corporal named K.C. (Eriq La Salle) who is assigned to a new field unit after
being hospitalized for earlier battle wounds. On patrol, K.C. steps on a mine
with just enough pressure to hear the warning click. He has to stand still until
experts can be found to defuse the mine. After hours in the blazing sun, he
begins to reveal the reasons for his hostility. Except for Mr. La Salle's tough
performance, the piece is slight and obvious.

In ''The Pass,'' written by Mr. Duncan and directed by Kevin Hooks, three
soldiers - portrayed by Tony Becker, Wendell Pierce and Merritt Butrick - meet
to get high on alcohol and pot and sample the professional girls at Mama-San's
Chicago Club. One is a desk-bound clerk eager for combat duty. The other two are
weary grunts. By segment's end, the clerk gets his chance to fight. For the
others, the dreary war goes on. The episode makes its point neatly.

By far the most effective effort, however, is ''Home,'' written by Ronald Rubin
and directed by Ray Danton. Set in a Veterans Administration hospital back in
the United States, the script focuses on a scrawny, fast-talking fellow named
Zadig (Nicholas Cascone) who has taken upon himself the crusade of keeping up
the spirits of all the other disabled veterans in his ward. Mr. Cascone, David
Harris and Tom Fridley head a first-rate cast that manages to powerfully convey
resentment and disillusionment while still delivering a gut-wrenching punch.

There are pitfalls here. In the rush to compensate for past treatment of Vietnam
veterans, there is a temptation to sanctify their experiences. Going
sanctimonious has its limitations. But ''Vietnam War Story'' establishes an
imposing quality level for subsequent TV efforts to reach. And, incidentally, it
provides an unusually generous display case for fine black talent, in front of
and behind the cameras. HBO is reportedly ready to order additional segments
from Nexus Productions. The investment is clearly warranted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

For John Ritter, Playing The Comic Isn't Enough

BYLINE: By ANDY MEISLER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2317 words


FRED ASTAIRE HAD IT. CARY Grant had it. It is that rarest of on-screen
attributes: the ability to break new ground, to grow artistically, while
appearing to the public as effortlessly entertaining. For the past decade or so,
Hollywood insiders have suspected that a man named John Ritter - primarily a
commercial TV actor, of all things -has more than his share of it, too.

Their suspicions may be confirmed when a series called ''Hooperman'' makes its
debut on ABC on Wednesday, Sept. 23. In it, Mr. Ritter portrays Harry Hooperman,
a San Francisco police detective. The show itself is something out of the
ordinary: It skips away from standard TV formula like a sharp phonograph needle
on a worn-out record.

TV crime-fighters usually occupy hourlong time slots; ''Hooperman'' is a
30-minute show. Half-hour shows are almost invariably situation comedies; this
one has humorous elements, but it is filmed without a live audience and will be
broadcast without a laugh track.

Mr. Ritter's acting skills get a healthy workout; yet, it isn't until the final
credits have rolled that one realizes the range of emotions he's attempted to
coax out of a mere 23 minutes of dialogue.

He plays, as he often does, a good-natured, good-looking,
well-meaning-but-impulsive, non-macho man - whose comically clumsy gestures mask
the actor's uncanny grace and body control. In the course of the premiere
episode, Harry Hooperman experiences some fairly standard comic situations: a
shower interrupted in mid-shampoo, a gruff boss and a digestively misbehaving
dog. During one sequence in which Hooperman is trying to hire a superintendent
for his apartment building over the telephone, Mr. Ritter manages to deftly
deliver clues to the character that are imbedded in funny lines: ''How's your
plumbing? [pause] No, no, I'm not referencing your internal organs. I'm just
trying to determine if you have skills in that area.''

He also, however, looks genuinely terrified as he sidles out onto a window ledge
to talk to a potential suicide. Intertwined with it all is his reaction to the
brutal murder of one of his closest friends, an elderly woman who lives in his
building. In the final scene of the episode, while sorting through his friend's
possessions, he breaks down in tears.

Even though wisecracks were bouncing off him just seconds before, Mr. Ritter has
smoothly shifted emotional gears. Few other well-known television stars would
even have been called upon to make that kind of transition. And that ability
seems to be both Mr. Ritter's greatest strength and greatest paradox.

''Is 'Hooperman' a stretch for me?'' John Ritter, munching on a sandwich in his
production company office at the 20th Century Fox studios, seems slightly
surprised by the question. ''Uh, sure. Uh-huh. But basically, I try to look at
everything I do as a stretch.''

''Everything'' in Mr. Ritter's case includes an uneven list of television, movie
and theater projects. In October, ''Real Men,'' a theatrical feature in which he
plays a bumbling insurance agent recruited for a dangerous mission by the
C.I.A., opens nationwide. He's done his share of feature films (forgettable ones
like ''Americathon,'' almost-forgotten respectable ones like ''They All
Laughed'' and ''Hero at Large''); made-for-TV movies (most of them lightweight
vehicles, with the exception of last year's highly acclaimed ''Unnatural
Causes,'' about the effects of Agent Orange on Vietnam veterans), and, in
comparative obscurity, live stage performances of O'Neill, Tennessee Williams
and Shakespeare.

But, above all, for better or worse, John Ritter is known for portraying Jack
Tripper, the lead character of the ABC sitcom ''Three's Company.'' From 1977 to
'84, Mr. Ritter mugged, did double-takes and took pratfalls through one of the
most controversial programs on television. Controversial not strictly because of
its theme - it was a leering sex farce about a young man who feigns
homosexuality in order to share an apartment with two attractive women -but
because, while critics decried it as everything from an empty-headed waste of
air time to a symptom of moral rot in 1970's America, it was one of the most
highly rated programs in TV history.

Many observers were confronted, though, by a seeming anomaly: that even in a
show they hated, in a role that was essentially trivial, Mr. Ritter was more
than convincing. Indeed, he displayed a marked talent for being able to rise
above mediocre material.

''As he has consistently demonstrated in the 'Three's Company' series,'' wrote
one critic, reviewing a 1980 TV movie starring Mr. Ritter and entitled ''The
Comeback Kid,'' ''Mr. Ritter is an extremely engaging and agile actor, capable
of deceptively easy reversals in mood and tone. He deserves bigger and better
projects.''

In Hollywood, where commercial success tends to outweigh artistic potential, the
qualified raves are fewer. '' 'Three's Company' was not a show I particularly
liked,'' says the writer/producer Steven Bochco. ''I didn't watch it on a
regular basis. But if I was flipping channels past it, I'd stop and watch.'' Mr.
Bochco, who created ''Hill Street Blues'' and, with his partner Terry Louise
Fisher, produces the NBC drama series ''L.A. Law,'' has contracted to write the
first three ''Hoopermans'' with Ms. Fisher. ''Why would I watch it?'' he adds.
''Because I'd get fixated watching John. John is riveting. You have to watch
this guy. You pay attention to him.''

The film maker Peter Bogdanovich, who cast Mr. Ritter in ''Nickelodeon'' and
''They All Laughed,'' is more effusive: ''He moves better than anybody I've seen
on the screen in years. He has such an extraordinarily disarming naturalness
that you almost think he's not working at all. He's the most natural actor I've
seen since Jimmy Stewart.''

''Basically,'' says Mr. Ritter, ''what I'm doing is what I want to do. I feel
very lucky. And very satisfied. Sometimes, sure, I think: 'Gee, I should be
doing the classics or something.'

''But I've done a lot of theater. And I know I can do a lot of different things.
Right now, I feel fulfilled, because I can be in on the decision-making
process'' -he gestures vaguely toward the phone and desk in his office - ''and
make my own creative choices, for better or worse. I've made some wrong choices,
but they're mine. And I can dance to my own Walkman.''

In person, the actor is much like many of the personable, self-effacing
characters he plays on the screen. It's also clear that he is more comfortable
telling a joke than delving into his own motivations.

Yet, there is evidence of conscious effort behind the ''natural actor'' image.
Earlier in his career, he studied method acting with Stella Adler and Nina Foch.
''You don't use that stuff for 'Three's Company,' because it's farce - all
toptext, no subtext,'' says Mr. Ritter. ''A lot of the time, my acting notes to
myself were 'louder and faster.'

''But in 'Letting Go,' a TV movie I did with Sharon Gless, I played a widower
who has to come to terms with his wife's death. I had to talk to her grave. I
had to say goodbye to her. It was one of the hardest scenes I've ever had to do.
And my wife wrote me a note, which the director had asked her to. And I read the
note, and I saw the grave, and I put my wife's name on it. And I said goodbye to
her.

''One of the things about acting is you can always use your life. You have to
recall how you are and how people are and how you relate.

''At my father's funeral, for instance, I cried my heart out. But I remember,
especially with my brother, I never laughed so much either. There were moments
where it was like explosive laughter. We were on that incredible roller coaster
of life.

''And so, an hour after I did that scene in the graveyard, we were kidding
around. And so the technique has to fit the project. And every project is
different.''

But still a challenge, adds Mr. Ritter, who disagrees with the notion -that a
''move up'' to movie projects is desirable.

''I've been offered a few movies lately,'' he says. ''But I don't want to do a
movie just for the sake of saying, 'Oh, boy! There's popcorn involved in this.'
I really love the speed of television. And I have a deal to make
movies-of-the-week, projects that I really love.''

It's a position, the actor says, that he does not take for granted. Born in
1948, he is the son of the late cowboy singer Tex Ritter. Raised in southern
California, he majored in theater at the University of Southern California over
the objections of his father. ''He wanted me to get a real job,'' says Mr.
Ritter. ''A major piece of unfinished business in my life is that I borrowed
$250 from him back then to pay my rent, and I never got to pay him back.''

After college, Mr. Ritter appeared in summer-stock productions of ''Desire Under
the Elms'' and ''The Glass Menagerie.'' He also did ''The Tempest'' and ''As You
Like It'' in local Los Angeles productions. In a typical West Coast career
progression, he was shortly in demand for guest roles on television shows like
''Medical Center,'' ''Starsky and Hutch,'' ''Phyllis'' and ''Rhoda.'' In 1975,
Mr. Ritter made two half-hour pilots. One, a fairly sophisticated sitcom for
Grant Tinker at MTM, had him playing a young lawyer. Despite three separate
filmed attempts, the show - called ''Bachelor at Law'' - didn't sell.

''Three's Company'' did. Indeed, it was a major reason for ABC's ratings
dominance during the late 1970's and is still going strong in syndication. By
most accounts, it has made Mr. Ritter a wealthy man; by his own admission, he is
financially secure for life.

Mr. Ritter won an Emmy in 1984 for his role in the show. That year he formed
Adam Productions to produce TV movies and his next weekly show.

Shortly after, his company signed a deal with 20th Century Fox Television. Over
a period of three and a half years, the studio put several projects into
development that were ultimately rejected by either the network or Mr. Ritter.
Most, if not all of them were conventional sitcoms filmed in front of live
audiences.

''In April 1986,'' says Mr. Bochco, who also has an office on the Fox lot,
''Peter Grad, the head of development then, asked me to take over and rewrite a
project for John that someone else had started. For a number of reasons, I
wasn't interested.

''But Peter asked me: 'If you were creating a series for John, what would you
do?' I said: 'If I were creating a series for John Ritter . . . .' The strange
thing was, as I was saying this, I had no idea what was going to come out of my
face. I said: 'I'd make him a cop in San Francisco.' And as I said it, I knew it
was absolutely right, and I saw basically how to do it. It made absolute sense:
because the police world is a physical world, and John is an incredibly gifted
physical actor. It's a world that has a tremendous amount of humor. It's also a
world that has sudden, complex drama in it - and John has to be able to do that,
because he's not a kid anymore.''

Subsequently, after meeting with Mr. Ritter, Mr. Bochco and Ms. Fisher agreed to
get ''Hooperman'' started before returning full time to ''L.A. Law.'' After
that, an as-yet-unnamed production team will take over.

''What I really want to do,'' says Mr. Ritter, ''is fulfill the ideas in
Steven's script. The humor is rooted in my character. Before shooting started, I
went up to talk to these cops in San Francisco. And they were very formal guys.
'Well, Mr. Ritter,' they said. But I asked hundreds of questions. After about
the first hour, they were telling me horror stories - but they were telling me
funny stories, too. What it was, in order to survive, in order to deal with what
they have to deal with, they have to plug into humor. It's just a different kind
of humor.

''When I got the part in 'Real Men,' '' he continues, ''a career dream was
coming true for me. The dream was to work with Lucille Ball and have her like
me. I was on 'Life With Lucy' last year. She gave me all sorts of specific,
brilliant advice. We roared with laughter together. To have her say, 'I want you
on the show every week'!

''Well, that night, the taping night, I got home to find a message on my phone
machine from my agent. It was 12:15 A.M. 'You know that script you read? ''Real
Men''? Tomorrow morning, three scenes, auditioning with Jim Belushi.'

''I had to get up at 6 in the morning and memorize three scenes,'' Mr. Ritter
adds. ''I had to leave Lucy and all that ecstasy behind and go down there with
my little hat in my hand. What's wrong with working in television - at the
top?''

Genre Genesis

Already, there's a buzzword. In TV programming circles, ''Hooperman'' is known
as a ''dramedy.'' That slightly queasy new noun describes an ambitious mixture
-homogenization might be a better word - of comedy and drama in a half-hour
format.

''I personally resist putting a label on it,'' says Steven Bochco (in photo).
''We just wanted to fool around with the format, mess up some people's
expectations.''

''I find so much television predictable,'' says Terry Louise Fisher, a former
practicing attorney who is Mr. Bochco's writing partner on the series. ''So
predictable that when you turn it on and you see the first scene, you know
what's going to happen at the wrap-up. This show keeps yin-yanging back and
forth. What we do is pull back on the rug a bit so that the viewer says, 'Gee, I
don't know what this show is.' ''

According to Mr. Bochco and Ms. Fisher, the mixture of comedy and drama will
vary in each episode of ''Hooperman.'' In any event, they add, the comedy will
depend less on jokes than on ''comedic situations.'' Which may prove fortunate.
''Before 'Hooperman,' I'd written one half-hour script,'' says Mr. Bochco.
''Writing that one convinced me for sure that I didn't know how to write
straight comedy.'' Says Ms. Fisher: ''I couldn't write a joke to save my soul.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from ''Hooperman''; Photo of Gene Bochco

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Bork And the Press

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


As law professor and judge, Robert H. Bork has criticized judges who in his view
read the guarantees of the Constitution too expansively. On that ground he has
denounced constitutional decisions going back 60 years.

But in at least one area Judge Bork has himself taken a broad view. That is
protection of the press from chilling libel suits. He wrote, in 1984, what
advocates of press freedom consider one of the great libel opinions of recent
years.

The case was brought by Bertell Ollman, a political scientist specializing in
Marxist theory, who had been attacked in a column by Rowland Evans and Robert
Novak. The U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington divided over whether one
pejorative statement in the column was an expression of opinion, which cannot
give rise to a libel action, or a factual charge.

Judge Bork did not rely on the fact-opinion distinction. He joined the majority
in rejecting Professor Ollman's suit, but he went on broader grounds.

''Those who step into areas of public dispute,'' he wrote, ''who choose the
pleasures and distractions of controversy, must be willing to bear criticism,
disparagement and even wounding assessments.

''Perhaps it would be better if disputation were conducted in measured phrases
and calibrated assessments, and with strict avoidance of the ad hominem; better,
that is, if the opinion and editorial pages of the public press were modeled on
The Federalist Papers.

''But that is not the world in which we live, ever have lived, or are ever
likely to know, and the law of the First Amendment must not try to make public
dispute safe and comfortable for all the participants. That would only stifle
the debate.''

Noting the growing number of libel suits and the inflation of damage claims,
Judge Bork said the courts must act to prevent an intimidating effect on free
discussion. His solution was to give nearly absolute protection to speech and
writing in ''the public, political arena.'' Judges, he said, must see that cases
involving that kind of expression did not go to juries.

The roots of that opinion can be traced as far back as 1971 in Judge Bork's
writings. In a speech at the University of Michigan in 1979 he said our
democracy would be ''meaningless unless citizens are free to discuss and write
about political men and issues.''

The Michigan speech also included some tart Bork comments on the press. ''Not a
week goes by,'' he said, ''without thunderings from the journalistic corps that
their freedoms are under assault. . . . When the press advances and loses some
novel [legal] claim, it responds with an outcry that would lead the uninitiated
to suppose it was being systematically stripped of centuries-old rights.''

Those comments seem fair enough to me. The American press is the freest on
earth, but it does talk sometimes as if it saw doom at hand. I also agree with
Judge Bork, most journalists would not, that the press isolates and endangers
itself when it seeks special privileges such as immunity from subpoenas.

There are aspects of Judge Bork's views on freedom of the press that are
troubling. For example, he has questioned Supreme Court decisions holding,
first, that a newspaper could not be compelled to run a candidate's reply to
criticism and, second, that a broadcaster who found a rape victim's name in
public court records could not be punished for publishing it. Those decisions
were unanimous.

Judge Bork has also indicated doubts about the Pentagon Papers case: the 1971
Supreme Court decision refusing to prohibit the publication of excerpts from a
secret official history of the Vietnam War. It was the great modern test of the
long-established and fundamental principle that the First Amendment disfavors
prior restraints on publication.

Libel cases make headlines these days, and libel law is so interesting that much
is written about it. But a far greater threat to freedom of the press - and to
democracy - lies in the Federal Government's insistent push to restrain and
censor in the name of national security. Many cases reflecting that tendency are
in the pipeline now.

Outside the press area Judge Bork has consistently supported claims of
Presidential power. The question is whether, when a President asserts the power
to silence public debate, Judge Bork would see as he does in libel cases that
the functioning of our democracy is at stake.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLASS REUNION;
Kennedy's Men Relive the Cuban Missile Crisis

BYLINE: By J. Anthony Lukas; J. Anthony Lukas won the 1986 Pulitzer Prize for
nonfiction for his book ''Common Ground.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4476 words


OUT IN THE TROPICAL night, a winter storm sweeps off the Caribbean, drenching
the sea grapes and strangler figs along Hawk Channel, rattling the thatch palms
and red mangroves that rim the terrace. Inside the old Florida resort hotel,
three television sets glow in the dark, illuminating the sparkling napery of
five tables strewn with half-nibbled strawberry shortcake, coffee-stained cups,
burgundy in great balloon glasses. Around the tables, spectral figures hunch
forward, absorbed by video images of a crisis that ended a quarter century
before.

''Today,'' intones Charles Collingwood, ''the world came out from under the most
terrible threat of nuclear holocaust since the end of World War II. During the
next half hour, we'll examine the events that led to the break in the crisis
that came suddenly this morning in Moscow. Soviet Premier Khrushchev announced
that Russian missile bases in Cuba would be dismantled, crated and shipped back
to the Soviet Union. . . . In Washington, Mr. Kennedy's reaction was swift and
favorable. In a statement, he said that Khrushchev's offer was important and
constructive, a contribution to peace.''

Abruptly, images of American warships and Soviet missiles give way to a sonorous
announcer asking, ''Do you ever say, 'I feel so tired you couldn't drag me out
of the house tonight.'? Do you take vitamins and still feel tired? Do you know
your trouble may be due to iron-poor blood? Of course, vitamins alone can't
build up iron-poor blood. But - Geritol can! A couple of Geritol tablets or a
few tablespoons of Geritol liquid contains seven vitamins plus twice the iron in
a whole pound of calves liver. . . .''

An elderly gentleman in the corner stifles a sardonic grin, another chuckles
decorously into his napkin. Softly at first, then with mounting hilarity, these
veterans of the Kennedy Administration - among them, former Secretary of Defense
Robert S. McNamara, 70; former Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon, 77;
former Under Secretary of State George W. Ball, 77; former Presidential aides
Theodore C. Sorensen, 58, and Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., 69 -quiver in rueful
laughter at this reminder of the changes wrought in themselves and the world
since those blood-racing times 25 years ago.

It is Thursday, March 5, 1987. Eight survivors of the missile crisis have come
to the shores of the Caribbean - barely 130 miles northeast of Havana - to
relive two of the most momentous weeks of their lives. Along with a dozen or so
scholars of that era, they have gathered at Hawk's Cay, a luxury resort in the
Florida Keys, for a four-day conference marking the 25th anniversary of the
crisis.

Strictly speaking, that quarter century will not be complete until October, but
the conference has been scheduled seven months in advance so that its findings
will be available during this autumn's commemoration. Sponsored by Harvard
University's John F. Kennedy School of Government and underwritten by the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation and the Carnegie Corporation, the gathering has awakened
high expectations among the cognoscenti of foreign affairs. For perhaps no event
since World War II so preoccupies the makers and critics of foreign policy as
those ''13 days'' when the world seemed to tremble on the brink of nuclear
apocalypse.


THE CRISIS BEGAN on Oct. 15, 1962, when photographs taken by a United States U-2
aircraft provided indisputable evidence that the Soviet Union was constructing
missile bases in Cuba; it continued through a week of secret preparations, which
culminated with President John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Oct. 22
announcing a naval blockade of Cuba; and ended on Oct. 28, when the Russian
leader Nikita S. Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba in
exchange for an American pledge not to attempt an invasion of Cuba.

Ever since, analysts have sifted the fine grains of this episode for lessons on
nuclear deterrence, crisis management and creative diplomacy -lessons which, it
is hoped, will help other leaders avoid, or at least defuse, future crises. A
whole cottage industry has grown up around the missile crisis, producing a vast
literature of learned polemic, scholarly conjecture and technical exegisis.
Harvard's Kennedy School of Government has built part of its curriculum around a
treatise on the subject, ''Essence of Decision,'' by Graham T. Allison, the
school's dean. There is even a counterliterature developing, exemplified by an
article last winter by Eliot A. Cohen of the Naval War College entitled, ''Why
We Should Stop Studying the Cuban Missile Crisis.''

There is no sign yet that anyone has stopped studying the crisis. But with many
of its key figures now in their late sixties and early seventies, this weekend's
conference may be - as Harvard professor Richard E. Neustadt tells his Hawk's
Cay audience -''the last opportunity for researchers like us to deal face to
face with those of you who went through these events.'' Turning to the crescent
of graying heads around the television sets, Neustadt says: ''You are the only
people we have access to who have had to face the problems of escalation in a
nuclear crisis. You are the only people there are to talk to about your
perceptions, your feelings, your concerns. For any future leader who has to face
the prospects of a crisis escalating out of hand, you have valuable lessons to
offer.''

But when Graham Allison invites ''personal reflections'' from the participants,
Robert McNamara is in a dyspeptic mood. His bullet head bobbing emphatically,
his spectacles catching glints of candlelight, he takes vigorous exception to
Charles Collingwood's portayal of events:

''The assumption that the Soviet missiles in Cuba shifted the strategic nuclear
balance is wrong. My memory may be bad - some of us do need Geritol - but I
believe we had 5,000 nuclear warheads at that time and the Soviets had 300. What
difference would it have made if they had 340? Did putting 40 launchers in Cuba
change the military balance of power? I didn't believe it then and I don't
believe it today. I asked in 1962: What difference did it make if we were killed
by a missile from Moscow or a missile from Cuba? I don't think it makes any
difference. When you try to understand something like this, you have to begin
with an understanding of what the problem is. Contrary to what Collingwood said,
the problem was not a change in the strategic balance.''

But Douglas Dillon, seated next to McNamara, disagrees. ''All I can remember is
how we felt at the time,'' the oldest of the participants says in a soft but
self-assured voice. ''I felt -and so did the Joint Chiefs of Staff -that there
was a change in the strategic balance. We felt a tremendous shock that the
Soviets were putting these things so near to us. So did all Americans!''

Ted Sorensen, still jut-jawed and forceful, comes down on McNamara's side: ''The
President never mentioned a shift in the balance of power as his reason for
wanting the missiles out. But let me say I have some worries about this weekend.
Beware of using Cuba as a precedent in the future. We live in a different world
now, with a different role for military force, a different role for the
President of the United States.''

And Arthur Schlesinger, his voice still crisp with the authority of Harvard and
the White House, adds further support from the late President himself: ''The
Monday after the resolution of the crisis, President Kennedy gave me his views
at some length. He was concerned that people might draw the wrong lessons from
the crisis. In particular, he worried that people might conclude 'Just be tough
with the Russians, and they will back down.' ''

Something is going on here, a subtext dancing just beneath the surface. In part,
this discussion is an echo of a secret debate during the missile crisis itself
about whether the Soviet challenge was primarily military or political. But
overlaying - and sharpening - this historical disagreement is a more urgent
contemporary debate. McNamara, Sorensen and Schlesinger are all strong opponents
of the Reagan Administration's nuclear policies, all vocal advocates of measured
steps toward arms control and, ultimately, nuclear disarmament.

Douglas Dillon, on the other hand, is a member of the Committee on the Present
Danger, a group of neoconservative intellectuals and former government officials
who support increased defense spending and greater vigilance toward the Soviet
threat. Finding in Soviet expansionist policies a ''clear and present danger''
to the United States - the phrase is Oliver Wendell Holmes's -Dillon and his
colleagues in the committee vigorously support the need to maintain a powerful
nuclear deterrent, if not outright nuclear superiority.

Tonight's debate over the strategic balance in 1962 is thus intricately related
to the participants' differences over the strategic balance today. With these
parallels flashing in their heads, the conferees trundle off to bed shortly
before 11 P.M.


FRIDAY DAWNS GRAY and gusty. A blackboard in the lobby proclaims ''Windy Day
Schedule. 11 A.M. Coffee with Dolphin Trainers. 3 P.M. Scuba Diving Video.''

Those with swimming trunks still packed away mutter under their breaths. ''The
weather is coming in from Cuba,'' notes Joseph S. Nye Jr., a Harvard political
scientist and former Deputy Under Secretary of State who is chairman of the
conference. ''Is this Fidel's revenge?'' The lawns around the pink stucco hotel
are littered with coconuts that have fallen during the stormy night, several of
them denting the roofs of sports cars that line the drive. The license plate of
one Mercedes-Benz 380SL bears the words ''Poverty Sucks,'' a reminder that these
deliberations are taking place in a privileged enclave.

After a gargantuan brunch in the Palm Terrace, the conference assembles in
lavender swivel chairs around a horseshoe table: 22 men in bright sportshirts,
looking not unlike the investment bankers and stockbrokers who generally inhabit
this conference center. The talk this morning is not of convertible bonds,
however, but of nuclear annihilation.

''We didn't then - and we don't today - give much thought to how Moscow will
read what we are doing,'' says Bob McNamara. ''We'd carried out the Bay of Pigs
operation, never intending to use American military force - but the Kremlin
didn't know that. We were running covert operations against Castro. . . . People
in the Pentagon were even talking about a first strike. There were four regular
options, plus a fifth called 1 (a), which was a first-strike plan. [Air Force
Chief of Staff Curtis] LeMay talked openly about a first strike against the
Soviet Union if the Russians ever backed us into a corner. So the Soviets may
well have believed we were seeking Castro's overthrow plus a first-strike
capability. This may have led them to do what they did in Cuba.''

But McNamara says Russian fears were exaggerated. Despite evidence that the
Central Intelligence Agency was planning to assassinate Castro, McNamara insists
that John Kennedy never approved such a measure. And, he says, ''I don't believe
that the President or I ever thought that we would launch a first strike under
any circumstances.''

Ted Sorensen underlines this argument with a fresh interpretation of the
President's state of mind that fall. As the Congressional campaign heated up,
the Republicans warned with increasing vehemence of the dangers of Soviet arms
shipments to Cuba. In September, the President attempted to defuse this issue by
warning the Soviets explicitly not to introduce ''offensive ground-to-ground
missiles'' into Cuba.

''I believe the President drew the line precisely where he thought the Soviets
were not and would not be,'' Sorensen says. ''That is to say, if we had known
that the Soviets were putting 40 missiles in Cuba, we might under this
hypothesis have drawn the line at 100, and said with great fanfare that we would
absolutely not tolerate the presence of more than 100 missiles in Cuba. . . .''

Sorensen's notion that Kennedy would have been willing to simply ''define away''
the crisis before the fact stirs a murmur of surprise around the table. A moment
later, Prof. Thomas C. Schelling of the Kennedy School sets off some more
murmurs when he argues that there were never any nuclear warheads in Cuba for
the Soviet missiles. ''Given the fact that the Soviets had never deployed any
nuclear missiles outside the Soviet Union before, and that they do not even
trust their own military with custody of warheads in the Soviet Union,''
Schelling contends, ''it seems almost inconceivable to me that they would then
have trusted the warheads with anybody outside their borders.''

Raymond L. Garthoff, an analyst of Soviet affairs for the State Department at
the time and now a researcher at the Brookings Institution, says the C.I.A.
''never confirmed that there were warheads in Cuba,'' although storage
facilities were ready and there were some indications that the Russians were
preparing to bring warheads in. (The famous photographs unveiled by Adlai
Stevenson, the American chief delegate to the United Nations, before the
Security Council, showed missile launch sites and missiles, never warheads.)
McNamara agrees that the White House had no hard evidence that the warheads were
there, but notes that it was ''prudent for us to act as if they were.''

The conference adjourns for lunch, still buzzing about the morning's twin
''disclosures.'' Over chicken salad and ice coffee, Richard Ned Lebow of Cornell
University's Peace Studies Program, suggests that the missile crisis may have
been, in some sense, a double bluff. ''If Khrushchev had no warheads in Cuba, as
now seems probable, and Kennedy was determined to avoid war at all costs, as now
seems likely, then both sides may have been bluffing. Kennedy was threatening an
air strike he never intended on nuclear warheads that were never there. It's an
intriguing notion.''


BUT IF THERE WAS some bluff in all this, it was scarcely discernible at the time
to members of Excom - short for Executive Committee of the National Security
Council - the ad hoc, top secret body of senior officials that John Kennedy
assembled to manage the crisis. The Excom members here uniformly describe those
weeks as the most intense, the most draining, the most terrifying of their lives
(Remembering Saturday Oct. 27, Robert McNamara confesses he ''wasn't sure I
would ever see another Saturday night''). The Defense Department had announced
it would begin stocking bomb shelters with food and water; a Navy fighter
squadron had been dispatched to southern Florida; the stock market had taken a
dramatic plunge.

Ted Sorensen says as the conference resumes that afternoon: ''Bob McNamara and I
were reminiscing last night about the evening of Saturday the 27th. We'd just
dispatched Bobby Kennedy to [Soviet Ambassador Anatoly] Dobrynin, expecting the
'ultimatum' to be rejected.''

There has been much debate here about whether the message was really an
ultimatum or just a statement of the ''facts.'' It called for 1) immediate
Soviet withdrawal of the missiles in Cuba, 2) a United States pledge not to
invade Cuba, and 3) United States agreement to withdraw its obsolete Jupiter
missiles from Turkey (but according to its own schedule and not as part of any
explicit deal with the Soviet). The Kennedys had real doubts whether this
''ultimatum'' would be accepted.

''The only word to describe the meeting that night is 'rancorous,' '' Sorensen
says. ''We did show the effects of stress and fatigue, the air-strike option was
gaining strength and its proponents were becoming more and more vigorous, the
President was under tremendous pressure at that point for military action.''

George Ball, a cultivated figure from the old school of diplomacy, recalls
walking through the White House Rose Garden the next morning with Bob McNamara,
still apprehensive about Khrushchev's response to the President's message: ''It
was such a beautiful morning and it reminded me very strongly of that Georgia
O'Keeffe painting of a rose growing up through a cow's skull. It was macabre. I
know I felt 10 years older afterward. But we got over it. We had one enormous
advantage, and that was a Secretary of Defense who was more than just a
spokesman for the military. I hate to think what would have happened if we'd had
one like the present Secretary of Defense!''

Indeed, McNamara recalls that even after Khrushchev agreed to remove the
missiles from Cuba, some military leaders still were determined to bomb Havana
and/or invade Cuba: ''The President invited the chiefs in to thank them for
their support during the crisis, and there was one hell of a scene. Curtis LeMay
came out saying, 'We lost. We ought to just go in there today and knock 'em
off!' ''

During this afternoon's coffee break, in walks McGeorge Bundy, John Kennedy's
National Security adviser, who has been delayed in New York to attend a meeting
of the Century Club on the admission of women. (''Talk about war!'' Ted Sorensen
exclaims.) This evening, a bit of New Frontier glamour is recreated. At a table
in the center of the formal Caribbean Room, lit by clusters of tall white
candles, the Dillons, the Balls, McNamara and Schlesinger dine in stately
splendor. A young waiter, who wasn't born until three years after John Kennedy's
death, looks on in bluff astonishment when told whom he has been serving. ''Good
Lord,'' he mutters, ''that's half of Camelot out there.''


AT 7:10 SATURDAY morning, fire alarms clang throughout the hotel. Lightning has
struck some power system, and now firemen in yellow slickers clatter past dazed
guests still in their pajamas.

But when the conference reconvenes at 9 o'clock, lack of sleep is only one of
the complaints. Some of the younger scholars are growing peevish about the
paucity of new data from the Excom participants. Marc Trachtenberg of the
University of Pennsylvania opens this morning's session with what he concedes is
''a parochial plea as an historian'':

''What we need is hard evidence - new evidence -that will help us understand
these issues better. If you give it to us, we will be eternally grateful.''

''Do you want true or false information?'' asks Abram J. Chayes, a Harvard law
professor who was legal adviser to the State Department under Kennedy in 1962.

''If you answer too well,'' Joe Nye of Harvard puts in, ''you're going to wipe
out a whole cottage industry.''

Under the ensuing laughter, Bob McNamara grumbles, ''It should be wiped out, as
far as I'm concerned.''

But there is still some hard evidence to emerge. During this morning's coffee
break, Ray Garthoff ambles over to McNamara and whispers, with a cryptic little
smile, ''I have a surprise for you.''

A few minutes later, Garthoff tells the conference of several events which
''even Excom didn't know at the time.'' Among them, he says - ''and this is
something that will come as a surprise to Mr. McNamara - the Commander in Chief
of the Strategic Air Command, General [Thomas] Power, sent out the 'Defcon 2'
alert instructions to all SAC units [putting them on a high level of nuclear
readiness] in the clear, without authorization, just so the Soviets could pick
it up. They did. The Excom thought the signal had gone out in code, which would
have been the proper procedure. General Power had simply taken it upon himself
to rub the Soviets' noses in their nuclear inferiority.''

McNamara's eyes roll toward the ceiling in mock exasperation at this military
insubordination.

When some around the table express surprise at the President's inability to
control the military, Ted Sorensen quickly rises to John Kennedy's defense:
''It's very easy for us to sit down here in Florida on a sunny day 25 years
later and think, a strong-minded President who didn't want war, how could he let
it get out of control? It wasn't that easy. There were lots of pressures. . .
.''

A sunny day! Lo and behold, the sun has broken from behind the clouds for the
first time in three days. But this only creates fresh problems. During the lunch
hour, Graham Allison approaches chairman Nye with a warning. A lot of people
want to watch the hotel's dolphins being put through their paces at 1 P.M. If
they don't postpone the afternoon session for a bit, they're likely to lose half
the participants to the beguiling dolphins. ''I'm not giving you an ultimatum,''
Allison says with heavy irony, ''It's just a matter of fact.''

But a strong tennis lobby wants to start on time so they can get in some doubles
at 3 P.M. They prevail. The afternoon session begins on time, with nearly a full
room.

Those present have a poignant moment in store: a videotaped interview with John
Kennedy's favorite soldier - and chairman of the Joint Chiefs during the missile
crisis - Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor. Too ill to attend the conference - he will die
six weeks later - Taylor was still erect and alert four years earlier, at age
81, when he told Dick Neustadt on tape that there were essentially three choices
for getting the missiles out of Cuba: ''talk them out,'' ''squeeze them out,''
or ''shoot them out.'' Like his colleagues on the Joint Chiefs, Taylor ''never
wavered'' in his advocacy of shooting them out, ''until my Commander in Chief
took another decision.'' In retrospect, he is glad, ''because it proved to be
enough.''

''It was a real treat to hear Max Taylor,'' says McGeorge Bundy, as he
introduces this afternoon's discussion. And he has one more treat in store, a
communication from another absent veteran of the Kennedy Administration, former
Secretary of State Dean Rusk, who has been ill recently and remains at home in
Athens, Ga.

But now Bundy reads part of a letter from Rusk that clarifies the situation on
that grimmest of all evenings, Oct. 27. Shortly after Robert Kennedy was
dispatched to put the United States ''ultimatum'' to Ambassador Dobrynin, Rusk
and the President discussed what they would do if Khrushchev refused to go
along. What in particular would they do if the Soviets refused to accept the
ambiguously phrased ''deal'' over the Jupiters in Turkey, a deal that the United
States would disown if the Kremlin ever mentioned it publicly. Would the world
be plunged into war over a bunch of missiles the United States didn't even want
or need anymore?

Now Rusk has written in his letter: ''There is a postcript which only I can
furnish. It was clear to me that President Kennedy would not let the Jupiters in
Turkey become an obstacle to the removal of the missile sites in Cuba because
the Jupiters were coming out in any event. He instructed me to telephone the
late Andrew Cordier, then at Columbia University, and dictate to him a statement
which would be made by U Thant, the Secretary General of the United Nations,
proposing the removal of both the Jupiters and the missiles in Cuba. Mr. Cordier
was to put that statement in the hands of U Thant only after a further signal
from us. That step was never taken and the statement I furnished to Mr. Cordier
has never seen the light of day. So far as I know, President Kennedy, Andrew
Cordier and I were the only ones who knew of this particular step.''

Rusk's letter has immediate repercussions around the table. It is a genuinely
important revelation - a secret Rusk has kept for 25 years -for it indicates, as
Bundy points out, that John Kennedy was ''prepared to go the extra mile to avoid
a conflict, and to absorb whatever political costs that may have entailed.'' And
surely there would have been some political damage from an explicit trade of
American and Soviet missiles, even one initiated by U Thant. Following the
earlier disclosures - of Sorensen's reading on Kennedy's willingness to ''define
away'' the crisis, and the growing view that there were probably no Soviet
warheads in Cuba - this reinforces the feeling here that the dangers of nuclear
war during the crisis were somewhat slimmer than most analysts -not to mention
most Americans - have believed.


SHORTLY AFTER THE conference reconvenes Sunday, Ted Sorensen slips out of the
room on his way to ''encounter'' the dolphins. Hawk's Cay doubles as a
dolphin-training center, providing for the amusement of hotel guests, and the
dolphin encounter is the most arcane ritual of all. Under instructions from the
trainers, Sorensen, now a well-connected New York lawyer, dons a yellow kapok
vest and slips into the blue water. After treading water for a few moments, he
finds two sleek gray dolphins gliding up on either side of him, like a military
escort. Grasping their dorsal fins with each hand, he is towed across the lagoon
for 60 feet, in what he later describes as a ''sublime'' experience.

Back in the conference center, his colleagues are wrestling with the ''lessons''
of the missile crisis. Bob McNamara - who for days has dominated this conference
through sheer force of personality - insists that the Cuban crisis was by no
means unique, that its lessons are equally applicable to Berlin, Vietnam, the
Middle East, Libya and Grenada. First among them is one he calls ''McNamara's
Law,'' which he would inscribe above the portals to the White House and the
Pentagon. It reads: ''It is impossible to predict with a high degree of
certainty the consequences of the use of military force because of the risk of
accident, miscalculation, inadvertence and loss of control.''

Thomas Schelling, one of the nation's leading nuclear thinkers, strikes a more
sanguine note: ''I firmly believe that the Cuban missile crisis was the best
thing to happen to us since the Second World War. It helped us avoid further
confrontation with the Soviets. It resolved the Berlin issue. Sometimes the
gambles you take pay off. That doesn't make me a hawk. I worry enough about
nuclear war that I'm willing to take a one-shot risk to reduce the risks over
the long run.''

Ned Lebow of Cornell sees it differently. If the missile crisis ultimately
lowered the risks of nuclear war, he suggests, it had plenty of disastrous
effects: notably the Vietnam War, which was spurred on by some ''wrongly applied
lessons of the Cuban crisis,'' and the arms race, accelerated by ''Soviet
determination never to be so humiliated by the United States again.''

As the deliberations conclude, a reporter and his wife, groggy from four days of
total immersion in the events of a quarter century ago, stroll out onto the
terrace, now drenched in golden sunlight. For a moment, they gaze out across
Hawk's Channel toward the waters of the Caribbean and the islands just beyond
the horizon. ''Now that we've finally got a clear day,'' says the reporter, ''I
wonder if we can see Cuba.''

''On a very clear day,'' replies his wife, moving from today's history to
tomorrow's, ''we ought to see Nicaragua.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Pres. Kennedy with McGeorge Bundy, Paul H. Nitze, Gen.
Maxwell D. Taylor and Robert S. McNamara (Stanley Tretick); McGeorge Bundy and
C. Douglas Dillon 25 years after the crisis (Randy Taylor/Black Star); Theodore
C. Sorensen (pg. 24); Robert S. McNamara, George W. Ball, Abram J. Chayes and
Ernest R. May (pg. 25); Kennedy at a meeting with his Cabinet during 1962 Cuban
missile crisi

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

When Is a Bad Road Good?

BYLINE: By Harry G. Summers Jr.; Harry G. Summers Jr. is the author of ''On
Strategy,'' the ''Vietnam War Almanac'' and the forthcoming ''Sound Military
Decisions,'' an analysis of military planning and decision-making.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 934 words



STRATEGY
The Logic of War and Peace. By Edward N. Luttwak. 283 pp. Cambridge, Mass.: The
Belknap Press/ Harvard University Press. $20.


ALTHOUGH he never cites Robert S. McNamara by name, and mentions the Vietnam War
only in passing, the insight that business leaders (the favorite choice for
secretaries of defense since that office was created) have an educated
incapacity for military affairs is but one of the intriguing conclusions a
reader can draw from Edward N. Luttwak's important new book, ''Strategy: The
Logic of War and Peace.''

When it comes to the employment of the armed forces, the linear logic of
business ''efficiency'' -where good is good, bad is bad, more is better and
standardization is a virtue - can prove to be counterproductive. ''The entire
realm of strategy is pervaded by a paradoxical logic of its own, standing
against the ordinary linear logic by which we live in all other spheres of
life,'' Mr. Luttwak emphasizes. ''It often violates ordinary linear logic by
inducing the coming together and even the reversal of opposites.''

On the battlefield ''a bad road can be good precisely because it is bad and may
therefore be less strongly held or even left unguarded by the enemy . . . a
paradoxical preference for inconvenient times and directions, preparations
visibly and deliberately left incomplete, approaches seemingly too dangerous,
for combat at night and in bad weather, is a common aspect of tactical
ingenuity.''

To a large extent Mr. Luttwak's ''Strategy'' is an extended gloss on Karl von
Clausewitz' important maxim that, ''In war the will is directed at an animate
object that reacts.'' It is that fundamental fact that differentiates war from
all other forms of human endeavor. In business, economies of scale are a virtue,
''but for military equipment that must function in direct interaction with the
doings and undoings of a live enemy . . . homogeneity is no longer an unalloyed
virtue and becomes a potential vulnerability.''

Using the example of standardization of antiaircraft missiles as a case in
point, Mr. Luttwak points out that ''in war a competent enemy will be able to
identify the weapon's equally homogeneous performance boundaries and then
proceed to evade interception by transcending those boundaries. . . . [And] what
is true of antiaircraft missiles is just as true of any other machine of war
that must function in direct interaction with reacting enemy - that is, the vast
majority of weapons.''

A senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a
Washington think tank, and the author most recently of ''On the Meaning of
Victory,'' Mr. Luttwak, a self-described hawk, traces this paradox through what
he identifies as the five levels of strategy. These are: ''the technical
interplay of specific weapons and counterweapons . . . the tactical combat of
the forces that employ those particular weapons . . . [the] operational level
[that] governs the consequences of what is done and not done tactically . . .
[the] higher level of theater strategy [where] the consequences of single
operations are felt in the overall conduct of offense and defense . . . [and]
the highest level of grand strategy, where all that is military happens within
the much broader context of domestic governance, international politics,
economic activity, and their ancillaries.'' ''The five levels form a definite
hierarchy,'' Mr. Luttwak writes, ''but outcomes are not simply imposed in a
one-way transmission from top to bottom because the levels interact with one
another in a two-way process. . . . Strategy, then, has two dimensions: the
vertical dimension of the different levels that interact with one another; and
the horizontal dimension of the dynamic logic that unfolds concurrently within
each level.''

Military theory, like any theory, can be mind-numbing when read in its pure
form. Just as the theory of bridge-building comes alive when one examines an
actual bridge, so military theory becomes understandable when applied to a
specific military problem. And the problem Mr. Luttwak uses to illuminate his
theory is the defense of Western Europe.

Successive chapters examine not only the five levels of strategy, but also
various proposals for NATO defense: reliance on antitank weapons as a substitute
for armored forces, defense in depth rather than forward defense, and the
various one-force schemes such as the currently fashionable maritime strategy.
Only in his attempts to refute the argument that a conventional force buildup
would negate reliance on nuclear weapons does he stumble. Here Mr. Luttwak falls
into what he himself calls ''the classical delusion of the 'final move' '':

''If the nonnuclear forces of the Alliance become strong enough to defend the
front and repel invasion,'' he reasons, ''the Soviet leaders might well react by
using their own battlefield nuclear weapons.'' But surely strategy's
''paradoxical logic'' doesn't end there. If the Russians were to use nuclear
weapons to blast an opening in NATO's defense barrier, the forces that came
storming through that gap would be equally vulnerable to NATO's nuclear
defensive fire.

But Mr. Luttwak's arguments are not meant to be prescriptive, a sort of manual
for action. Instead, his purpose ''is to uncover the universal logic that
conditions all forms of war.'' His purpose is to make us think about what to all
too many Americans has become the unthinkable. And here he has succeeded
magnificently. For peacemakers and warmakers alike, ''Strategy: The Logic of War
and Peace'' is essential reading.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Present at the Misconception

BYLINE: By Lloyd Garrison; Lloyd Garrison reported from Europe and Africa in the
1960's as a correspondent for The Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 665 words



THE TWILIGHT STRUGGLE
Tales of the Cold War. By William Attwood. 433 pp. New York: A Cornelia and
Michael Bessie Book/ Harper & Row. $20.


IN 1955, attempting to rediscover his roots after years of reporting abroad,
William Attwood and his wife, Sim, set out to cross America in their
Austin-Healey with red French license plates. ''We figured it would be a
conversation starter in the drive-ins and filling stations along the way,'' he
recalls. It was. Mr. Attwood was a good listener, and his experience became a
book entitled ''Still the Most Exciting Country.'' Now 68 years old, and more
reflective, the author observes sadly that if he wrote the same book today,
''America Adrift'' would be its most likely title.

A sense of drift is not all that troubles Mr. Attwood about America and the
world in ''The Twilight Struggle,'' an otherwise sprightly historical narrative
by the man who once drafted some of Adlai Stevenson's most memorable foreign
policy addresses. His journalistic career included stints as the European editor
of Look magazine and publisher of Newsday, and he served President Kennedy as a
go-between with Fidel Castro, as Ambassador to Guinea and as a member of the
United Nations delegation; Lyndon Johnson later named him Ambassador to Kenya.
In between, his assignments as a reporter took him all over the world.

So much for credentials. What Mr. Attwood has fashioned is an unconventional
memoir that begins with his discharge from the Army at the end of World War II
and plunges straight into a vivid 40-year chronicle of the deepening diplomatic
chill between Moscow and the West that was soon to become known as the cold war.
Phrases like ''roll back,'' ''brinkmanship,'' ''massive retaliation'' and
''unleashing Chiang'' may now sound as archaic as ''Manifest Destiny,'' but the
author brings them alive as if they were today's most topical slogans. Above
all, this is a book endowed with the unusual perspective of a man who has
closely reported every nuance in the West's relations with the Communist world.
Both sides, he notes, frequently misread the other, yet neither has come fully
to accept that ''you do not add to your own security by adding to the insecurity
of your opponent.''

Although admittedly an early cold war warrior, Mr. Attwood holds that one of the
great illusions of the cold war was the widespread assumption that Moscow
conspired to take over Western Europe by force. It was a myth, he says, on a par
with the belief that China coveted all of Southeast Asia, an idea that got us
into Vietnam in the first place. Jimmy Carter's contention that Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan presented a major danger to world peace strikes Mr.
Attwood as only slightly less absurd than President Reagan's belief that
Sandinista control of Nicaragua poses the threat of a national security
disaster.

''The Twilight Struggle'' is filled with historical anecdotes. Adlai Stevenson
confided in 1963 that ''the CIA is still in charge of Cuba.'' He was right, of
course. As Mr. Attwood was exploring an opening to Cuba at Kennedy's behest, the
C.I.A. was plotting to pass Fidel Castro a poison pen. And Jawaharlal Nehru,
then the Prime Minister of India, assured Mr. Attwood in 1953 that ''it is
inconceivable . . . that Mao will accept the position of being a satellite.''
This was fully six years before the Chinese-Soviet split became evident.

Mr. Attwood believes that neither side can any longer afford the cold war. He
warns that not only could the continuing arms race bankrupt America, but
mounting indifference to the needs of the nation's poor and uneducated could
lead to the creation of a permanent underclass. While often a witty writer with
a keen sense of irony, he concludes with a somber question: ''If we believe in
God, we must assume we are being tested. Will we pass the test, shove the
nuclear genie back into its bottle and accomplish what a probably benevolent
deity expects of us on this small planet?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Generation Gap: From Persephone to Portnoy

BYLINE: By Elinor Lenz; Elinor Lenz is the author of ''Once My Child, Now My
Friend,'' a study of parent- and adult-child relationships, and co-author of
''The Feminization of America.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2591 words


''ONLY connect,'' said E. M. Forster, and what a world of human struggle, folly
and failure are compressed into those two words. But for parents and children,
in life and in literature, it is not the connecting but the separating that is
the problem. Parents ''accept their obsolescence with the best grace they can
muster,'' as Christopher Lasch puts it in ''Haven in a Heartless World.'' ''They
do all they can to make it easy for the younger generation to surpass the older,
while secretly dreading the rejection that follows.''

For the young, the separation carries its own burden of anxiety and pain. In
rebelling against the ''parental archetype,'' to use the Jungian term, the young
begin to see the father and the mother as fallible human beings, no longer
superhuman in wisdom and strength. But at the same time, the disempowerment of
the parent removes a source of support, the love and feeling of being cared for
that sustained the child through the growing-up years. In their early novels,
which are so often autobiographical, writers have worked over this material so
thoroughly that it has become a literary cliche; there has been less concern,
however, in psychology and literature with what happens to the parent whose
''archetypal image'' has been destroyed.

The expectations that parents place upon their children are often
self-projections that are doomed to disappointment. Today, parents cannot even
look forward with any degree of confidence to the companionship of their
children in staving off the loneliness of the later years. Bette Pesetsky
expresses this disillusionment in the opening lines of her short story
''Offspring of the First Generation'': ''I made an early decision to have two or
three children, cer-tain that when they grew up they would be of my blood and
therefore would desire my company. . . . I was wrong.''

And Marsha Norman, commenting on her two-character play '' 'Night, Mother,'' has
said, ''For so many mothers, there is this terrible, terrible thing -they were
promised, they thought, some reward for their labors - that we would come home
for dinner, and we would bring the kids and visit. And we don't. Whoever made
that promise was lying. When Mama says to Jessie, 'everything you do relates to
me,' she is committing one of the great wrongs between mothers and daughters. To
me, that is one of the most manipulative, guilt-producing statements. That
statement means: 'you are not a separate person from me.' ''


ALTHOUGH the term ''generation gap'' has been in common usage only since the
1960's, the uneasy relationship between older and younger generations has a long
literary history. The biblical scribes took note of the problem in their
injunction to ''honor your father and your mother that you may have a long life
in the land which the Eternal, your God, is giving you.'' It is a theme that
inspired the Greek dramatists (to whom the Freudians, of course, are indebted
for the Oedipus complex), and Shakespeare extracted every ounce of high tragedy
from it in ''King Lear.''

It is easy to see why the writer as social critic has been drawn to this classic
family drama. How many other aspects of the human condition offer such a rich
vein of metaphorical allusions? Tyranny versus freedom, materialism versus the
creative spirit, the abuse of power, the rebellion of the oppressed against the
oppressor - weighty issues like these can attract a wider readership when they
are placed in the larger context of parent-child relationships.

Thus, Antigone's act of defiance in burying her brother is not only a threat to
the law of the state which, Creon reminds her, she is obligated to uphold as a
daughter of Oedipus; it is also a symbolic protest against tyranny. The contest
between Kirsanoff and his son, Arkady, in Turgenev's ''Fathers and Sons'' is in
fact an argument for the emergence of radical socialism. The father-son story in
''Death of a Salesman'' is Arthur Miller's impassioned critique of the values of
a commercial system that grinds people down and then callously discards them.

In pre-Freudian works, generational conflicts like these do not seriously
threaten family solidarity. When Lydia Bennet in ''Pride and Prejudice'' runs
off with Mr. Wickham without benefit of clergy, the Bennet family quickly
rallies around its errant daughter, who is soon properly wed and restored to
respectability -including an appropriate financial settlement. In Thomas Mann's
''Buddenbrooks,'' Tony's two disastrous marriages bring anguish and
embarrassment to her family, but she is welcomed back to the fold and blames her
misfortune on her own poor judgment in choosing men who do not meet the superior
standards of the Buddenbrooks.

''We feel like the nobility, and we realize the difference,'' she tells her
brother Tom. Referring to her second husband, Permaneder, in a tone of
condescension that expresses the then-prevalent attitude of North Germans toward
inhabitants of the southern region, she says that she could never get used to
''people without dignity, morals, energy, ambition, self-respect, or good
manners, lazy and frivolous, stupid and shallow.''

Parents and children in the pre-modern family were linked by a common history
and by shared values, embedded in the family's patriarchal structure. The tribe,
the clan took undisputed precedence over the individual. Thus, in 18th- and
19th-century novels, family crises are acted out on the solid ground of respect
for paternal authority. Consul Buddenbrook is the undisputed family head and
arbiter, a commanding figure for whom his children feel ''awe and respect''
because of his ''high position in the town, his piety, his solid, stern ability
and industry.'' Sir Austin Feverel in George Meredith's ''Ordeal of Richard
Feverel'' brings his son up according to ''scientific principles,'' but although
the system is clearly a failure, Richard never questions his father's wisdom.
And in the Bennet household, despite Mrs. Bennet's fussing and fluttering, it is
Mr. Bennet who lays down the law to Kitty when he fears she is about to follow
the unfortunate example of her sister. ''I have at last learned to be cautious,
and you will feel the effects of it,'' he warns his daughter, as he places a
series of restrictions on her social activities.

The conflicts between parents and offspring in these novels tend to center on
inappropriate marital choices or, in the case of sons, a preference for the
artistic life instead of such approved bourgeois occupations as the clergy, the
army or the civil service. A staple theme in these family sagas involves
disputes over property, as in Henry James's ''Spoils of Poynton,'' in which Mrs.
Gereth, a widow, becomes embattled with her only son, Owen, over the priceless
treasures of Poynton Park. Two generations are embroiled in the Jarndyce vs.
Jarndyce lawsuit in Dickens's ''Bleak House.'' In his preface to ''The Forsyte
Saga,'' Galsworthy says of Soames, ''The Man of Property,'' that ''As surely as
a dog will bark at a brass band, so will the essential Soames in human nature
rise up uneasily against the dissolution which hovers around the folds of
ownership.''

When Freud's theories of infant sexuality gave added importance to sexual
tension in the traditional generational conflicts, the libido became the locus
of the family battleground. Now the contests between mother and daughter, father
and son, are attributed to Oedipal drives, and the generations become secret
sexual competitors as daughter lusts for father and son for mother.

The English novel was quick to exploit this promising cache of family melodrama.
Though D. H. Lawrence rejected Freudian ideas, his ''Sons and Lovers,''
published in 1913, is an early prototype and perhaps the starkest example of the
Oedipus complex in the novel. Describing the novel in a letter to Edward Garnett
in 1912, Lawrence provides a sketch of the Oedipal triangle based upon his own
family background: ''A woman of character and refinement goes into the lower
class, and has no satisfactions in her life. . . . As her sons grow up, she
selects them as lovers - first the eldest, then the second. These sons are urged
into life by their reciprocal love of their mother - urged on and on. But when
they come to manhood, they can't love, because their mother is the strongest
power in their lives, and holds them.''

The novel portrays Lawrence's mother, in the character of Gertrude Morel, as a
strong, sensitive woman who lavishes on her son Paul the love she cannot feel
for her coarse, uneducated coal-miner husband. Her possessiveness makes a
competitor of any woman to whom Paul is sexually attracted. In ''Sons and
Lovers,'' the center of gravity in the family shifts from the paternal to the
maternal side. Mrs. Morel is a forerunner of the devouring, soul-destroying,
emasculating Mother who stalks through the pages of so many literary works
produced during the 60's and 70's. Identified by Philip Wylie in ''Generation of
Vipers'' as the source of many psychic disorders, she has been accused of, among
other sins, unmanning her sons, inducing frigidity in her daughters and reducing
her mate to a cowed, ineffectual lump.

In time she acquired ethnic trappings and, with an assist from male Jewish
writers such as Philip Roth and Bruce Jay Friedman, emerged full-blown as the
Jewish Mother. Sophie Portnoy is in effect a comic American Jewish version of
Gertrude Morel, and like Lawrence's mother-protagonist, Sophie is also
responsible for her son's infantilism, which expresses itself in his need to be
sexually dominated by women. The mother in Mr. Friedman's novel ''A Mother's
Kisses'' sows confusion and anxiety on her son's developing manhood by making
sexual advances to him. When he finally breaks away, he shouts after her as the
train pulls out of the station, ''I never enjoyed one second with you.''


THE Jewish Mother began taking on a more sympathetic aspect as a result of the
women's movement and the work of women writers who brought compassion and
empathy to this mythical maternal figure. ''Too well we know the Jewish mother
our male writers have given us,'' writes Erika Duncan in ''The Lost Tradition,''
''the all-engulfing nurturer who devours the very soul with every spoonful of
hot chicken soup she gives, whose every shakerful of salt contains a curse. . .
. Yet we do not know enough of the other hungry one who feeds others because it
is the only access she knows to a little bit of love.'' Tillie Olsen in ''Tell
Me a Riddle'' writes of the grandmother, typical nag and yenta, who in her dying
turns away from those she was forced to nurture: ''Being able at last to live
within and not to the rhythms of others, as life had helped her to: denying,
removing, isolating; taking the children one by one; then deafening,
half-blinding - and at last, presenting her solitude.'' In the work of Jewish
women writers, such as ''Bread Givers'' by Anzia Yezierska and ''A Weave of
Women'' by E. M. Broner, the mother is weak and self-effacing, and the father is
the devourer, sacrificing his daughters, in a re-enactment of the Iphigenia
myth, to his sexual-religious ecstasies.

Generational conflict began giving way in the 70's to the theme of the search
for the parents. In the Vietnam and post-Vietnam eras, the loss of faith in
America's moral authority and the growing chaos in individual and family life
brought on a profound yearning for a strong, assured authority figure. ''I
thought I would find my father'' writes the poet Philip Levine, but the search
is fruitless, for ''the last step, like an entrance, is alone, in darkness, and
without song.'' And so it is for Margaret Atwood in ''Surfacing,'' for when she
finds her father, she sees that ''it isn't my father, it is what my father has
become,'' and instead, her quest leads her to an illuminating vision of her
mother. Kim Chernin's memoir ''In My Mother's House'' brings a daughter back to
her mother, whose Communist beliefs she has repudiated, in the hope of arriving
at a reconciliation.


SINCE the search for the parent is actually a search for the self, the letting
go invariably leads to self-discovery. As Nancy Friday concludes in ''My Mother,
Myself'': ''For every step I have taken away from her - my sexuality, my work,
the whole dramatic design of my life which overshadows her conservative one - I
have been aware of her tugging at my heels, pulling me back. . . . It has taken
me the entire writing of this book to acknowledge in my heart that the qualities
I am proudest of in myself I learned from her.''

In the 80's, the connecting links between the generations seem to be loosening,
and the family as we have known it in the past is being replaced by the
alienated, self-obsessed individual. The rise of a youth culture in the 60's and
70's, with its distinctive language, dress, music, religion and politics, ripped
to shreds the connecting tissue between parents and children. Gone are the
shared values and common history of earlier parent-child generations. The
generation gap has widened and deepened so that parents and children now
confront each other as strangers across a great yawning chasm. ''He changed the
boy's diapers in the sad apartment high on Wilbur Street,'' writes John Updike
in ''Rabbit Is Rich.'' ''He watched him become a high school student with a
wispy moustache. . . . He and Nelson have been through enough years together to
turn a cedar post to rot and yet his son is less real to him than these crinkled
leaves of lettuce he touches and plucks.''

Although the 60's generation has receded into the past, taking with it its
''consciousness,'' its slogans - ''Make love not war,'' ''Never trust anyone
over 30'' - intergenerational tension remains in place. Today we are witnessing
something of a generation gap in reverse, between the young who are either
politically conservative or apolitical, and their parents who still carry within
them the liberalism of the Kennedy era.

In much of contemporary North American writing, the self-obsessed characters
have no history; rootless and disconnected, they are atomistic individuals
calculating their self-interest, acquiring and casting aside lovers as casually
as the trendy fashions they favor. The men and women in the pared-down fiction
of Ann Beattie, Alice Adams, Frederick Barthelme, Mary Robison, Raymond Carver
appear to be parentless, conceived and raised to adulthood in a vacuum. And when
the parent is given an equal role, as in '' 'Night, Mother,'' she is
ineffectual, powerless to stop her daughter from killing herself. The solid,
reassuring sense of group identity and continuity that is contained in 19th- and
early 20th-century novels - ''The Forsyte Saga'' and ''Buddenbrooks,'' for
example - is missing from much of the literature of our time.

If fiction and drama merely mirror the time in which they are written, then it
could be argued that these works are performing their proper function. But we
look to our novelists and dramatists to take us beyond television and the daily
newspaper to that critical meeting point where the solitary self moves out of
its isolation and merges with the human community. If our literature is to be
more than a literal recording of the Zeitgeist, our writers will have to probe
more deeply into the primal bond of parent and child, into the tangled roots of
our love, hate and enduring need for each other. Perhaps then literature can
help us in our struggle to carry out Forster's directive: only connect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sculptural Gateway to City Hall Is Rising in Mt. Vernon

BYLINE: By TESSA MELVIN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


THE thousands of Mount Vernon residents who enter their Colonial-style City Hall
building each week have a surprise coming.

Rising 14 feet above the plaza and spreading 30 feet across the entrance to the
grand staircase is the nearly completed ''Spirit Creek,'' a work of art
sponsored by the Mount Vernon City Council that is one of the few approved by a
municipal government in the county.

The city of Mount Vernon unanimously approved the installation just six months
after City Council members in neighboring New Rochelle unanimously rejected a
different public art work by the same artist, Jeffrey Brosk.

The artist's portfolio that Councilman Robert Schaefer in New Rochelle had
labeled ''junk'' when that city rejected the offer of a sculpture was described
in Mount Vernon by City Councilman Richard A. DeCarlo as ''attractive'' and
''eye-catching.''

''Mount Vernon,'' Mr. DeCarlo said recently, ''is a city on the move, but we
don't have much public art. We saw this project as an opportunity to enhance a
beautiful City Hall.''

The $12,000 project was commissioned by Westchester Public Art, a three-year-old
nonprofit organization that tries to arrange visual arts projects for
Westchester communities. The organization has found sponsors to contribute money
or materials to the Mount Vernon project, including, in addition to the city
itself, Citibank, Omni magazine, Peoples Westchester Savings Bank, the Red Devil
paint company, Lopane Nursery and D'Arcangelo & Company, an accounting firm.

Spanning two levels of City Hall Plaza and incorporating seating areas as well
as a ceremonial entrance to the municipal building, the newest Brosk sculpture
is made of rough wood, blue stone, copper, granite and one-inch pieces of
handmade blue glass from West Virginia.

Mr. Brosk said that ''Spirit Creek'' would provide a gateway to the 60-year-old
red-brick City Hall, one he hopes will provide a fresh experience for the public
during the year the sculpture is in place.

''Public art like this piece becomes an education for the public,'' Mr. Brosk
said. ''For the many people who don't go to museums to see art, if they see it
in their everyday life and enjoy it, that's good.''

Adele Greene, director of Westchester Public Art, agreed: ''Public art makes
people want to be part of the community, and it shows them art doesn't have to
be intimidating.''

Mrs. Greene said that the organization hoped to put innovative visual arts in
more communities and that Katonah, Rye Brook, Scarsdale and Mamaroneck have
expressed interest in the program.

''Spirit Creek'' is the second piece of public art on view in the Mount Vernon
City Plaza. Across the square stands the eight-foot-tall welded-steel
''Split-Grid'' sculpture by Angela Veneto. Because ''Split-Grid,'' also a
temporary installation arranged by Westchester Public Art, was installed on
private property, the City Council did not express an opinion about it.

Council members viewed a scale model of Mr. Brosk's work, Mr. DeCarlo said, and
''we were delighted to have someone as prominent as Mr. Brosk featured in our
plaza.'' The New York City artist, has exhibited work at the World Trade Center
and Dag Hammarskjold Plaza in Manhattan, the Dallas Convention Center and the
Oakland Art Museum in California, among other locations.

The City Council's main concern in installing Mr. Brosk's work was liability,
Mr. DeCarlo said, a problem Westchester Public Art solved by securing a $1
million insurance policy.

Public dedication of the completed work will be at 11 A.M. Sept. 22.

Ways to execute more public art projects will be discussed later this fall when
the Neuberger Museum opens an exhibition entitled ''George Rickey: Projects for
Public Sculpture'' and featuring nine works by the well-known artist.

On the day before the opening of the exhibition, which will run from Oct. 25
through March 6, the museum will conduct an daylong public symposium, ''Setting
Sites: Process and Consensus in Public Art.'' With Mr. Rickey as keynote
speaker, the symposium will use a case-study format and focus on such examples
of public art as the civic monument. Maya Ying Lin, who designed Washington's
Vietnam Memorial, will attend to discuss her piece, as will Jan C. Scruggs, the
memorial's project coordinator.

Tickets are $25 for the general public, $20 for friends of the Neuberger and $8
for students.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Jeffrey Brosk and workers assebling his piece outside Mount
Vernon's City Hall (NYT/Edward Hausner); Photo of workmen preparing sculpture by
jeffrey Brosk (NYT/Edward Hausner) (Page 4)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA MEETING SEEKS PACT

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 285 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 29


Representatives of the Soviet Union and the three Communist nations of Indochina
met in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, this week and said they were beginning a new move
to end the Cambodian conflict, the Phnom Penh press agency said today.

The agency said Foreign Ministry officials from the four nations - the Soviet
Union, Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia - had agreed on what they called a national
reconciliation policy to involve all factions in the eight-year-old conflict
except Pol Pot and other leaders of the Khmer Rouge guerrilla group.

A communique, issued as the three-day meeting ended Friday, said the four
nations had discussed ''problems concerning a political solution'' to the
Cambodian issue, developments in Southeast Asia and improved cooperation between
their nations.

It said the nations fully supported a reconciliation policy that would include
an offer of citizenship for refugees, emigres or guerrillas who rallied to the
Vietnamese-backed Government.

The Phnom Penh Government of Heng Samrin, which was set up after a 1978
Vietnamese military invasion and is recognized only by India and Soviet bloc
countries, is fighting a guerrilla coalition recognized by the United Nations.

The annual vote at the United Nations over who will hold Cambodia's seat occurs
in October. In the past, at about this time of year, both sides have offered
iniatives to resolve the conflict.

Leaders of the three guerrilla groups - Khieu Sampan, head of the Khmer Rouge;
Son Sann, premier of the coalition and head of a non-Communist faction, and
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, inactive president of the anti-Vietnamese coalition -
are meeting in Peking to try to patch up rifts in the five-year-old coalition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

FILM;
FROM VIETNAM TO WALL STREET

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1521 words


ALFRED HITCHCOCK ONCE SAID movies are like life with the boring bits cut out.

In the newly renovated ''21'' Club, on a $500,000 trading floor constructed in a
vacant office building just outside the financial district, in East Side
apartments and at a grand beachfront house in the Hamptons, Oliver Stone, who
made war so real in ''Platoon,'' is cutting the boring bits out of the lives of
those of us in the world of money - and adding some spicy bits inspired by the
recent insider-trading scandals.

Fittingly enough, the film is titled ''WallStreet,'' and in keeping with the
''Platoon'' tradition, realism remains a pivotal component of the Stone formula.
He has enlisted a host of technical advisers, eminent money-world names, who
have helped him etch such telling details as stock-price monitors that flash the
symbols of the film's fictitious companies. But as he did with ''Platoon,''
Stone is looking beyond atmospherics and into motivations, in this case the
pressures that can turn an ambitious young stockbroker into a white-collar
criminal.

''This movie is about young people and their attitudes toward money,'' says the
director as he takes a break from shooting the film one Saturday in his
temporary office on 11th Avenue, digs that look as if they could belong to a
college newspaper. ''There has been a loss of values.''

Stone's concern with values - and the loss of them - has been the recurring,
uneasy subtext in each of the movies he has made. His screenplays for Alan
Parker's 1978 ''Midnight Express'' and Brian De Palma's 1983 ''Scarface'' were
about drug smuggling. ''Salvador,'' which he co-wrote and directed, portrays
political and human chaos in Central America. With ''Platoon,'' Stone moved to
the moral quicksand of Vietnam, where he had served as an infantryman after
dropping out of college. ''Salvador'' and especially ''Platoon'' met with
widespread critical enthusiasm; both screenplays were nominated for Academy
Awards. For ''Platoon,'' Stone took the Oscars for best picture and best
director. At 40, he has become a major film maker.

Stone's current explorations involve a community that helped shape him as surely
as Vietnam did, for the director is himself in a way a creation of Wall Street -
the son of Louis Stone, a well-known stockbroker and author of a popular market
letter that railed against Roosevelt and crusaded for the gold standard, a man
driven in the end to a bit of insider trading himself - in a time when the
strictures against such dealing were far less clear-cut - in order, in the words
of his son, to ''make the rent.'' ''In the 50's and 60's,'' says the director,
''people always took tips. It was never a big deal.''

Young Oliver, who grew up in comfort on East End Avenue, embraced the views of
his father's newsletter for a time, and even supported Barry Goldwater on the
Yale campus. But he soon rebelled, dropping out of college, fighting in Vietnam,
exploring drugs, savoring the expatriate life in Paris and failing in marriage.
Today, the director has ''mellowed,'' he says, and his memory of his father, who
died two years ago, is largely sympathetic. To some extent, he views his current
project as fulfilling his father's desire that he make ''an intelligent business
movie.''

In ''Wall Street,'' the director takes on some lofty issues, particularly
whether the financial community actually creates anything of value or just
shuffles assets, charging a percentage for the effort. The question wouldn't be
an easy one for the likes of Paul Volcker, much less for a movie maker who
describes himself as ''confused by economics.'' At Trinity School in Manhattan
he was terrible at a mock investing exercise, which ''drove my father crazy.''
At Yale he got a 70 in the one economics course he took. ''I was never able to
understand the Samuelson book,'' he recalls.

Stone, who is co-author of ''Wall Street'' (with Stanley Weiser) as well as its
director, bores in on Yuppie greed through a collection of characters who will
be familiar to readers of the financial pages (and sometimes of news stories
from the criminal courts). The two central figures, played by Michael Douglas
and Charlie Sheen, are a hardened arbitrageur/corporate raider and the
ambitious, willing young stockbroker he entices into an insider scheme leading
to the takeover of an airline. Along the way, Sheen's character falls in with an
East Side interior decorator, played by Daryl Hannah, who is also on the climb.
The movie revolves around the interplay among the values of these characters.

Although Stone has limited his drama to Wall Street, he is under no illusion
that the obsession with money is confined within the boundaries of the financial
district. Wall Street, he says, is ''the leading example, the leading symbol of
money.'' But he sees Hollywood and sports as other arenas where money is a
powerful and seductive force, especially among the younger generations.

Stone says he can see how newcomers to Wall Street could be dazzled by it. He
talks of the tides of money being tossed about each day on the trading floors
and in the mergers and acquisitions departments of the big firms. ''It surpasses
anything my father could dream about,'' he says.

''Money never sleeps, pal,'' says the raider character in ''Wall Street,'' after
he has spent a sleepless night on the beach working his cellular telephone.
''When I came in in '69, they traded six hours a day, now the clock don't stop,
London's deregulated, the Orient is hungrier than us.''

Stone has updated his knowledge of the financial world by studying it from all
angles, in consultation with an eclectic assortment of Wall Street players. On
the list are raiders (Carl Icahn, Asher Edelman and T. Boone Pickens), an
admitted insider trader (David S. Brown, formerly of Goldman, Sachs), senior
investment bankers (John H. Gutfreund of Salomon Brothers; Alan C. [Ace]
Greenberg of Bear, Stearns; Mike Milken and Jeffrey Beck of Drexel Burnham),
prosecutors (Charles Carberry of the United States Attorney's Office and Gary
Lynch of the Securities and Exchange Commission) and even a proxy solicitor (Don
Carter of the Carter Organization). The script received an early reading by
Heather Evans, an investment banker and technical adviser to the film, and many
of the principal actors also spent time with appropriate role models.

Chief among Stone's advisers was Kenneth Lipper, a former partner of Salomon
Brothers. ''Among many other things, the film is about the depersonalization of
Wall Street,'' Lipper said. ''The more anonymous it becomes, the more it lends
itself to this kind of behavior.''

For Charlie Sheen, Stone asked Lipper to design a six-week ''course'' that would
expose the 21-year-old actor to a cross section of young Wall Street denizens.
''I was impressed and very, very respectful of the fact that they could maintain
that kind of aggressiveness and drive,'' said Sheen. ''I was also amazed at
their dedication to the almighty dollar. It's the essence of life with certain
people.''


STONE'S OFF-THE-SET APPROACH to developing actors' motivations is consistent
with his low-key on-the-set approach to directing. Amidst the chaos of a movie
set, Stone is almost inconspicuous to a casual observer. But that quiet demeanor
belies a close attention to every detail of the proceedings. In the public glare
of the set, Stone mostly communicates his wishes through small gestures and
short comments that seem as clear to his subordinates as a third-base coach's
signals to his runners. Occasionally, he will whisper a little to an actor or
have a longer conversation with one or two aides in an office.

''I generally try not to discuss abstract ideas with actors,'' Stone said.
''Acting is very concrete. Most of my ideas go into the script.'' In
constructing his tale of avarice and ambition, Stone drew on more contemporary
insights than those provided by his father's career. The director was influenced
deeply by a friend named Owen Morrissey, who was a principal in a commodities
concern. Says the director, ''I had never met a character this intense. In his
mind, self-worth equaled net worth.'' Morrissey became a symbol of greed in
1985, when he was charged with helping to defraud customers of more than $20
million. In him, Stone encountered ''a life style I never knew existed.''
Morrissey was ''a young man my age with two houses in Bridgehampton, a townhouse
in New York, Mercedeses, Jeeps, motorcycles, all the latest gadgets.'' He also
had ''enormous energy. He never stopped working.''

Morrissey avoided jail, but, says Stone, ''everything in his life was suddenly
for sale'' (with at least the exception of a beachfront house in Bridgehampton,
where some ''Wall Street'' scenes were filmed). ''The experience deepened his
values,'' Stone continues. ''He was forced to reassess what was important in
life.''

In the end, that is the key to ''Wall Street.''

''I feel sorry for those whose sole objective in life is capital accumulation,''
says Stone in his soft, measured voice. ''Those are sad people. Other values are
more important.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article on page 34 in The New Season, part 2 of the Times Magazine today,
about a film on Wall Street omitted the indentification of the author, Steven
Rattner. Mr. Rattner, formerly a correspondent for the Times, is now a managing
director of Morgan Stanley & Company.

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from ''Wall Street'' (Philip LaRoca DiCorcia)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SEASON PREVIEW: FILM;
James Joyce to Rambo III

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 35, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2191 words


The new season promises to be less silly than most, with an emphasis on
substantive social, historical and political subjects. ''Cry Freedom,'' Richard
Attenborough's biographical film about the black South African leader Stephen
Biko, will be Hollywood's first treatment of apartheid. Robert Redford has
directed ''The Milagro Beanfield War,'' about a Chicano community's efforts to
protect a tract of land from development.

World War II as seen through children's eyes will be evoked by ''Hope and
Glory,'' John Boorman's recollection of the London blitz as he saw it at the age
of 9, and by ''Empire of the Sun,'' Steven Spielberg's film from J. G. Ballard's
autobiographical novel about a young boy in a Japanese prison camp near
Shanghai.

There will also be abundant literary adaptations, including John Huston's
version of the James Joyce novella ''The Dead,'' a Merchant-Ivory film of E. M.
Forster's ''Maurice,'' Norman Mailer's adaptation of his own ''Tough Guys Don't
Dance'' and Hector Babenco's film of William Kennedy's ''Ironweed,'' not to
mention films from Jay McInerney's ''Bright Lights, Big City'' and Bret Easton
Ellis's ''Less Than Zero.''

Also of special interest: ''House of Games,'' David Mamet's directorial debut;
Nikita Mikhalkov's ''Dark Eyes,'' for which Marcello Mastroianni won this year's
Best Actor prize at Cannes, and Lindsay Anderson's ''Whales of August,'' in
which Bette Davis co-stars with Lillian Gish.

Of course the least promising entry on any list like this may prove to be the
sleeper of the season. Some of the sure-fire hits will misfire. The least
original-sounding film imaginable may be so clever it generates a dozen sequels.
The only thing that's certain, where predictions of the cinematic future are
concerned, is that the new season will bring us surprises. And it will also
bring us ''Rambo III.''

A SELECTIVE GUIDE: FILM

September

''Best Seller.'' James Woods plays an assassin who enlists a detective-novelist
(Brian Dennehy) to help expose the misdeeds of an American conglomerate.

''Dudes.'' From maverick director Penelope Spheeris, a story of punk rockers in
the rural American West avenging the murder of a friend.

''Fatal Attraction.'' A thriller from Adrian Lyne (''Flashdance''); Michael
Douglas plays a married man, Glenn Close the dangerously unstable woman with
whom he has a one-night stand.

''Hellraiser.'' A horror film written and directed by Clive Barker, for whom no
less a light than Stephen King has had high praise.

''Matewan.'' John Sayles' film based on the true story of labor battles between
miners and a West Virginia coal company. With James Earl Jones.

''Maurice.'' The Merchant-Ivory team's latest literary adaptation is based on E.
M. Forster's novel about a young man coming to terms with his homosexuality.

''Orphans.'' Two orphaned brothers (Matthew Modine and Kevin Anderson) find a
surrogate father in the gangster (Albert Finney) they planned to rob. Directed
by Alan Pakula.

''The Princess Bride.'' Rob Reiner directs a film based on William Goldman's
novel-length fairy tale. With Billy Crystal.

''Slam Dance.'' A new-wave thriller from Wayne Wang, with an offbeat cast: Tom
Hulce, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Harry Dean Stanton.

''Surrender.'' Sally Field plays a commercial artist pursuing Steve Guttenberg,
as an entertainment lawyer who can't commit. Michael Caine plays a famous writer
whom she ends up liking even better.

''Tough Guys Don't Dance.'' Norman Mailer takes another try at directing,
adapting his own novel. With Ryan O'Neal and Isabella Rossellini.

The New York Film Festival. The 25th-anniversary roster includes ''Barfly,''
Barbet Schroeder's film from an autobiographical screenplay by the supremely
seedy bohemian poet Charles Bukowski, with Mickey Rourke and Faye Dunaway; Peter
Greenaway's ''Belly of an Architect''; ''Babette's Feast,'' based on an Isak
Dinesen short story; Maurice Pialat's ''Under Satan's Sun,''the controversial
Palme d'Or winner at Cannes this year.

October

''An American Date.'' Martin Short's admirers continue to wait for him to find
the right film role. Perhaps it's in this: a night on the town for a couple of
New Yorkers on their third date. Co-starring Annette O'Toole.

''The American Way.'' Political satire starring Michael J. Pollard and Dennis
Hopper, who can always be counted on to do something new.

''Anna.'' The fashion model Paulina Porzikova makes her debut as the mysterious
girl who becomes involved with an aging Czech movie star (Sally Kirkland).
Written by Agnieszka Holland (''Angry Harvest'').

''Baby Boom.'' One of the season's au courant plots has Diane Keaton as a
high-powered career woman who inherits a baby and must rearrange her life. Sam
Shepard and designer baby food are among the new elements she eventually
incorporates.

''Dancers.'' A reunion of Herbert Ross and Mikhail Baryshnikov in another film
that, like their ''Turning Point,'' explores dancers' private lives.

''Dark Eyes.'' One of the high points of this year's Cannes Film Festival,
Nikita Mikhalkov's period romance brought a best-actor award to Marcello
Mastroianni.

''Destiny.'' A new film from the director of ''El Norte,'' Gregory Nava. William
Hurt and Timothy Hutton star in the story of a romantic triangle, set against
the backdrop of World War II England.

''The Glass Menagerie.'' Paul Newman directed Joanne Woodward in this new
version of the Tennessee Williams classic, with a cast that also includes John
Malkovich and Karen Allen.

''Hope and Glory.'' An autobiographical film from the versatile British director
John Boorman, about the blitz as seen through the eyes of a young boy.

''House of Games.'' A directorial debut by the playwright David Mamet, whose
''Untouchables'' screenplay made it clear that he ought to be in pictures.

''Less Than Zero.'' The spectacularly disaffected Beverly Hills teen-agers who
populated Bret Easton Ellis's novel find their way to the screen. Directed by
Marek Kanievska (''Another Country'').

''Little Nikita.'' Sidney Poitier returns after a decade's absence from the
screen, to play an FBI agent in Richard Benjamin's film. With River Phoenix.

''Prince of Darkness.'' John Carpenter tells of graduate students who are
unwittingly enlisted by their professor to help prevent the devil from coming to
earth.

''Sammy and Rosie Get Laid.'' Anyone who thought ''My Beautiful Laundrette'' was
an odd title had better get ready for this one. From the same director, Stephen
Frears, another film examining racial tensions in present-day England. With
Claire Bloom.

''Three O'Clock High.'' Would it be a new season without a new Steven Spielberg
protege? From Phil Joanou, who directed several ''Amazing Stories'' episodes, a
film about a high-school student who's due to be beaten up by the school bully
when classes let out for the day.

''Too Outrageous.'' The team that made ''Outrageous'' returns for the further
adventures of Robin Turner, hairdresser-turned-female- impersonator.

''The Wannsee Conference.'' A reconstruction of the meeting held by Adolf
Eichmann and Reinhard Heydrich on January 20, 1942, to plan the annihilation of
the Jews. The film lasts as long as the conference did - 85 minutes.

''The Whales of August.'' The remarkable team of Bette Davis and Lillian Gish
play sisters in Lindsay Anderson's drama of elderly women and their restricted
lives.

November

''Cry Freedom.'' Richard Attenborough's film about the murdered anti-apartheid
leader Stephen Biko stars Denzel Washington as Biko, Kevin Kline as his lawyer.

''Date With an Angel.'' A beautiful angel (Phoebe Cates) mysteriously appears in
a young man's swimming pool one morning. Splash, anyone?

''The Dead.'' The great John Huston adapts James Joyce, with a screenplay by
Tony Huston from a portion of ''Dubliners.'' With Anjelica Huston, Donal McCann.


''Hearts of Fire.'' Fiona Flannagan plays a rock star involved with two men, one
of them an American rock legend. Bob Dylan plays the legend.

''Housekeeping.'' A new film from the always delightful Bill Forsyth
(''Gregory's Girl''), starring Christine Lahti as a drifter who changes the
lives of her teen-age nieces. From the novel by Marilynne Robinson.

''Made in Heaven.'' From Alan Rudolph, a film about a young man who returns from
the afterlife to seek his true love. Starring Timothy Hutton, Kelly McGillis.

''Planes, Trains and Automobiles.'' Steve Martin and John Candy, a mature cast
by John Hughes's standards, star in his antic comedy.

''Repentance.'' Winner of a Special Jury Prize at Cannes this year, Tengiz
Abuladze's film is about the death of a prominent Soviet mayor, the grave robber
who exposes the mayor's tyrannical past and the consequences for the mayor's
family.

''Shy People.'' Barbara Hershey co-stars with Jill Clayburgh in a film by Andrei
Konchalovsky.

''Siesta.'' What do Isabella Rossellini, Jodie Foster and Grace Jones have in
common? They star with Martin Sheen, Julian Sands and Ellen Barkin in Mary
Lambert's mystery about the last 60 seconds in a stuntwoman's life. Score by
Miles Davis.

''Walker.'' From the versatile Alex Cox (''Sid and Nancy''), a film starring Ed
Harris as the 19th-century soldier of fortune who, backed by American business
interests, declared himself president of Nicaragua.

December

''Broadcast News.'' From James L. Brooks, the director of ''Terms of
Endearment,'' television newsroom intrigue starring William Hurt as a famous
anchorman.

''Eddie Murphy Raw.'' Robert Townsend had a host of Eddie Murphy types in his
''Hollywood Shuffle''; now he directs the real McCoy in a concert film.

''Empire of the Sun.'' Something very different from Steven Spielberg: the story
of a schoolboy's experiences in a prison camp outside Shanghai during World War
II. With John Malkovich and Miranda Richardson, from the novel by J. G. Ballard.


''The Family.'' From Ettore Scola, the reunion of an extended family on the
occasion of its patriarch's 80th birthday. With Vittorio Gassman, Fanny Ardant.

''Good Morning, Vietnam.'' Robin Williams plays an irreverent disk jockey who
does what he can to raise morale in Vietnam. Directed by Barry Levinson
(''Diner'').

''Ironweed.'' Jack Nicholson plays the alcoholic, down-on-his-luck former
baseball player, Meryl Streep his companion, in Hector Babenco's film version of
William Kennedy's novel.

''Leonard: Part VI.'' Bill Cosby takes a feature-film role, playing a secret
agent chasing an assassin who transforms frogs and fish into killers. Yes, frogs
and fish.

''The Lonely Passion of Judith Hearne.'' Based on a novel by Brian Moore, this
romance pairs Maggie Smith, as a Catholic spinster, with Bob Hoskins, who plays
a rogue. Directed by Jack Clayton.

''Nuts.'' Barbra Streisand returns, as a woman whose parents want her declared
insane so that she won't have to stand trial for manslaughter. With Richard
Dreyfuss. Directed by Martin Ritt, from Tom Topor's play.

''Overboard.'' A promising screwball plot, with Goldie Hawn as a wealthy woman
who falls off her yacht, Kurt Russell as the carpenter who adopts her after she
develops amnesia. Garry Marshall directed.

''Punchline.'' Sally Field plays a housewife who dreams of being a stand-up
comedian. With Tom Hanks.

''Sunset.'' Blake Edwards visits 1920's Hollywood, with a cast including Bruce
Willis, Mariel Hemingway, James Garner, Malcolm McDowell.

''Wall Street.'' Oliver Stone brings his galvanizing directorial style to bear
upon the tale of a young stockbroker's rise and fall. With Charlie Sheen, Martin
Sheen and Michael Douglas.

Woody Allen's new film. Mia Farrow is in it, and saying we know anything more
than that would be a lie.

Early 1988

''Hotel Terminus: The Life and Times of Klaus Barbie.'' Marcel Ophuls's
long-awaited documentary, still being edited down from more than 100 hours of
interview footage, is expected this winter. No courtroom scenes, but it will
cover this notorious Nazi war criminal's recent trial.

''Bright Lights, Big City.'' Michael J. Fox plays Jay McInerney's high-living
young New Yorker in a film co-starring Kiefer Sutherland, Dianne Wiest and John
Houseman. Directed by James Bridges.

''Manon of the Spring.'' ''Jean de Florette,'' Part II.

''The Milagro Beanfield War.'' Robert Redford directed this story of a community
of impoverished Hispanic workers uniting to oppose a recreation development.

''Moon Over Parador.'' Paul Mazursky's comedy about an actor's travels within a
Central American country on the eve of revolution. With Richard Dreyfuss, Raul
Julia, Sonia Braga.

''She's Having a Baby.'' Kevin Bacon and Elizabeth McGovern play a young couple
facing parenthood.

''The Sicilian.'' Michael Cimino strikes again, with a film based on Mario
Puzo's novel. The life of a 1950's Italian outlaw.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo from ''Milagro Beanfield War'' (Elloitt Marks)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SELECTIVE GUIDE: TELEVISION

BYLINE: By Peter J. Boyer; Peter J. Boyer covers television for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 90, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 984 words



New Network Series

''The 'Slap' Maxwell Story.'' Dabney Coleman, whose edgy portrayal of an
egomaniacal TV talk-show host in ''Buffalo Bill'' won critical praise but
marginal ratings, returns to weekly television as an egomaniacal sportswriter in
this ABC series.

''Tour of Duty.'' CBS will try to turn the Vietnam War into a weekly
entertainment, in an hour-long drama told from the grunt's point of view.
Terence Knox stars as a platoon sergeant who cares.

''Hooperman.'' In this ABC comedy-drama series, John Ritter portrays a San
Francisco police detective who becomes the owner of an apartment building when
his landlord is murdered. From the creators of ''Hill Street Blues'' and ''L.A.
Law.''

''A Different World.'' NBC tries to exploit the overwhelming success of ''The
Cosby Show'' with a spinoff starring Lisa Bonet as a Cosby kid in her first year
of college.

''Frank's Place.'' A CBS series starring Tim Reid, who played Venus Flytrap in
''WKRP in Cincinnati.'' Here he takes on a more subdued role as a college
professor who inherits a down-home Creole restaurant in New Orleans.

''Beauty and the Beast.'' An update of the fantasy classic, with Linda Hamilton
as a career girl whose life is changed when she meets a nice monster who lives
in the sewer system beneath New York City. Ron Perlman is the hirsute romantic
lead in this CBS series.

''Dolly.'' ABC scraps its long-running (23 years) Sunday night movie for a try
at the musical/variety format. Dolly Parton and guest stars.

Mini-Series

''Napoleon and Josephine.'' A six-hour ABC soap opera with Armand Assante and
Jacqueline Bisset as the Little Corporal and his wife.

''Echoes in the Darkness.'' Peter Coyote, Peter Boyle and Stockard Channing in a
five-hour CBS adaptation of the Joseph Wambaugh book about murder in a
Philadelphia suburb.

''Mario Puzo's 'The Fortunate Pilgrim.' '' A four-hour NBC rendition of the Puzo
novel about a feisty immigrant and her family, with Sophia Loren and Edward
James Olmos.

''James Clavell's 'Noble House.' '' Pierce Brosnan, Deborah Raffin and John
Houseman are among the players in NBC's eight-hour mini-series set in
contemporary Hong Kong.

Television Movies

''Gunsmoke Revisited.'' James Arness and Amanda Blake portray Matt Dillon and
Miss Kitty again, 12 years on. In this CBS movie, the retired marshall is a
mountain trapper and Miss Kitty lives in New Orleans.

The nostalgia trend continues this season with several movie revisits to old TV
series, including ''Eight Is Enough Reunion,'' with NBC reuniting the members of
the Bradford family, and ''Family Reunion,'' in which ABC reunites members of
the ''Family'' series. NBC also plans four new ''Perry Mason'' movies.

''The Baby M Story.'' ABC recounts the story of Mary Beth Whitehead, the
surrogate mother who decided she wanted to keep her baby. The film is one of
several upcoming TV movies drawn from recent headlines, including CBS's story of
the ''Mayflower Madam,'' the socialite who used her marketing skills to run a
highly successful ''escort service.''

Specials

''The Blessings of Liberty.'' The first and most sublime of anniversary-based
ABC special programs planned for the fall tells the story of the Constitution in
its bicentennial year. ABC will also make specials out of the 20th anniversary
of Rolling Stone, the magazine, and the 75th anniversary of Las Vegas, the
Nevada city.

''Christmas in Washington.'' An NBC holiday special that will include an
appearance by President and Mrs. Reagan. Other Christmas specials planned by the
networks include ''The Sound of Christmas'' with Julie Andrews on ABC.

''This Is Your Life.'' Another TV nostalgia trip, in the form of a one-hour NBC
reprise of the popular program of the 1950's, with Ralph Edwards returning as
host.

Public Television

''Masterpiece Theater.'' The popular anthology series begins the new season in
October with ''The Bretts,'' a generational drama about a British stage family.
The series will also include Jane Austen's ''Northanger Abbey,'' Olivia
Manning's ''Fortunes of War,'' adapted from her ''Balkan Trilogy'' and ''Levant
Trilogy,'' and a five-part adaptation of ''David Copperfield.''

''Moyers: God and Politics.'' The journalist explores the impact of religious
values and beliefs on national and international issues in three one-hour
documentaries.

''We the People.'' Four one-hour programs on the Constitution, hosted by Peter
Jennings. Bill Moyers examines that document in ''Moyers: The Secret Government,
the Constitution in Crisis.''

''Trying Times.'' The Public Broadcasting Service, sometimes jokingly known as
the network for the humor-impaired, tries a comedy anthology. Six half-hour
shows about life in the 1980's, with scripts by Beth Henley, Wendy Wasserstein,
Christopher Durang, Spalding Gray, Bernard Slade and Earl Pomerantz.

''Celebrating Gershwin.'' A two-part ''Great Performances'' presentation, hosted
by Michael Tilson Thomas, with Mikhail Baryshnikov, Bob Dylan, Rosemary Clooney,
Chita Rivera and many others.

Cable

''Mandela.'' A two-hour biographical drama about South African Government foe
Nelson Mandela, starring Danny Glover and Alfre Woodard, on Home Box Office.

''Divided Union.'' A five-part overview of the War Between the States, with
re-enactments of battles and scholarly discussion. The program episodes will
play weekly on the Arts and Entertainment network.

''Code Name: Kyril.'' A two-part spy thriller about a K.G.B. officer's discovery
of a double agent in his ranks. Edward Woodward and Ian Charleson star in the
Showtime presentation.

''Der Rosenkavalier.'' Sir Georg Solti conducts the Royal Opera's production of
the Strauss opera, featuring Kiri Te Kanawa, Anne Howells and Aage Haugland on
Bravo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Best Sellers: August 30, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1347 words

                                                                          Weeks
This                                                                 Last    On
Week Fiction                                                         Week  List
 1   PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy.  (Putnam,                            1     5
     $19.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles
     international terrorists.

 2   PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.                                 2    10
     (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A murder
     creates a crisis among politicians and lawyers.

 3   MISERY, by Stephen King.  (Viking, $18.95.)                        3    13
     Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
     psychotic fan.

 4   WEEP NO MORE, MY LADY, by Mary Higgins                             4     9
     Clark.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Love and
     murder at a swank California health spa.

 5   DIRK GENTLY'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE                                   5    10
     AGENCY, by Douglas Adams.  (Simon & Schuster,
     $14.95.) A private eye's search for a missing cat
     takes him on a trip through space and time.

 6   THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.                                6    16
     (Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
     Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.

 7   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel.  (Delacorte,                       8    24
     $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
     way to the 80's.

 8   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.                          7    30
     (Morrow, $18.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall
     a woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 9   SPHERE, by Michael Crichton.  (Knopf, $17.95.)                     9    11
     Scientists explore mysteries of an alien spaceship.

10   SARUM, by Edward Rutherfurd.  (Crown, $19.95.)                    12     2
     Ten centuries of English history seen through the
     experiences of five families.

11   MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow.                           10    12
     (Morrow, $17.95.) The many-faceted relationship of
     the 35-year-old narrator and his botanist uncle.

12   EMPIRE, by Gore Vidal.  (Random House, $22.50.)                   13    12
     Turn-of-the-century Washington, from the point of
     view of a young woman newspaper publisher.

13   THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.                               11    41
     (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
     relationships in South Carolina and New York City.

14   THE SONGLINES, by Bruce Chatwin.  (Sifton/Viking,                        1
     $18.95.) Meditations, anecdotes, adventures
     set in an Arcadian Australia.

15   HEIRESS, by Janet Dailey.  (Little, Brown, $17.95.)               15    16
     Sisters vie for their father's affection and fortune.

16 * THE TIMOTHY FILES, by Lawrence Sanders.                           14    12
     (Putnam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran turned
     detective checks out dubious entrepreneurs for
     Wall Street firms.
                                                                          Weeks
This                                                                 Last    On
Week Nonfiction                                                      Week  List
 1   SPYCATCHER, by Peter Wright with Paul                              1     5
     Greengrass.  (Viking, $19.95.) The autobiography of
     a former senior member of the British secret
     service.

 2   THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by                               2    18
     Allan Bloom.  (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
     of liberal arts education during the past 25 years.

 3   THE GREAT DEPRESSION OF 1990, by Ravi                              3     8
     Batra.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) An economist's
     dire predictions about the coming decade.

 4   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.                            4    21
     Siegel.  (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A surgeon stresses
     the importance of the patient's mind and emotions.

 5   CULTURAL LITERACY, by E. D. Hirsch Jr.                             5    13
     (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) The information --
     geography, history, literature, polities -- that you
     need to read with.

 6   CALL ME ANNA, by Patty Duke and Kenneth                            6     4
     Turan.  (Bantam, $17.95.) The autobiography of the
     actress and show business personality.

 7   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA.  (Collins                            7    39
     Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
     recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 8   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber.  (Beech Tree/                      9    27
     Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
     visits of "intelligent nonhumans" to his home.

 9 * LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien                                8    10
     Cheng.  (Grove, $19.95.) China's Cultural Revolution
     as experienced by a wealthy woman accused of
     spying for the West.

10 * AND A VOICE TO SING WITH, by Joan Baez.                           15     4
     (Summit, $19.95.) The memoirs of the folk singer
     who became a political activist in the 1960's.

11   THE DIFFERENT DRUM, by M. Scott Peck.                             10    13
     (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A psychiatrist's
     prescription for personal and communal peace.

12   HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon.                        11    16
     (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the
     octogenarian industrialist and philanthropist.

13 * THE SPY WORE RED, by Aline, Countess of                           12     9
     Romanones.  (Random House, $18.95.)
     Recollections of a woman from upstate New York
     who served as an undercover agent in Europe
     during World War II.

14   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes.  (Knopf,                             27
     $24.95.) Australia, from penal colony to its gradual
     emergence as a flourishing nation.

15   ELVIS WORLD, by Jane Stern and Michael Stern.                            1
     (Knopf, $35.) A profusely illustrated album about
     the life and legend of Elvis Presley.
                                                                          Weeks
This Advice, How-to and                                              Last    On
Week Miscellaneous                                                   Week  List
 1   THE 8-WEEK CHOLESTEROL CURE, by Robert                             2     8
     E. Kowalski.  (Harper & Row, $15.95.) How to lower
     your blood cholesterol level without drugs.

 2   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE                                     1   103
     DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
     standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 3   HOW TO MARRY THE MAN OF YOUR CHOICE,                               3     4
     by Margaret Kent.  (Warner, $14.95.) Ways to find a
     mate.

 4   MEN WHO CAN'T LOVE, by Steven Carter and                           4     4
     Julia Sokol.  (M. Evans, $15.95.) What women can do
     about men who fear a commitment.

 5   THE 35-PLUS DIET FOR WOMEN, by Jean Perry                                1
     Spodnik and Barbara Gibbons.  (Harper & Row,
     $15.95.) A metabolism diet for women over 55,
     developed at the Kaiser Permanente clinic.




* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest)

STRAIGHT ON TILL MORNING: The Biography of Beryl Markham, by Mary S. Lovell.
(St. Martin's, $16.95.) A superbly researched life of the Kenyan hero pilot and
writer ("West With the Night") whose intelligence, courage, beauty and want of
inhibition or scruple astonished (or should have) all who knew her.

THREE CONTINENTS, by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala.  (Morrow, $18.95.) The first-person
narrator is a boob, but a subtle, claustrophobic tale of moral failure and
disappearing identity transpires nevertheless in Mrs. Jhabvala's 10th novel.

FREEDOM, by William Safire.  (Doubleday, $24.95.) An engrossing and abundant
(1,125 pages) fictional version of the first years of the Civil War and
Lincoln's developing commitment to emancipation; by the Washington columnist of
The Times.

GOING TO MIAMI: Exiles, Tourists, and Refugees in the New America, by David
Rieff.  (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Mr. Rieff explores the increasing "Cubanismo"
of a major North American city in this careful, curious essay in personal
journalism.

YOU MUST REMEMBER THIS, by Joyce Carol Oates.  (William Abrahams/Dutton,
$19.95.) An unhappy family, inward violence in a gritty urban setting, a mad
uncle-niece love affair are the elements of the remarkably productive Ms.
Oates's 18th novel.

CLOAK & GOWN: Scholars in the Secret War, 1939-1961, by Robin W. Winks.
(Morrow, $22.95.) How Yale produced many of the men who created the O.S.S. and
the C.I.A. and submitted some of its academic programs to the purposes of
intelligence.

CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE: The Secret Life of Anthony Blunt, by Barrie Penrose and
Simon Freeman.  (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) The first biography, by two
very industrious journalists, of the British art historian unmasked as a Soviet
spy in 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Doubts on Intelligence Data: Iran Affair Renews the Issue

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1801 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 30


For most of President Reagan's tenure, the nation's intelligence agencies and
some senior officials have fought with increasing bitterness over whether
intelligence analyses prepared for the President were being distorted to support
Administration policies.

The conflict came into full view this year when the Iran-contra committees in
Congress made it a major subject of their investigations.

The committees have uncovered many new documents and examples, that several
committee members said show the Central Intelligence Agency had been ''cooking''
-distorting - its assessments of Iran and Central America. Many of these
documents were made public last week Undue Influence Cited Committee officials
said the final report of the panels, expected this fall, is likely to echo the
sentiments of Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana, who said
undue influence of policy makers on the intelligence process was a major flaw
exposed in the Iran-contra affair.

The report last February by the Tower commission, the Presidental panel
appointed to investigate the Iran-contra affair, raised similar concerns.

A wide range of Administration and Congressional officials said the question of
whether intelligence has been distorted to suit policy aims is difficult to
answer with a clear yes or no.

An Issue Back to Vietnam

The issue is rooted in the history of the intelligence agencies. Conservative
critics of the C.I.A., for example, contend that the agency consistently
miscalculated the military strength and strategic intentions of the Soviet Union
in 1970's, particularly during the period when the Nixon Administration was
pursuing a policy of detente.

On the other hand, during the Vietnam War, it was military intelligence that was
consistently optimistic and the C.I.A that angered policy makers by giving
gloomier but ultimately more accurate appraisals.

Several present and former officials asserted that the strong views on some
subjects held by William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence,
affected intelligence reports given to President Reagan, particularly those
related to the so-called Reagan Doctrine of aid to insurgencies in Central
America, Africa and elsewhere.

But even officials critical of Mr. Casey, who died last May, said the Central
Intelligence Agency had a record for objectivity on other important issues when
he ran it. On arms control, for instance, the officials said the C.I.A.
repeatedly issued reports that undercut the Administration's positions.

The C.I.A. has emphatically denied that it let policy aims influence
intelligence reports on any subjects.

Government officials on all sides of the debate agree that written intelligence
reports can make a difference in a tight debate over policy.

Shultz's Complaint: Distorted Intelligence

Secretary of State George P. Shultz told the Iran-contra committees last month
that he was so upset by what he viewed as manipulation of intelligence that it
was one reason he was preparing to resign last August. Mr. Shultz also testified
that he took the problem to the President last August, telling Mr. Reagan that
he had become ''uneasy with the intelligence.''

William Webster, the new Director of Central Intelligence, has told senior
intelligence officials that he is determined to end any doubts about the
reliability of analysis. When asked for comment on the questions raised about
the C.I.A., he signaled the importance of the problem by issuing a personal
statement this week.

''Important estimates,'' he said, ''are now fully addressed at senior levels
throughout the intelligence community, and divergent points of view are
disclosed in the finished product. The reports are furnished without any regard
to whether they support a particular policy line and they may not be altered for
that purpose.''

These are among the subjects raised by the Iran-contra committees and in
interviews with Administration officials:

* There was an effort by some officials at the C.I.A. involved in the Iran
dealings to write a paper last year arguing that Iran had ended its support of
terrorism during the period it bought arms from the United States. The document
was substantially rewritten after analysts at other agencies as well as some
within the C.I.A. objected. ''There was an example of a desperate attempt to try
to sort of prove something was happening to make the policy look good, and it
wasn't,'' said Clair George, the C.I.A.'s chief operations officer, in testimony
made public last week.

* President Reagan believed that Iran was losing its war with Iraq. A January
1986 memo, urging the President to approve arms sales to Iran, said the Israelis
believed Iran was losing the war. It did not mention that the unanimous
consensus of American intelligence analysts was that Iran had the upper hand.
Notes taken at White House meetings last November show that Mr. Reagan continued
to believe Iran was the weaker of the two combatants. Some members of the
Iran-contra committees say they suspect that officials who supported the Iran
initiative, such as Mr. Casey, failed to tell Mr. Reagan of the opposite view.

* The C.I.A.'s views about the contras were in question. On the eve of a
Congressional vote last year on contra aid, a handwritten note uncovered by the
Iran-contra committees suggests, Mr. Casey told aides to make the situation look
more bleak. The note said that Mr. Casey ''wants to make the insurgency choice
stark - either we go all out to support them or they will go down the drain.''

* The completeness of reporting from Central America was unclear. Senator Warren
B. Rudman, the vice chairman of the Senate Iran-contra committee, said that in
November 1986, a leader of a Central American country criticized American policy
while Mr. Casey was visiting the region. A C.I.A. cable mentioned the incident,
but this was not included in the C.I.A.'s final trip report.

* A dispute between the State Department and the C.I.A. arose over the last
several years about the strength of the Renamo insurgency in Mozambique. Mr.
Casey wanted to change Administration policy to support the rebels. The State
Department has successfully advocated a policy of trying to wean the Government
of Mozambique from its Marxist origins. State Department officials have long
believed the C.I.A. has overstated Renamo's chances.

Some officials raised questions about whether Mr. Shultz had himself tried to
alter intelligence to suit policies he favored. They said that in late 1982, the
intelligence agencies prepared an analysis that said the chances of the factions
in Lebanon settling their differences were nil. It also warned of the
possibility of terrorist attacks against Americans. The officials said Mr.
Shultz went to Mr. Casey and asked the analysts to re-examine the issue. They
did not change their views.

The Role of Casey: Wearing Two Hats

Although Mr. Casey was not the first Director of Central Intelligence to be both
a close friend and confidant of a President, Reagan Administration colleagues
said there has probably never been a Director who held more pronounced views on
policy.

Mr. Casey often gave speeches in which he made clear his positions. In those
addresses, he came across as a man who believed the United States could roll
back the Soviet Union's gains in the world if the Administration supported what
it termed freedom fighters in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia, Laos and
Nicarauga.

Mr. Casey's public statements, and his equally pivotal role in the internal
struggles over policy, made it inevitable that he would be accused of using his
position as intelligence chief to advance positions he was presenting to the
President.

''The question was, could you trust Bill Casey?'' said one senior Administration
official.

Within the intelligence agencies, officials who analyze intelligence data work
separately from those who gather it. This is to insure that operatives who run
particular programs or agents are not also responsible for assessing their
success and value.

Mr. Shultz's complaint was that the analysis was influenced by officials from
the Operations Directorate of the C.I.A. ''I felt that the information about
Iran and terrorism was just not on the mark,'' he said. ''And I felt that beyond
these specific things there was, so to speak, a kind of structural fault in that
the intelligence-gathering and assessment function had been joined together with
the operational function.''

Intelligence Estimates: Under Director's Control

A second criticism of Mr. Casey by present and former intelligence officials
involved his role in the preparation of analyses. The most significant are the
National Intelligence Estimates, which are intended to represent the consensus
of the views of all the intelligence agencies, from the C.I.A. to the State
Department to the Pentagon's Defense Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Casey was chairman of the secret meetings among intelligence officials about
the estimates, and was the final editor.

Mr. Casey was not shy about demanding changes. Early in the Reagan
Administration, for example, the C.I.A. prepared an analysis that argued that
there was no evidence of a Soviet role in supporting international terrorism.

That draft was brushed aside by Mr. Casey, one former intelligence official
said, with the observation that ''of course there's no evidence; they conceal
it.''

Mr. Casey sent his operatives out to look harder, citing recent books on the
subject. The estimate was eventually rewritten to give more prominence to the
possibility of Soviet involvement.

Herbert Meyer, who from 1983 to 1985 was the vice chairman of the C.I.A. unit
that supervised the writing of intelligence estimates, said the incident showed
how Mr. Casey had prevented bias from creeping into the agency's work. ''If
someone doesn't draw the connection to the Soviet Union in an estimate on
terrorism, I'd say that's politicizing it,'' he said.

Mr. Meyer said the requirement for consensus in national intelligence estimates
made it impossible to tilt views in a particular direction.

A former senior official in the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and
Research, Frank McNeil, said a determined C.I.A. head could subtly alter the
written products. He noted, for example, that some intelligence reports are the
work of only a single agency and are not reviewed by other agencies, as are the
national estimates.

As to whether intelligence judgments were altered to suit Mr. Casey, Mr. McNeil
said: ''There were several instances in which I believe that was the case on
Mozambique, Central America and Iran, obviously. Sometimes, when Casey got very
interested in a problem, people would appear who would write things that fit his
perceptions.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Representative Lee Hamilton (NYT) (Pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, AUGUST 31, 1987


SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 369 words






Companies


Investigations of merger talks between Hutton and Shearson are being conducted
by the S.E.C. and the New York Stock Exchange, according to people familiar with
the situation. The investigators are said to be looking at the run-up in
Hutton's stock price in October and at whether there was adequate and prompt
disclosure of the talks the two brokerages held last year. [Page D1.]



The Economy


Car sales will not slacken but neither will incentives, G.M. and Ford officials
predicted for the 1988 model year. [D1.]

The turnaround in the aluminum industry might be short-lived. Some analysts say
that the production capacity being added could undermine the surging prices of
recent months. [D1.]

Orders for machine tools fell 19.7 percent in July, after strong gains in the
previous two months. [D1.]

International


To deal with a falling dollar, foreign companies are adopting many of the
tactics used by American businesses a few years ago when the dollar was very
strong. [D1.]

The Israeli Cabinet voted to stop development of a jet fighter and spend some of
the money on American-made F-16's. [A1.]

Vietnam is trying to improve the climate for investment with rules that lower
barriers to foreign involvement. [D6.]

Shoemaking in India is increasingly attractive to footwear companies in the
West. [D6.]

Tryart Proprietary, owned by Sir Warwick Fairfax, said it would make a takeover
bid for John Fairfax Ltd. [D5.]



Markets


Oil futures prices are expected to rise this morning as the market reacts to the
latest attacks in the Persian Gulf. [A2.]



Today's Columns


The seeds of the next decline in interest rates have been sown, according to
some interpreters of Fed policy. Credit Markets. [D5.]

Mary Tyler Moore is going to Wall Street, offering shares in her MTM production
company. The company has strengths, an analyst said, but the offering is at a
difficult time. Market Place. [D4.]

Recent decisions in lawsuits against tobacco companies favored the industry, but
many actions are pending and there are issues that have not yet been tested.
Business and the Law. [D2.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INTERNATIONAL REPORT;
Vietnam, Seeking Capital, Eases Rules

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Vietnam, falling further and further behind its free-market Southeast Asian
neighbors in development, is about to begin an ambitious two-track investment
campaign.

Officials appear willing to deal with just about anyone with capital but are
placing special hopes on tapping the accumulated wealth of the hundreds of
thousands of ''boat people'' and other exiles who now live in the West.

Vietnamese emigrants, being wooed with nostalgia, already play a large role in
the newly liberalized ''family economy,'' supplying relatives with goods to sell
in local markets and mom-and-pop businesses. They also send machines, tools and
parts for small industries. Such shipments, along with dollars, are now allowed
to enter Vietnam almost without limit. Emigrants are also allowed to return for
visits.

Western nations restrict trade with Vietnam and give it no official aid, in
protest of the presence of 140,000 Vietnamese troops in neighboring Cambodia,
which Vietnam invaded in 1978. Vietnam and the United States have no diplomatic
relations.

The Bureaucratic Maze

At the heart of the development campaign is a new investment code, which Hanoi
says will be ready by the end of this year after having been tied up since 1984
in what now appear to have been political disagreements. The new law is intended
to remove many bureaucratic barriers that have made doing business here
virtually impossible for most Westerners.

The new investment climate, the Vietnamese say, will also be enhanced by
recently enacted statutes that greatly liberalize both individual and official
Vietnamese dealings with the non-Communist world.

Until a change in Government leadership over the last year began to place
economic pragmatists in the Communist Party leadership, Hanoi had one of the
most isolated and orthodox systems of any Communist country.

Ideologues from the relatively backward North, it is now conceded, destroyed the
economy of Vietnam, making it one of the world's poorest nations. Reliable
statistics are virtually nonexistent, but the nation's per capita income is
thought to be under $175 a year and the inflation rate is believed to be 600 to
700 percent.

'Many, Many Complaints'

''We have had many, many complaints about our bureaucracy, and we know we must
improve,'' Luu Van Dat, director general of the Research Institute for Foreign
Trade and the coordinator of the new code, said in a meeting with reporters in
Hanoi.

''The code will simplify investment,'' he said. ''The foreign investor will deal
only with one oversight committee headed by a high Government official. He will
not have to go to many offices.''

Mr. Dat is confident that Vietnam will find foreigners who are interested in
''our abundant products of land and sea,'' especially tropical fruits and
shellfish. Asked who would back him this time if politics intrudes, he pointed
to the ceiling and said, ''Now I can go right to the top.''

The top includes a new party general secretary, Nguyen Van Linh. A northerner,
he appears to have been much influenced by a long career in the South, first as
Hanoi's overseer of the Viet Cong during the war with the United States and
later as party leader after the fall of Saigon, since renamed Ho Chi Minh City.

Clash With Hard-Liners

Mr. Linh's sympathies for southern-style economics and its active private sector
may have nearly removed him from power in the early 1980's, when hard-liners had
the upper hand in Hanoi.

At least as important to sustaining change are Vo Van Kiet, the director of
state planning, and Vo Chi Cong, the new chairman of the Council of Ministers,
or President. Vietnamese say Mr. Cong, when he was agriculture minister, quietly
tolerated free-enterprise farming on a wide scale.

Mr. Dat, outlining the new code, said Vietnam would welcome both private
investors interested in joint ventures and investment by the subsidiaries of
foreign companies. He also said it would allow contracts for resource
development - oil is a priority in this energy-poor country -and for the
building of a tourism industry. Tourism is one area where the expertise of
''overseas Vietnamese'' with experience in restaurant management and hotel and
other service industries is being actively sought.

Goal of Industrialization

Much of the hope for industrialization with foreign help is centered on Ho Chi
Minh City. As Saigon, the city had a relatively high standard of development and
entrepreneurial talent before it fell to Hanoi in 1975.

The city has its own Import-Export Corporation and a consular office that allows
it to bypass Hanoi in some cases. For foreigners, Imexco is often the best place
to make exploratory contacts with the Vietnamese.

Imexco's new director is Nguyen Van Hoang, who until a few months ago was
Vietnam's trade representative in Singapore, where much unofficial business is
done. He said in an interview that the South was the acknowledged finance center
of Vietnam, with a good deal of technical equipment remaining from the days
before the North took over.

Mr. Hoang said that during the last year and a half, local governments had
opened the way to expansion by light industry.

The city planners are focusing on handicraft export - artisanship is of high
quality in Vietnam, but the country's isolation has allowed marketing to
deteriorate - and the manufacture of consumer goods for the home market as well
as for barter with other socialist economies.

Other Factories Opening

Garment and shoe factories and some electronic assembly lines are also being
introduced.

Although Vietnam's new investment law is said to include tax incentives and the
promise that profits can be repatriated, some potentially troublesome areas
remain. These include the granting of resident permits for business executives
and setting the number of foreigners allowed to supervise operations here.

An Eastern European who has worked on joint ventures said many bitter lessons
were learned from turning over too much of an operation to local managers.
Skills are low, and corruption and theft have been rampant. The Government is
conducting a campaign against theft, but temptations are great in a land so
poor.

A drive by the Japanese for a head start under the new investment law is leading
to ethical problems, Vietnamese say. Would-be Vietnamese partners are learning
to seek Japanese ''gifts'' - from exotic calendars to motor scooters and,
occasionally, cars or trips to Tokyo.

New Attitude Spreading

A Western European business executive said that mentality had become widespread
in the last year or two. As an example, he mentioned the drivers assigned to
foreigners. Occasionally the drivers demand Western cigarettes and, if denied
them, slow down or refuse to provide services already paid for.

Vietnam's intrinsic problems are monumental: Most manufacturing is done in
primitive conditions in deteriorating plants. Hygenic standards are low. Workers
at a frozen-food factory were seen sorting cuttlefish on a concrete surface that
also serves as a driveway for trucks. Throughout the country, water is unsafe to
drink.

Roads in Vietnam are few - the best were built by the Americans -and in bad
repair.

Fuel and utility supplies are, at best, unreliable. A journalist's scheduled
visit to some of the small private factories here, on which so much hope is
being placed, was canceled because electricity in the entire neighborhood had
been off for two days.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vo Chi Cong, the new chairman of Vietnam's Council of
Ministers (Agence France-Presse); Photo of Nguyen Van Linh, the new Communist
Party general secretary, voting in national election last April (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Lack of Military Data Halts Agent Orange Study

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1750 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 31


Federal scientists have concluded that they cannot proceed with a major
Congressionally mandated study on the effects of Agent Orange on American ground
soldiers in Vietnam because they are unable to find enough soldiers who were
exposed to significant levels of the herbicide.

The finding, which appears to contradict the popular image that ground troops
were in frequent contact with chemicals used to defoliate the jungle, has been
relayed by the Centers for Disease Control in recent weeks to key Agent Orange
advisory committees in the Administration and Congress. Neither the Reagan
Administration nor Congress has taken a position yet on what to do about the
study.

The centers' conclusion is based on a pilot study to determine whether troops
with high exposure to Agent Orange could be identified from military records for
a large-scale study.

''This study has demonstrated that, for most of the ground troops, the exposure
was not significant,'' Dr. Vernon Houk, director of the Center for Environmental
health at C.D.C., said in an interview. ''I'm quite sure there were some
individuals, such as chemical corps workers, who were exposed. But this study
shows it is not possible to get a sufficient number of exposed people through
military records to do a meaningful study of ground troops.''

The centers' conclusion is sure to provoke anger and disbelief among veterans
who are convinced that Agent Orange caused a wide range of illnesses that
appeared after they returned home, including cancers, birth defects in their
offsping and other serious ailments.

Court Settlement Unaffected

Other studies, such as of Air Force personnel who directly handled Agent Orange,
are under way. But none of these studies, or the one that may now be aborted,
will affect the court settlement in which companies that manufactured Agent
Orange have contributed more than $200 million to a fund to be distributed among
veterans who say they were injured by the herbicide. The distribution is based
on the disabilities suffered, not on whether those disabilities were caused by
Agent Orange.

Dioxin, a chemical contaminant of Agent Orange, has been found to be highly
toxic to some animal species. It is known to cause skin disorders in humans and
experts suspect it may cause other diseases, but the risks of high exposure
levels have not been determined.

The conclusion that the study cannot go forward as planned has been endorsed by
scientific advisers to the Government but challenged by veterans' leaders and
the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission.

The president of the Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation, John Terzano,
contends that the Centers for Disease Control has proved only that the methods
it explored for doing the study will not work, not that the study was impossible
by other methods. If the study is now abandoned, he said, there will be ''some
very, very real problems, political problems.''

Effort Criticized as 'Pitiful'

Mr. Terzano acknowledged that the number of troops believed to be exposed ''has
been on a downward curve'' for the past eight years, but he suggested that the
planned study should be replaced by other research, including smaller-scale
studies or a large study of ground troops using methods not yet explored.

Similarly, Peter C. Kahn, a biochemist at Rutgers University who is a member of
the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission, charged, ''The Federal effort has been
pitiful in this whole business.'' He said that New Jersey was trying a different
method of finding troops who were highly exposed to Agent Orange that may in
turn make a study of health effects possible.

The Federal study was intended to be the largest and most important
investigation of whether ground troops in Vietnam suffered health damage from
exposure to Agent Orange, a chemical that was sprayed from aircraft, helicopters
and hand-held dispensers to kill vegetation that might hide the enemy.

Other studies are examining whether Agent Orange harmed the Air Force personnel
who conducted the spraying missions or caused specific cancers or birth defects
among a broad group of veterans. Still other studies are examining whether
service in Vietnam, regardless of exposure to Agent Orange, had adverse
long-term health effects. Thus far the other studies, most of which are well
under way, have turned up little evidence of serious problems.

Possibly Troublesome Finding

The only potentially troublesome finding, Government scientists say, has emerged
in a Veterans Administration study of mortality records that has not yet been
made public. Scientists familiar with the findings said the V.A. study found an
unexplained excess of deaths from non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, an unusual form of
cancer, among marines who served in Vietnam.

No one knows what caused the increase - the study was not designed to make this
determination - or whether it is a significant development, the scientists said.

A cause for concern, some scientists said, is that an excess of non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas has been found in at least two studies of agricultural and forestry
workers who used herbicides similar to Agent Orange. However, the V.A. study
found no excess lymphomas among Army troops who were presumably exposed to Agent
Orange as much as the marines were, or more. ''I wouldn't say it's terribly
worrisome,'' said Lawrence B. Hobson, director of the V.A.'s Agent Orange
office. ''If I were a Vietnam veteran, I don't think I'd be the least bit
disturbed about it.''

The inability to perform the central epidemiological study of the impact of
Agent Orange on ground troops comes after eight years of efforts to devise a
scientifically sound approach. The study was ordered by Congress in 1979 in an
effort to determine whether the illnesses suffered by veterans were indeed
caused by Agent Orange or were instead simply the normal illnesses that would
occur in any large group of people over a long period of time. Transferred From
the V.A.  The study has been repeatedly delayed by political and scientific
problems. It was first assigned to the Veterans Administration, but after
veterans' groups charged that the V.A., which would have to pay their health
benefits, could not be impartial, the study was reassigned to the Centers for
Disease Control. There it has been repeatedly delayed by difficulties in finding
a way to determine which troops had been exposed to Agent Orange.

Those difficulties were explored in a small ''validation study'' of more than
600 men, just completed by the centers. The study sought to determine if
military records of the movements of ground troops and of the locations of
herbicide spraying missions could be used to pick out the military personnel
most likely to have been exposed to Agent Orange, so that those people could
then be examined for adverse health effects.

Using newly devised measurement technologies, scientists compared the levels of
dioxin, the most dangerous contaminant of Agent Orange, in the blood of ground
troops who were believed, on the basis of records, to have the greatest
likelihood of exposure in Vietnam, with the blood levels of veterans who did not
serve in Vietnam.

The two groups were virtually identical. According to nearly complete results
presented last week, both groups had a median blood dioxin level of 3.8 parts
per trillion, which falls within the range generally expected in the American
public. Only three men had a dioxin levels above 20 parts per trillion, the
upper end of the normal range, and even their levels were not considered very
high by scientists.

A 'Perceptual Gap'

Two of the scientists involved in the study have measured their own blood dioxin
at 6 parts per trillion and 4.8 parts per trillion. The highest level ever
reported, after a chemical accident at Seveso, Italy, was above 1,800 parts per
trillion.

The scientists calculated, on the basis of dioxin measurements in Air Force
chemical personnel taken in 1982 and 1987, that dioxin has a ''half-life'' of
about seven years and would still be found today at elevated levels in the blood
of individuals exposed to the herbicide in Vietnam in the late 1960's.

The Centers for Disease Control warned in a provisional report of its findings
that there is a ''perceptual gap'' between the beliefs of the veterans and the
realities of what happened to them in Vietnam.

The conclusion that the study cannot proceed as planned was endorsed by most
members of the Agent Orange Advisory Panel of the Congressional Office of
Technology Assessment at a meeting last Thursday. The panel is monitoring the
study on behalf of Congress. Instead of classifying the exposure of ground
troops to Agent Orange as high, medium and low, as the Centers for Disease
Control did, ''you almost want to say its low, lower and lowest,'' said Richard
Remington, chairman of the panel, who is vice president for academic affairs at
the University of Iowa.

Another panelist, Lewis Kuller, an epidemiologist at the University of
Pittsburgh, urged that ''we should abandon this craziness'' of trying to do a
study that amounts to ''a great fishing expedition'' without knowing who was
exposed or what diseases to look for.

Various panelists suggested that a limited number of troops, perhaps 20,000 to
60,000 from among the 2.9 million who served in Vietnam, might have received
significant exposure to Agent Orange. But the C.D.C. argues that except for a
few thousand people who regularly sprayed the chemicals, no practical means
exists to find most of those with higher exposures. Testing all Vietnam
veterans' blood would be prohibitively costly and would overwhelm laboratory
capacity, Federal scientists say.

The panel's judgment is presented as advice to the Office of Technology
Assessment, which must now frame its own recommendation to Congress.

Earlier this month the scientific panel of the Reagan Administration's Agent
Orange Working Group also agreed that the study could not proceed as planned,
according to Carl A. Keller, a member of the panel and its former chairman.

''The general evidence is that there was not massive exposure in Vietnam,'' he
said. ''Nobody is saying that nobody was exposed. But the kind of massive
exposure of great concern to all Vietnam veterans does not seem to have
occurred.'' The panel's advice to abort the study is expected to be influential
as the Administration makes a final decision, perhaps at the level of the
Domestic Policy Council, on its position.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words




International    A2-9



The U.S. protested Iraq's attacks on Iranian targets, State Department officials
said. But Iraq's Ambassador to the United States said that Iraq would continue
its attacks.    Page A1



Iranian Revolutionary Guards fired on a Kuwaiti freighter with machine guns,
apparently in response to Iraq's attacks on oil installations on land and in the
Persian Gulf.    A6



Seoul's two main political parties agreed on the outline of a new constitution,
clearing the way for the first direct elections there in 16 years. But the
accord did not dissolve the mistrust between the two sides.    A1



In the Philippines, cadets issued a manifesto supporting the soldiers who
mutineed against President Corazon C. Aquino. The move came amid signs of
support within the military for last week's mutiny.    A1

The Philippine financial markets were thrown into confusion when they reopened
for the first time after a military rebellion Friday. Economic growth, everyone
agrees, is crucial to the country's political stability.    A8



Five South African miners died and 42 were missing after an elevator with scores
of men plunged to the bot-tom of a 4,600-foot gold-mine shaft. Five miners were
rescued. The accident was apparently caused by an explosion, an official said.
    A9



A Thai Airways jet plunged into the sea, and officials said they believed all 83
people aboard were killed. The plane, which was on a domestic flight, carried
two Americans.    A8



Britain's Social Democratic Party has split apart in a fight over its future,
six years after its founding as a vehicle for a new style of coalition politics.

    A3



Polish police break up Solidarity demonstration

    A3



Soviet arms concession is hinted

    A3



Tokyo journal

    A4



The secret ways of a Saudi prince

    A6



News analysis: South African mine strike

    A9



National    A10-14, B7



Hemophiliacs infected with AIDS pose no exceptional risk of transmitting the
disease to others through minor cuts and are no more likely than other people to
bleed profusely from superficial cuts, experts on the blood disorder said.    A1



A study on Agent Orange's effects on ground soldiers in Vietnam cannot proceed,
Federal scientists have concluded, because they are unable to find enough
soldiers who were exposed to significant levels of the herbicide.    A1



Catholics and Jews faced key issues as leaders met at the Vatican to discuss the
pope's audience with Kurt Waldheim, the Holocaust and the diplomatic status of
Israel.    A1



A group of surrogate mothers said that they wanted their babies returned and
called on the Congress and state governments to outlaw the practice. The women,
called the practice ''an institutionalized form of slavery.''    A13

Ford Motor Company is the target, rather than General Motors Corporation, for a
strike by the United Automobile Workers. The strike would be called if
negotiations for a new contract fail.    A10



The A.C.L.U. has joined the effort to defeat the nomination of Judge Robert H.
Bork to the Supreme Court. The move reflects a change in the group's policy
against involvement in judicial confirmation battles.    A10



While George Bush collects funds nationwide, the other Presidential hopefuls
must still rely on their home states and past supporters; only the Vice
President has a well-developed financial network so far.    A12



The five fastest-growing counties in the nation are apparently in Alaska and
Florida, with one Alaska county more than doubling its population since the 1980
national census, the Census Bureau reported.    A12



Carmel-by-the-Sea journal

    A10



U.S. challenges special counsel law

    A10



Six deaths linked to fear of shame

    A11



A self-immolation in Boston

    A11



Washington Talk    A14

Of statistics and politics

The Constitution's 87-hour party

Regional    B1-4



Teacher salaries will rise in New York City. Starting pay will increase to
$25,000 and senior teachers will earn $50,000 under a new contract, the Board of
Education and the United Federation of Teachers announced.

    A1



Mayor Koch received support for New York City's new policy of hospitalizing
homeless people involuntarily who appear unable to care for themselves. He was
speaking at the American Psychological Association's convention.    A1



Efforts to relocate a steel sculpture from Federal Plaza in Manhattan do not
violate the artist's constitutional rights, a Federal judge ruled as he
dismissed the artist's lawsuit.    B1



Century Association members favor admitting women, a straw poll shows. More than
70 percent of the members of the all-male club voted to support the change if a
city law forbidding discrimination is upheld.    B1



In the Biaggi-Esposito bribery trial, Representative Mario Biaggi was portrayed
as a Congressman who allowed himself to be corrupted by Meade H. Esposito. But
defense lawyers scoffed at the prosecutor's assertions.    B3

The daughter of a murder victim was arraigned in Connecticut on charges of
conspiracy and accessory to commit her mother's murder. The daughter's boyfriend
was charged with the murder last month.    B2



A storefront church has fed the poor every Wednesday afternoon for the last two
years from a sliver of a kitchen run by Emma Blake. In the beginning, she paid
for almost everything herself.    B1



A firefighter chased a van that had knocked down a fellow firefighter and sped
off. Firefighter Lawrence Brown, at the wheel of a ladder truck, caught up with
the van and held the driver until the police arrived.    B3



Accord set on building of schools

    B1



Woman dies in subway accident

    B2



Koch says he'll press warehousing ban

    B3



Ban on cyclists put off

    B3



Goetz judge nominated for Supreme Court

    B3


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SIX DEATHS LINKED TO FEAR OF SHAME

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 31


The authorities investigating a murder-suicide in which six people were killed
said a fear of lost honor may have driven a Vietnamese immigrant to shoot his
relatives, who had sponsored his entry into the United States.

Five people were killed before 23-year-old Minh Le committed suicide Sunday
afternoon with a semiautomatic weapon. Two people were critically injured. All
but one of the victims was related to Mr. Le.

A police spokesman, John Gillespie, said investigators had determined that the
shooting had followed a dispute over money.

''It was an issue of him using money from his aunt's account without that aunt's
authority,'' Mr. Gillespie said. A survivor of the attack, David Huynh, said Mr.
Le was believed to have stolen $1,800 from Mr. Huynh's mother's bank account.

Confronted by the Family

''He'd been confronted by the family on it, so he called the family together to
discuss the problem, at which point he drew a gun and started shooting,'' Mr.
Gillespie said.

Mr. Le apparently feared the confrontation with his relatives and their threats
to turn him in to police would result in a loss of honor, said Mr. Gillespie. He
said that Mr. Le had no criminal record.

''In Vietnamese culture, they call it loss of face,'' he said. ''Our
investigation is going in that direction. We may never know exactly what
happened.''

Investigators trying to learn more about Mr. Le wondered how he managed on his
hotel maintenance worker's salary to travel in recent months from Boston to New
York, Salt Lake City and Ottawa.

Had a Special Permit

Mr. Le, who came to the United States from Vietnam about four years ago, had a
special gun permit from the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety, according
to another police spokesman, Jack Kervin. Mr. Kervin said that Mr. Le's purchase
of the Israeli-made Uzi semiautomatic weapon was legal. A loaded .22-caliber
rifle also was found near the scene.

Hamilton Perkins, a Public Safety Department firearms specialist, said aliens
can apply for special permits by providing the state with basic information
about their jobs, entry into the United States and physical characteristics.
Aliens do not have to specify why they make weapons applications, Mr. Perkins
said.

Mr. Le's victims were his 52-year-old uncle, Duc Huynh; a 48-year-old aunt, Xuan
Le; two female cousins, Thau Huynh, 23, and Tru Vo, 26, and 24-year-old Mei
Geir, who David Huynh said was his girlfriend.

Two of the gunman's cousins, 19-year-old Tri Huynh and 3-year-old Phuong Huynh,
survived and were listed in critical but stable condition. Mr. Huynh was in
Boston City Hospital, and the girl was at New England Medical Center.

Tuan Tran, a Vietnamese interpreter who knew the Huynhs, said relatives
sponsored Mr. Le when he entered the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nguyen Van, who identified himself as a cousin of one of the
victims of the sniper (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 2, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Arms Protester Injured by a Munitions Train

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 439 words

DATELINE: CONCORD, Calif., Sept. 1


A Vietnam veteran kneeling on a track in an effort to stop a munitions train
outside the United States Naval Weapons Station here was critically injured
today when the train struck him.

The 47-year-old veteran, S. Brian Willson of San Rafael, Calif., lost his right
leg below the knee and suffered injuries to his head and left foot, according to
a spokeswoman at John Muir Hospital.

Mr. Willson is a leader of the Veterans Peace Action Team, which has marched
through combat areas in Nicaragua to protest American support for rebels opposed
to the Sandinista Government.

Today he was leading about 25 demonstrators protesting what they said were arms
shipments to Central America from the weapons station in this San Francisco
suburb. He was kneeling on the track after a news conference called by the
protesters when the engine hit him. Among the onlookers was Mr. Willson's
14-year-old stepson, Gabriel Rauen.

Both the Navy and the Contra Costa County sheriff's office were investigating.

Capt. Gary Ford of the sheriff's office called the occurrence ''just a tragic
accident.'' Dan Tikalsky, a spokesman for the weapons center, said later that
the members of the train's crew had been interviewed and that they might be
tested for drug use.

Mr. Tikalsky said the train operator, a civilian employee, applied the brakes
when he realized that not all the protesters would be off the tracks in time at
a road intersection on county property adjacent to the weapons center.

The train was traveling about 5 miles an hour at the time, he said, adding that
he did not know exactly where the brakes had been applied on the straight
stretch of railway, where visibility is several hundred feet.

Mr. Tikalsky said the protesters had been brief earlier in the day by the
California Highway Patrol about ''the danger of trying to block a train and they
were told it could not stop in a short distance.''

The train, an engine and two cars, was headed from one part of the station to
another, crossing a road. Mr. Willson and four other demonstrators had stretched
a banner across the tracks.

''As it got to the road, the train actually seemed to accelerate,'' said John
Skerce, one of the protesters. However, other witnesses said the train was
traveling at a steady speed that the crew had applied the brakes after seeing
that Mr. Willson was not moving.

The two demonstrators nearest Willson managed to jump clear of the train.

Mr. Willson was an Air Force lieutenant and served as an intelligence officer in
Vietnam from 1966 to 1970, according to a biographical sketch he has on file at
the Mount Diablo Peace Center here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words




International    A3-12



A U.N. Persian Gulf peace mission will begin next week, senior Secretariat
officials said. They said the five permanent members of the Security Council
backed the mission by Secretary General Javier Perez de Cueller.    Page A1



Iraqi planes and Iranian warships hit seven ships in 24 hours in the Persian
Gulf in the most concentrated assault on shipping since the Iran-Iraq war began
in 1980, reports from the region said.    A8



Mathias Rust flew to Moscow to talk to Mikhail S. Gorbachev about peace, the
West German youth told a Soviet court. He flew a light plane unchallenged across
hundreds of miles to land near Red Square.    A1



Central Asian steppes shook as 30 tons of high explosives was set off in an
unusual experiment to test whether American and Soviet scientists, up to 400
miles away, could detect relatively small blasts.    A3

Big losses from speculation in the Japanese bond market were announced by Tateho
Chemical Industries of Japan. The news sent a tremor through financial markets
around the world.    D1



The blindness of poor farmers is coming under control in Burkina Faso.Farmers in
the remote West African country no longer accept as inevitable middle-age
blindness caused by microscopic parasites carried by riverbed flies.    A1



Leaders of 41 French-speaking lands began a meeting in Quebec that was the focus
of angry human rights demonstrations by groups from Burundi, Somalia, Cambodia
and Vietnam who now live in Canada.    A12



Moscow is honoring Marc Chagall with an elaborate show containing more than 250
of his works at the Pushkin Museum on the centenary of the artist's birth after
decades of neglecting him.    A1

Hyundai workers resume strike

    A3



Maputo journal

    A4



Reporter's notebook

    A8



Ugandan leader accused of human rights violations

    A12



National    A16-24, B8



Flight delay data will be available in airline ticket offices and travel
agencies soon under a ruling made by the Department of Transportation. It denied
acting to avert Congressional action.    A1



Mayor Marion Barry Jr. is under fire in Washington. At least 11 city officials
have been convicted of wrongdoing, and a dozen or so other officials have been
dismissed or have resigned amid talk of misconduct.    A1



Presidential aspirants' unpaid bills have prompted most vendors in Iowa to
demand cash or credit card payments in advance of performing services for the
politicians, or large deposits, at the very least.    A1



Rightists hail Robert Bork as an activist and predict that his joining the
Supreme Court would bring about the reversal of many major rulings on such
issues as abortion, school prayer and pornography.    A16

A minister whose wife was choked nearly to death gave up his Methodist church
credentials. The minister, the Rev. Walker L. Railey of Dallas, has refused to
cooperate with the police in the investigation.    A16



Children have difficulty in schools mainly because of isolation and lack of
supervision after classes, according to most teachers and many parents surveyed.

    A19



Auto contract talks are progressing in efforts to replace a pact that expires
Sept. 14, according to representatives of the United Automobile Workers and the
Ford Motor Company.    A22



Cray Research Inc. is canceling a development project for a next-generation
supercomputer. Cray also said unexpectedly that Steve Chen, the project's
director, was resigning to take the project elsewhere.    D1



An experiment involving bacteria that had been genetically engineered violated
Federal regulations and Dr. Gary Strobel, who conducted the test, should be
reprimanded, a Montana State University panel said.    A17

Boston journal: Students are pouring into the city early as usual. For the
Boston economy, the beginning of fall semester means a busy season at banks,
restaurants, hotels and truck-rental companies.    A16



New breed of top sergeants

    A16



Firefighters from around nation help fight blazes in West

    A20



Pentagon shifts payday

    A21



Protesters return to arms station

    A22



Washington Talk    A24



New rules of retirement in the Foreign Service...
...and new careers to consider

Regional    B1-7, B24



Some patients have to wait days to be admitted to hospitals in New York City,
with patients waiting in emergency rooms strapped to stretchers and prisoners
handcuffed to wheelchairs, state mental-health officials said.    A1

A fireworks expert was sentenced to seven years in prison for his role in the
bombing of abortion clinics in New York City. The defendant, Dennis J. Malvasi,
said he would not take part in such bombings again.    B1



A police captain was arrested on charges of falsifying financial statements to
qualify for an apartment in a city-financed Queens housing development. The
captain is 35-year-old Charles W. Senzel.    B2



A youth was charged with murder in the fatal stabbing of a high school football
star and honor student, David Woods, during a dispute over a girl's complaint of
having been slapped. The suspect is Daniel Chaves, 16 years old.    B1



To preserve Times Square tradition, the City Planning Commission approved a rule
that developers set aside for entertainment uses 5 percent of the floor space in
new or enlarged buildings.    B1

New York City gardners are aided by the Horticultural Society, which will honor
them at its seventh annual public harvest festival on the weekend of Sept. 12
and 13 at 128 West 58th Street in Manhattan.    C1



Move to make ''dry'' town ''damp''

    B1



Queens heliport plans announced

    B2



Wedtech talks tied to Biaggi

    B3



AIDS Panel says it shuns politics

    B3



Police test restraint for suspects

    B4



Schools' treatment of homeless children is assailed

    B5



Resorts International to sell land

    B24


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Maputo Journal;
Now a Little Weary of Marxism's Heroic Slogans

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: MAPUTO, Mozambique, Aug. 29


The streets of this African capital are named after Mao, Marx, Ho Chi Minh and
other revolutionary heroes, and there are slogans on peeling stucco walls
proclaiming the triumphs of the revolution and the role of the ruling party
here, Frelimo, as the vanguard.

And yet the feeling in Maputo these days is that these various artifacts are
only a small and possibly even obsolescent part of the picture in a country
where officials are talking of their earlier adherence to a kind of third-world
Marxism as a mistake.

Mozambique, a fertile, tropical land laced with broad, muddy rivers, and
caressed by the sparkling Indian Ocean, is the kind of place that defies easy
categories, even though a few things are certain. Among them is that since the
country gained independence from Portugal 12 years ago, it has been far from a
success. It is devastated by civil war. Through donations of thousands of tons
of food this year, mass starvation has probably been averted. The per capita
income is under $130. The life expectancy at birth is just over 43. By most
standards, Mozambique is less well off than it was when Frelimo, full of
idealism and ideology, got independence from Portugal.

''At the time of independence, Mozambique functioned quite well,'' an official
here said. ''The economy worked. There was transportation, factories, mining.
The stores were full of goods. Now there is practically nothing left.''

'We Were Very Young'

''When we suddenly got power, we were very young,'' he went on. ''None of us had
ever run a country before. We were never really in control of the entire
territory.''

Since the death in an airplane crash last year of Samora Machel, the country's
founding President, major changes have been noted.

Chief among them has been a shift in foreign policy toward what Western
diplomats here characterize as a genuine sort of nonalignment, replacing the
one-sided reliance on the Soviet Union.

''We have been labeled pro-Soviet,'' Mario Da Graca Machungo, the Prime
Minister, said in an interview. ''What we say is that we are Mozambican, and we
don't want to be a tool in the East-West confrontation.'' Mr. Machungo denied
that Mozambican policy itself had changed, contending that improved relations
with the West, including the United States, are a result of an acceptance of the
country's nonalignment.

Things Are Opening Up

Nonetheless, Mozambique has opened itself up to the West as rarely before,
inviting American, European and even South African businessmen to discuss deals.
It has, for the first time, accepted austerity measures proposed by the
International Monetary Fund.

The country now seems full of mixed and even contradictory elements; some were
inspired clearly during the period of Soviet tutelage, others by newer
influences.

There are, for example, large numbers of Soviet, Cuban, and East German military
advisers; but there are British military advisers here as well, along with
Zimbabwean and Tanzanian soldiers guarding strategic places against attacks of
the anti-Government rebels, known as Renamo.

Reflecting the Soviet model, Maputo has a hard currency shop, where foreigners,
using dollars or South African rands, can buy imported goods. But, unlike
Moscow's, where ordinary Russians are barred, this establishment in Maputo is
full of Mozambicans, generally spending money they or their relatives have
earned as workers in South Africa.

The Guides Are Permissive

Mozambique is a place of travel restrictions and ''minders,''
Government-appointed guides who accompany foreign visitors practically any place
they go outside of Maputo itself. But little if any effort seems to be made by
the ''minders'' to bar visitors from inquiring about conditions in the country
or seeing its most troubled areas.

In contrast with many more orthodox Marxist countries, there appear to be no
restrictions here on contacts between foreigners and local people, who, in some
cases, are unhesitatingly outspoken. Maputo, despite its agreeably tree-lined
streets and spreading Southern European-style villas, exhibits an Eastern
European drabness. The stores are badly supplied. Many of them are shuttered.
There are no taxis. Buses are rare and crowded, and many people spend much of
their time walking. There are chronic shortages of such daily essentials as
soap. Cars, abandoned for lack of spare parts, or the unavailability of
gasoline, litter the streets.

At the same time, there has been a recovery of the free market, as Government
price controls have been relaxed and successive devaluations have given the
local money real value.

''We didn't take into account that there are economic laws,'' Mr. Machungo said,
talking about what are referred to as past ''mistakes'' by Government officials.
''We simply thought that what we desired would become concrete results.''

Plenty of Fresh Fish

Residents of this city say that several months ago it was virtually impossible
to buy fresh fish, since the fishermen saw no point in selling their catches at
low prices for a worthless currency.

The central market of Maputo these days is filled with counter after counter of
fresh fish and shrimp, as well as ample supplies of fruit, vegetables and
numerous handicrafts.

''There has been an influx of goods into the stores,'' a long-term foreign
resident said. ''Prices are too high for the average person, but at least the
people have started window shopping again. It's good to know what you will be
able to buy once you have money.''

What everybody refers to as the country's major problem is ''the war,'' the
intense battle between the Government's forces and Renamo, which has sabotaged
large parts of the economy and made much of the countryside unsafe for travel,
even for convoys carrying relief grain to people displaced by the fighting.

''If it weren't for the war,'' an official said, ''we could be an ordinary
country within just a few months, a country without any need of foreign aid.
There's lots of good earth to cultivate; there are lots of rivers; there are
coal mines and titanium. But the war imposes a terrible difficulty.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mozambicans at Maputo's central market, which has been
uncharacteristically filled with fresh food lately (NYT/Richard Bernstein)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

41 French-Speaking Nations Confer

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: QUEBEC, Sept. 2


The leaders of 41 French-speaking nations and territories began a summit meeting
here today to the accompaniment of angry human-rights demonstrations.

The group, the French-speaking world's counterpart to the Commonwealth, was
meeting for only the second time at the level of government leaders, after an
initial conference in Paris 18 months ago. The hope is to turn the organization
into a powerful forum for fostering economic and technical aid, as well for
promoting French language and culture, in countries with a combined population
of about 300 million.

But arrangements here underlined the still tenuous nature of the organization.
Major political issues that divide the members - for example, the occupation of
Cambodia by Vietnam, which is represented here by its vice premier, Nguyen Huu
Tho - have been kept from the agenda. So too has any discussion of human-rights
abuses, which are said to be widespread in many member countries, particularly
in Africa.

As the meeting opened to speeches by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and by
President Francois Mitterrand, among others, several hundred protesters made
their feelings known on a sidewalk outside. Groups from Burundi, Somalia,
Cambodia and Vietnam, most of them composed of people now living in Canada, kept
up a steady barrage of cries that rose to crescendos as motorcades arrived and
departed.

Suppressed Tension

Mr. Tho, the Vietnamese vice premier, looked uneasy as security men led him down
a red carpet to his car, barely 50 feet from a wall of Cambodian and Vietnamese
demonstrators venting their anger through bullhorns. Another target of the
protests was the Burundi president, Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, who heads an
administration accused by its opponents of complicity in a massacre 13 years ago
of as many as 300,000 members of the Hutu tribe.

Even Canada and France, nations at the hub of the organization, were meeting in
an atmosphere of suppressed tension. Although the differences that the two
countries had over Quebec for the last 20 years have been largely resolved,
there are new strains because of French concern that Canada intends to challenge
French commercial primacy in former French colonies in Africa and Asia.

The atmosphere was not helped when the French Prime Minister, Jacques Chirac,
told an interviewer on the eve of the summit meeting that Canada had de Gaulle
to thank, at least in part, for its success in overcoming the Quebec problem.
When de Gaulle visited Canada as the French President in 1967, he set off a
furor by pronouncing the rallying cry of Quebec separatism - ''Vive le Quebec
libre!'' - from the balcony of Montreal City Hall.

''I think this gave to Quebec a real push, and a good one,'' Mr. Chirac told the
English-language radio network of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.
''Today, what do you see? No more problems.''

Amnesty International Involved

If the remark was intended as a backhanded compliment to Mr. Mulroney, a native
Quebecer who recently signed a constitutional accord with the province, it was
judged by many Canadians, including Quebecers, to be a clumsy one. Even now,
with separatism seemingly receding as a threat, issues that have been at the
heart of the tensions here for two decades, including Quebec's role in
international affairs and its attempts to make French the province's only
official language, remain sensitive affairs.

But Mr. Chirac's remarks were a relatively minor worry for Mr. Mulroney beside
his concern for the conference to go smoothly, without any major disruption over
human rights. The issue received major attention here last week when Amnesty
International, the human-rights group, issued a report alleging that two-thirds
of the nations attending the summit were guilty of human-rights violations.

The report cited instances of torture, summary execution, and other forms of
abuse of prisoners. Among the 30 nations indicted by the document were Benin,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Laos, Lebanon, Mali, Niger,
Togo, Vietnam and Zaire. The presidents of three of the countries, Mobutu Sese
Seko of Zaire, Mathieu Kerekou of Benin and Amin Gemayel of Lebanon, were among
the seven speakers invited to address the summit at its opening session.

Canadian officials defended the decision to avoid discussion of the allegations,
at least in the formal sessions. In his speech, Mr. Mulroney spoke of the
''fragility'' of the organization, and a similar point was made by Foreign
Minister Joe Clark at a news conference on Tuesday. ''I don't think there was a
realistic prospect of our finding agreement on some of the human rights
questions,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Francois Mitterrand of France, talking with Premier
Robert Bourassa of Quebec before start of opening ceremonies for summit meeting
yesterday in Quebec (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

New Breed of Sergeants: Less Spit, More Polish

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: FORT BLISS, Tex.


In a far corner of this sprawling post, the new Sergeants Major Academy will
open in November, a symbol of a resurgence in the authority and responsibility
of the noncommissioned officer corps in the Army.

Not only here, but in the Marine Corps, Navy and Air Force as well, senior
sergeants and chief petty officers are experiencing a revival in trust after
years of diminished credibility.

Gone are the days when the noncommissioned officer was ''a hard-drinking,
hard-loving, hard-fighting man,'' said Lieut. Col. Paul Treolo Jr., a battalion
commander at Fort Sill, Okla., who was an enlisted man for four years in the
early 1960's.

''But that is not the kind of soldier we want in the Army today,'' he said. ''We
want a soldier who is technically competent, physically fit and morally
straight.''

In the armed forces, officers decide what should be done. But when the system
works properly, deciding how things should be done and by whom is the
responsibility of senior noncommissioned officers: battalion sergeants major and
company first sergeants in the Army and Marine Corps, master chiefs and leading
petty officers in the Navy, and flight line and maintenance shop supervisors in
the Air Force.

Eroded Status in Vietnam War

In peacetime they are the foremen who are critical to the success of a unit's
operations. In wartime the way they have trained junior sergeants and petty
officers as well as the troops will determine whether they win or lose, and
perhaps whether they survive.

The authority of noncommissioned officers, known by their colleagues as
N.C.O.'s, was eroded in the Vietnam War, where guerrilla combat placed much
responsibility on junior officers instead of senior sergeants. When the
volunteer force was started in 1973, many experienced noncommissioned officers
departed because of low pay, racial strife and the necessity of working with
poorly qualified recruits.

Some of those recruits are middle-ranking noncommissioned officers today.

Lieut. Col. A.J. Bacevich, a battalion commander at Fort Bliss, said: ''While
we've got something of a quality problem in the middle ranks, there are a lot of
good sergeants. But part of the problem is the officers' fault for not having
fixed the N.C.O. problem.''

In the early 1980's, however, the volunteer force began to attract qualified
yougn men and women as the memories of Vietnam faded and the Reagan
Administration and Congress improved pay and benefits. Good noncommissioned
officers began to stay and incompetents were weeded out.

The military educational system for noncommissioned officers has grown along
with the volunteer force. ''It's a calculated system of development,'' said
Command Sgt. Maj. Nat L. Brown of a training battalion here. ''Before, we just
picked people and put them in there.''

Emphasis on Education

Command Sgt. Maj. Larry J. Hampton of the academy here said the school was not
only expanding enrollment and curriculum in its new $18 million home but was
also setting standards for all training of noncommissioned officers in the Army.

Civilian education is also emphasized in each service. Many senior
noncommissioned officers have taken two years of college at night, with some
earning B.A. degrees. On a recent master sergeant's list of 100 promotions at
Dover Air Force Base, only one had fewer than two years of college study.

Sergeant Hampton said that when the volunteer force began in 1973, the Army had
leadership schools to train junior soliders to be sergeants and the Sergeants
Major Academy for the top people, and nothing in-between.

Now there is a step-by-step system, beginning with leadership courses for young
soldiers and followed by a basic noncommissioned officers' course to train
leaders of squads of 11 soldiers or commanders of tanks with a crew of four.

Later comes an advanced noncommissioned officers' course to teach sergeants to
be platoon sergeants responsible for 40 soldiers and a first sergeants' course
for the top sergeant in a company of 150 soldiers. More recently, courses for
intelligence and operations sergeants, who assist staff officers, have been
added.

At the Sergeants Major Academy, a national security course with guest speakers
and seminars is among the most popular.

In all the services, one after another of the top sergeants and chief petty
officers said that young people today did not accept traditional blind,
unthinking obedience, Command Sgt. Maj. Ira J. Royal Sr., the senior sergeant in
a brigade of 3,000 soldiers at Fort Sill, said, ''Today, if you tell a soldier
to do something, he needs to know why. I didn't ask when I was a private 27
years ago.''

At Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, Chief Master Sgt. Paul R. Smith agreed:
''It's not 'do as I say because I say so' anymore. If they have an idea, I want
to hear it.''

But Master Chief Petty Officer Nathaniel Lawrence in San Diego is not so sure.
''Before, there was authority aboard ship,'' he said. ''Today, some of the young
people have their own position on what they want to do. They question you about
it.''

In any case, senior sergeants must lead young volunteers by example. ''Many men
come to us from broken families,'' said Lieut. Col. Frank Libutti, a Marine
reconnaissance battalion commander at Camp Pendleton. ''Their role models are
staff N.C.O.'s.'' Sgt. Maj. William H. Head Jr, the top sergeant in another
battalion, noted that many young marines had not been taught how to keep a
checkbook or to do other everyday chores. ''The staff N.C.O.,'' he sighed, ''has
to be mother, father, chaplain and counselor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Command Sgt. Maj. Ira J. Royal Sr. (NYT/Paul Bearce); Photo of
Chief Master Sgt. Paul R. Smith, supervising crew working on cargo plane's
engine (NYT/Marty Katz)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Protesters, Angered by Injury, Return to Arms Site

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 2


Protesters today returned to a naval weapons transfer point where a train
severed the leg of an antiwar demonstrator Tuesday. Two trains scheduled to
leave the station were halted as a result of the renewed demonstrations,
according to protest leaders, although this could not be confirmed
independently.

The Contra Costa County Sheriff's Department is investigating to determine
whether criminal charges should be brought against the civilian crew of the
train that struck the demonstrator at the weapons station, in nearby Concord.

The injured man, S. Brian Willson of San Rafael, Calif., a 46-year-old Vietnam
veteran, remains in serious condition at John Muir Hospital in Walnut Creek,
about 30 miles east of here, after eight hours of surgery to amputate part of
his left leg, which was mangled when he was struck by the train. The train also
severed his right leg below the knee and inflicted severe head injuries.

Three Crewmen Unidentified

The weapons station refused today to identify the three members of the crew
operating the train, or to provide any information about them other than to say
they were part of a regular contingent of workers who operate the trains that
leave the base every day.

Some 50 protesters at the site today, including Daniel Ellsberg and Alice
Walker, denounced the Navy for failing to stop the train that hit Mr. Willson.

Central America at Issue

Mr. Willson, a longtime peace activist, was among a group of approximately 25
people who were demonstrating at the weapons station against what they said were
the shipment of arms from there to Central America.

After standing across the tracks to block the train, three demonstrators sat
down on the tracks in front of the oncoming engine. Mr. Willson was struck when
the train failed to stop and he was unable to move out of the way in time. As a
horrified group including Mr. Willson's wife, Holly Rauen, and stepson, Gabriel,
looked on, he was dragged approximately 25 feet.

Capt. Russell Pitkin of the Sheriff's Department said the department had been
given primary investigative responsibility because the train was traveling on
county property, from one part of the base to another, when the incident
occurred.

Protests have been going on at the weapons station since June 10, when a group
of demonstrators was arrested after they had caused a train to stop. The
station, which is a shipment facility for weapons to United States allies in the
Pacific, was also the site of frequent antiwar demonstrations during the Vietnam
War.

Mr. Willson is a member of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, whose post in Santa
Cruz said he served as an Air Force intelligence officer in Vietnam in 1969 and
was honorably discharged at the rank of second lieutenant that year, after three
years in the service.

He was one of four veterans who fasted for 47 days on the steps of the Capitol
in Washington last year to protest United States policy in Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of S. Brian Willson and his wife, Holly Rauen, speaking at a news
conference at a protest Tuesday on the railroad tracks at the United States
Naval Weapons Station in Concord, Calif (NYT/The Oakland Tribune/Marie Felde)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: THE FOREIGN SERVICE;
NEW RULES ON RETIREMENT. . . AND NEW CAREERS TO CONTEMPLATE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 2


Not all diplomats are going to wait 20 years to see if they will be forced to
retire from the Foreign Service. Some choose to leave early, having seen it
coming. Others elect to leave at mid-career for a range of other reasons.
Following is a sampling of second careers:


A Foreign Service officer for 21 years as a specialist in Middle Eastern
affairs, Wilbur Wright saw early retirement in his future.

''It was down the road,'' he said. ''I was going to have to have two promotions
in five years, and that rarely happens.''

So, three years ago Mr. Wright, now 54 years old, went into business importing
and distributing a children's educational construction set called Create-It that
is sold by more than 500 outlets, including Bloomingdale's, F.A.O. Schwarz and
Hammacher Schlemmer. This month his company is incorporating under a new name,
The Wright Toys, with four new products, including a science kit and a toy for
teaching fractions.

''One of the problems bureaucrats face going into business,'' Mr. Wright said,
''is that we don't really watch the tremendous cost of graphics and packaging
material - there is a lot to learn.''

As for profits, he declared with a grin: ''I'm trying to get back up to zero.
We're making money but only incrementally.''


For Thor Kuniholm, this is the time of life to give the left side of his brain a
rest and the right side a workout.

''The left side of the brain is objective, factual, analytical; the right-hand
side more interested in holistic experiences that see things in a different
way,'' Mr. Kuniholm said.

Mr. Kuniholm, a 27-year Foreign Service officer who served in Vietnam during the
Tet offensive, in Damascus at the time of the 1967 six-day war and in Bamako,
Mali, as deputy chief of mission at the height of a drought, has enrolled at the
Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, where for the next two years he will be a
full-time student of drawing, painting and sculpture.

It is a step that he hopes will lead to a new career in the arts.

''I had a very happy career in the Foreign Service, but I feel I've done the
course,'' he explained as he packed household goods for a move to Philadelphia.
''Years ago when we had three young toddlers, no money and no place to go, I
used to do a lot of drawing, but then I sort of tucked it away.''

Five years ago Mr. Kuniholm began to draw again and ''it was like a light coming
on.''


Last December Frank Seidner and his wife, Lee, opened Seidner Gallery of art and
antiques, just off Dupont Circle in Washington. A five-year assignment in
Heidelberg, West Germany, in which they spent their holiday weekends poking
about at markets and antique fairs had whetted the Seidners' appetite for
Renaissance treasures and the furniture and decorative objects of the 17th and
18th centuries.

So after 20 years of concerning himself with the economic and political policies
of western Europe, Mr. Seidner is a Washington antiques dealer.

''All of my life I've worked in an office situation,'' he said as he sat in the
gallery surrounded by Flemish desks, Jacobean chests and Louis XIII chairs. ''I
love the idea that I can do it the way I want, keep my own hours. I don't have
to get a clearance, check in with anyone - the only person I have to argue with
is Lee.''


Susan Klingaman, who has a master's degree in international relations and speaks
German, Danish, French and Indonesian, is returning to school.

After 25 years in the Foreign Service she has enrolled this fall at George Mason
University to pursue a master's degree in linguistics so that she may teach
English as a second language at the university level.

''I've always wanted to teach,'' she said. ''I've enjoyed diplomatic life
immensely, but I was tired of moving around.'

Indeed, her new career has already begun. This summer she has been teaching
English as a volunteer to a small class of refugees and immigrants at a refugee
center in Arlington, Va.

''In a way, it's just a shift in careers,'' she mused, ''for I'm really putting
together all the things - language, different cultures - that I love.''


Last Friday Carl Cunningham wound up his job as an economics officer and
management analyist at the State Department after 24 years of service. On Monday
he began a new job as manager of the Neurology Center of Fairfax, Va.

''They had gotten to the size where they needed sophisticated managment
techniques,'' said Mr. Cunningham, who has an M.B.A. from Harvard.

''For a long time I've thought there would be nothing more wonderful than a
second career,'' he said. ''This will be much more concrete, more hands-on, than
the Foreign Service, where there is a lot of policy analysis, gathering of data,
writing it up and sending it off. But you don't have a lot of opportunity to
make something happen; a sense of 'Yes, I did this.'

''I feel a read need to take an organization and move it forward in a strategic
sense, pushing, shoving, making something different than it was.''


These days William Newlin, a 25-year veteran of the Foreign Service, pulls out a
business card that reads: ''William V.P. Newlin, nature writer.''

''All your life in the Foreign Service you identify yourself when you go abroad
by handing out your card,'' Mr. Newlin wryly explained. ''Your psyche is tied up
in that card. Suddenly you are no longer an officer and you no longer have a
card. So I went out and had a card printed up.''

Mr. Newlin, nature writer, is at work on a book on the lakes of Mount Desert
Island, Me., where he maintains a second home.

The title? ''Ponds in Paradise.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo shows some of those discovering a new life after the Foreign
Service are: Frank Seidner, an antiques dealer; Wilbur Wright, a toy importer,
and Susan Klingaman, an English teacher (NYT/George Thames)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Bork On Free Speech

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS


In large areas of constitutional law, Judge Robert Bork is a committed radical.
He wants to tear up settled understandings of the Constitution, root and branch.

His approach to freedom of speech is a telling example. The willingness to let
people express ideas that a majority find offensive, even dangerous, is a
distinctive feature of American society: one of its glories, some would say.
Judge Bork disagrees with the legal tradition.

In law, our free speech doctrine traces back to dissenting opinions of Justices
Holmes and Brandeis starting in 1919. The majority naturally want to suppress
opposing views, they said, but it is wiser to let ideas be tested in the
marketplace.

''That at any rate is the theory of our Constitution,'' Holmes wrote. ''It is an
experiment, as all life is an experiment. . . .

''While that experiment is part of our system I think that we should be
eternally vigilant against attempts to check the expression of opinions that we
loathe and believe to be fraught with death, unless they so imminently threaten
immediate interference with the lawful and pressing purposes of the law that an
immediate check is required to save the country.''

The Holmes-Brandeis view in time became the majority, then the virtually
unanimous view on the Supreme Court. In 1974, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. spoke
of what he called ''the common ground.''

''Under the First Amendment,'' Justice Powell said, ''there is no such thing as
a false idea. However pernicious an idea may seem, we depend for its correction
not on the conscience of judges and juries but on the competition of other
ideas.''

Judge Bork has been nominated to replace Justice Powell on the Court. And his
view is very different indeed. In writings and speeches over the last 16 years,
Judge Bork has frontally attacked the Holmes-Brandeis philosophy of free speech.
Speech that advocates either ''forcible overthrow of the Government'' or
''violation of law,'' he said, ''must be excluded'' from the protection of the
First Amendment. He charged Justice Holmes with ''terrifying frivolity'' in his
rhetoric.

The striking thing about Judge Bork's thoughts on free speech is their abstract
and absolutist character. He writes as if attempts to punish ''subversive''
speech mostly concerned massive, dangerous advocacy of dictatorship. But that is
not so.

Most of the free speech cases decided by the courts over the decades have
involved fringe groups and actions that threatened no one. The 1919 case that
evoked Holmes's great dissent, Abrams v. United States, itself involved a few
anarchists who published what Holmes called ''puny'' leaflets denouncing U.S.
intervention in revolutionary Russia. For that they were sentenced to 20 years
in prison.

Fear may bring repression where there is no danger. ''Men feared witches and
burnt women,'' Brandeis said. And repression of a few may numb the whole
atmosphere of freedom in the society. That hardly needs to be said in a country
that has gone through the 1920 Red Scare, the McCarthy years and other paranoid
episodes. It is the central point, but Judge Bork takes no account of it.

His argument that speech urging a ''violation of law'' deserves no
constitutional protection is equally divorced from the reality of American
history. That is what Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. did. He urged Southern blacks
to violate the unjust laws of segregation. They did, and they changed the
country. Can anyone seriously suggest that Dr. King could constitutionally have
been imprisoned for his speeches?

Judge Bork's deference to Presidential power also has worrying implications for
free speech. He emphasized the President's foreign affairs power in deciding,
for a majority of the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington, that the Government
could prohibit demonstrations within 500 feet of a foreign embassy - if the
demonstrators were critical of the foreign government: Nicaragua's in that case.
The Supreme Court has agreed to review the case, Finzer v. Barry.

''The constitutional right of free expression is powerful medicine in a society
as diverse and populous as ours. . . . To many, the immediate consequence of
this freedom may often appear to be only verbal tumult, discord and even
offensive utterance. [But it is] not a sign of weakness but of strength.''

Justice John Marshall Harlan, a great conservative on the Supreme Court, wrote
that in protecting an individual who used an offensive word to protest the
Vietnam War. Judge Bork has particularly criticized Justice Harlan's moving
opinion. He does not conceal his radical disagreement with the legal mainstream
of free speech in America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Abortion Foe Gets 7 Years For Bombings

BYLINE: By JESUS RANGEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 558 words


A 37-year-old fireworks expert was sentenced yesterday to seven years in prison
for his role in the bombing of abortion clinics in New York City.

In a two-hour hearing the man, Dennis J. Malvasi, said he would not take part in
such bombings again because of his loyalty to the Roman Catholic Church and to
John Cardinal O'Connor.

''The Cardinal is my shepherd,'' Mr. Malvasi told Judge Thomas P. Griesa in
Federal District Court in Manhattan. ''If he tells me I cannot, that's an order.
I cannot do it because that would get me in trouble with the Almighty.''

Mr. Malvasi, a former marine who served in Vietnam, turned himself in Feb. 24
after Cardinal O'Connor made a televised appeal to him to surrender.

Limit on Parole Specified

Under the sentence, Mr. Malvasi is to serve a minimum of four and a third to
five and a third years before being eligible for parole.

As part of an agreement with the Government, he pleaded guilty in June to
bombing one clinic in Manhattan and to an attempted bombing of a Queens clinic
and making a threatening telephone call concerning the first bomb.

Charges against him in two other bombings were dropped.

Judge Griesa asked if the defendant wished to say anything.

''I only have one question to ask,'' Mr. Malvasi said. ''Is abortion murder?''

''That under no circumstances is in my province to comment on,'' Judge Griesa
responded.

The judge later told Mr. Malvasi that many people strongly and sincerely opposed
abortion but that there were just as many who felt the other way. ''They do not
engage in violent acts with explosives,'' the judge said.

Later Judge Griesa said Cardinal O'Connor had ''respect for the laws of the
United States'' and asked whether Mr. Malvasi did also.

''What the Cardinal says is the word,'' Mr. Malvasi replied. ''If he says not to
do it, I cannot do it. That supersedes man's law. Whether it's right or wrong,
that's his problem.''

Throughout the proceedings Mr. Malvasi's lawyer, Roland Thau, described his
client as a man torn between patriotism, heroism, devotion to country and
opposition to abortion, which he equated with killing.

Defendant's Background Cited

One of 13 children, Mr. Malvasi was sent to a religious school in upstate New
York for 12 years, beginning when he was 2, Mr. Thau said.

He dropped out of school in the eighth grade. After paying a woman $20 to pose
as his mother, he enlisted in the Marines, where he ''learned to do destructive
things in the name of patriotism and devotion,'' Mr. Thau said.

''He learned to do it so well that when he was shipped back, he was miserable,''
Mr. Thau said. He added that life for the defendant was so ''painful, cruel and
sordid'' that he took refuge in religion after having turned to robbing minor
organized-crime figures to support himself.

Elliott B. Jacobson, the assistant United States attorney who prosecuted the
case, said Mr. Malvasi often bought small handguns for himself and other
''individuals with records'' and supported himself by committing robberies.

''God knows how many he has committed,'' Mr. Jacobson said.

Judge Griesa, who reported receiving many letters advocating a harsh sentence,
said he had considered several factors, including ''a clear effort and intent to
avoid killing or harming other people'' and Mr. Malvasi's strong religious
beliefs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Old Duel at French-Speaking Summit

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: QUEBEC, Sept. 3


In their efforts to stage a successful summit meeting here for 41
French-speaking nations and territories, the Canadian authorities have had to
resolve delicate domestic issues of their own.

In effect, Canada's national Government and the provincial government of Quebec
are co-hosts, and elaborate compromises have been made to avoid the squabbling
that has marred previous appearances of the two governments at international
gatherings.

France, traditionally jealous of its pre-eminence in the French-speaking world,
has a reputation as one of the most protocol-conscious of nations. But here, the
French have been surpassed by the elaborate negotiations among the Canadians,
for whom it is something of a triumph to have agreed to hold the summit meeting
here in the first place, given the long-standing suspicions between the
governments in Ottawa and Quebec City.

For much of the last 20 years, the two governments have feuded over
constitutional matters, including the right of Quebec to be represented by
missions in foreign capitals and to have its own delegations at international
meetings. The dispute reached new heights of bitterness when two Quebecers with
diametrically opposed political views, Pierre Elliott Trudeau and Rene Levesque,
a Quebec separatist, headed the two governments.

A Series of Compromises

Among other things, the differences delayed the establishment of the
French-speaking group, because Ottawa and Quebec could not agree on the terms
for their joint membership and other French-speaking nations were reluctant to
proceed without them. Only after Mr. Trudeau and Mr. Levesque retired, in 1984
and 1985 respectively, was a compromise reached.

The compromise proved brittle when the group, known in French as La Francophonie
and comprising nations as varied as Vanuatu and Vietnam, held its first summit
meeting in Paris last year. Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, the pragmatic
Quebecer who took over power in Ottawa from Mr. Trudeau, thought he had a
commitment from Robert Bourassa, the new Quebec premier, that Mr. Bourassa would
speak on international matters only with Mr. Mulroney's prior approval. But Mr.
Bourassa, a Harvard-educated economist, decided otherwise.

Mr. Mulroney complained publicly about being blind-sided, and warned that he
would not tolerate a recurrence. The result was a year of to-and-fro between the
two governments to insure that there were no rough spots at the current meeting,
for which the two governments have budgeted nearly $10 million.

One awkward compromise involved the participation here of the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police, the federal police force.

Mounties Enter the Fray

Initially, Quebec preferred to exclude the Mounties, who have long been
considered hostile to Quebec's nationalistic aspirations. The deal that was
worked out has had the scarlet-jacketed Mounties interspersed with the
olive-coated officers of the Quebec Provincial Police on ceremonial occasions.

Likewise, the two flags, the Canadian Maple Leaf and Quebec's Fleur-de-Lys, have
been carefully positioned to imply something like equality, and Mr. Bourassa and
Mr. Mulroney have alternated as chairmen of the sessions.

Mr. Levesque, the former Quebec premier whose push for independence from Canada
was defeated in a 1980 referendum, has watched the proceedings with amusement.

As for having ''les federaux'' playing such a prominent role in the Quebec
capital, he is nonchalant. ''Oh, I think that's normal, don't you?'' he
commented to one reporter.

Meanwhile, Mr. Bourassa, the current Quebec premier, has been having some fun of
his own.

After telling a news conference Wednesday of his proposal for tying
international debts to the world prices of raw materials, he was asked about
Quebec's position on a Palestinian state, one of the issues discussed here.

''As you know, Quebec only concerns itself with international relations,'' he
said with a smile. ''The Palestinians, that's a matter of foreign policy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Francois Mitterrand passing a demonstrator as he
left session of conference of French-speaking nations in Quebec (AP); Photo of
signs protesting Quebec's nationalist aspirations (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Cancer Deaths High for Some Veterans

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 3


The largest mortality study of Vietnam veterans yet conducted has found that
former Marine ground troops died of lung cancer and certain lymph cancers at a
significantly higher rate than marines who did not serve in the war, the
Government reported today.

The study, performed by the Veterans Administration, was not intended to
determine the cause of the higher cancer death rates and thus did not clarify
what role, if any, might have been played by the herbicide Agent Orange.

The study cited such other possible causes for the excess cancer among marines
with Vietnam service as anti-malaria drugs, diseases and statistical chance. No
similar increases in cancer deaths were found in Army troops who served in
Vietnam.

The V.A. researchers, in a random selection process, examined the death records
of more than 52,000 veterans who served in the Army or the Marine Corps from
1965 to 1973. Slightly less than half the group served in Vietnam; the rest
served elsewhere. The group accounted for about a third of all deaths among
veterans who served in Vietnam, thus providing a far greater statistical sweep
than any previous study of mortality among these veterans.

'Proportional Mortality' Study

The study dealt with ''proportional mortality,'' comparing the percentage of
veterans dying of specific causes among the group that served in Vietnam against
an expected percentage that was computed on the basis of death rates among
veterans who served elsewhere.

It found that marines in Vietnam had a 58 percent higher rate of death from lung
cancer, the most common form of cancer, than would be expected and a 110 percent
higher rate of death from non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, a category embracing several
types of rare cancers of the lymph system.

The finding that is expected to prove the most controversial is the excess in
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. At least two civilian studies have suggested a link
between these cancers and phenoxy herbicides, the family of chemicals that
includes the ingredients of Agent Orange. But other studies have linked the
lymphomas to arsenic compounds, which were used in other herbicides sprayed in
Vietnam; to dapsone, an anti-malaria drug, and to certain viruses. The V.A.
study noted that ''the men who served in Vietnam had the potential for exposure
to all of these agents.''

The study also noted that most of the marines in South Vietnam served in I Corps
and in the central highlands, northern regions where malaria was present and
dapsone was administered widely. The V.A. said it would not analyze the data to
determine whether Army troops in those specific areas also suffered an excess of
lymphomas.

The areas most heavily sprayed with Agent Orange, according to the Defense
Department, were closer to the capital, Saigon.

Cloudiness on Agent Orange

The puzzling findings come at a time when the Centers for Disease Control,
another Government agency, has said that it cannot carry out a major study that
some hoped would determine whether Agent Orange was a cause of health damage
among ground troops in Vietnam. The agency says it cannot locate enough veterans
with high exposures to dioxin, the dangerous contaminant of the herbicide.

In another finding that will further cloud the question of Agent Orange, the
V.A. study found no excess of deaths in Vietnam veterans from soft tissue
sarcomas, a rare type of cancer that has been associated in some studies with
exposure to herbicides comparable to Agent Orange. Some state studies have
suggested that Vietnam veterans have an excess of soft tissue sarcomas, but all
such studies have been much smaller than the one whose findings were issued
today.

The study gave no explanation for the elevated lung cancer mortality among the
marines who served in Vietnam as compared with marines who did not serve there.
A similar elevation in lung cancer had been found in a study of veterans from
New York, although the increase was not large enough to be statistically
significant.

No Histories on Smoking

Tobacco is the most commonly cited cause of lung cancer, but the V.A. said it
had no smoking histories of the marines in the study. Nor is it known whether
smoking rates differed between the marines who suffered excess lung cancer and
the Army troops, who had normal rates of lung cancer. A state study in Wisconsin
has found that veterans as a whole smoke at twice the rate of men in the
civilian population, but this should have increased lung cancer among the Army
troops as well as the marines, the V.A. said. Lung cancer has also been
associated with exposure to chemicals such as the phenoxy herbicides and
arsenic, the V.A. noted.

The finding of an elevated rate of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas among marines who
served in Vietnam was reported Tuesday by The New York Times. Lawrence B.
Hobson, director of the V.A.'s Agent Orange office, said then of the lymphoma
finding: ''I wouldn't say it's terribly worrisome. If I were a Vietnam veteran,
I don't think I'd be the least bit disturbed about it.''

The study's findings were issued today only because the key finding had been
reported in The Times, an official said. Bonner Day, a spokesman for the agency,
said today that the V.A. would have no comment until the study is presented next
month to an advisory committee of experts for their scientific evaluation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 5, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A Washington dispatch yesterday about cancer deaths among marines who served in
South Vietnam misstated the Veterans Administration's plans for more research.
The agency is collecting data to analyze whether Army troops who served in the
same areas of South Vietnam also suffered an excess of certain cancers.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: CAPITAL READING;
Telling the Russians Our Hopes and Fears

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 974 words


Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, delivered a speech last week at
the conference on Soviet-American relations in Chautauqua, N.Y., that set off
one of the most intense discussions of the meeting. Following are excerpts:


Like you, I have watched what is happening in the Soviet Union. I have doubts
and concerns but, above all, I have hope.

So let's candidly examine what we have in common as well as what divides us -
let's begin this process as the first step toward lasting peace.

One thing we share is our love of the land. Now from Chernobyl to Love Canal we
see its vulnerability to abuse and we recognize that its potential for giving us
rebirth may be slipping away.

We also share historical ties: We both endured the traumatic experience of
revolution and the satisfaction of nation building. We were even allies in a war
which we won, in large part, because of the heroic struggle of the Soviet people
against the invasion of Hilter's armies.

And, finally, we share a yearning for freedom.

Above all else, Americans cherish liberty. We fought a war to claim it from a
colonial power. We value not just the freedom of the nation, but the liberty of
each individual man and woman.

Profound Differences, Too

These sentiments cannot be strange to the people of the Soviet Union. In our
day, has not the most brilliant example of the inextinguishable thirst for human
liberty come from the innermost heart of the Soviet Union - come in the
Akhmatovas and Pasternaks and all those nameless ones who have in their
matchless courage braved the winds of Kolyma, circulating handwritten
manuscripts in defiance of the censor just as their ancestors evaded the
censorship of Czar Nicholas the Flogger?

Yet despite these bonds our institutions and standards of conduct differ
profoundly.

For example, Americans are mystified by Soviet denial of many basic freedoms of
expression. We don't understand why Rostropovich couldn't conduct an orchestra
or play his cello in his motherland. Why pianist Vladimir Feltsman has to
emigrate to perform. Why Baryshnikov felt he had to leave in order for his
artistry to grow. Why exile was the price the writer Vassily Aksyonov paid to
publish his novels.

America, as perhaps the world's most open society, is also bewildered and
threatened by Soviet preoccupation with secrets. If the Soviet Union wishes to
be trusted by others, it must first show that it believes its own people can be
trusted with the truth.

Deep Suspicions

Finally, we Americans are also deeply suspicious of a nation that keeps families
divided.

So how do we improve relations in the face of all the things that divide us?

First we have to see each other clearly.

American views of the Soviet Union swing between wishful thinking and hostile
pessimism. We tend to think that the tensions between us result only from
superficial misperceptions. Or we believe that the Soviet state is our
implacable adversary - the incarnation of evil.

These caricatures lead to errors in judgment. The one lulls us into a false
sense of security which, after events such as Czechoslovakia or Afghanistan,
degenerates into an angry sense of betrayal. The other obscures the significant
opportunities that appear from time to time to settle grievances, reduce
tensions and advance mutual interests.

They Ignore Our Pride

Soviet misperceptions of the United States are at least as great and as
dangerous.

Soviets discredit our concern for human rights and individual liberties and see
our foreign policy as the captive of rapacious capitalists; they attribute our
defense policies to the ''military-industrial complex;'' they underestimate the
extent to which speech is truly free in a democratic society; and they ignore
throughout our history the pride with which we have enfranchised ever larger
segments of the American people.

Before Mikhail Gorbachev became General Secretary, all but the most optimistic
Americans would have given low odds to significantly improved relations.

Because of the General Secretary's words and his actions, Americans have begun
to question their old views. We ask:

* Will the party and state bureaucracy, about which General Secretary Gorbachev
has often complained, share more power with the Soviet people?

* Will workers have a bigger voice and trade unions a stronger role, even as
''restructuring'' creates hardships for some workers who lose their jobs?

* Will Soviet citizens make their own choices about what to read, see, hear, buy
and sell?

* Will Soviet authorities accept differences in politics, culture and religion?

* Will freedom to travel no longer be confined to the privileged few?

* Will Soviet history, including the record of Stalin's purges, Ukrainian famine
and collectivization, be taught by people concerned with discovering the truth?

* Will fewer resources go to a military buildup at home and abroad?

* Will the General Secretary's call for ''democratization'' bring greater
autonomy to minority nationalities who have lived under Russian dominance for
decades?

* Will the Soviet leadership let the people of Eastern Europe restructure their
own systems and their relations with the outside world?

* Will Soviet youth be permitted to repudiate the war in Afghanistan with the
same decisive vehemence tht young Americans rejected Vietnam?

Toward a Lasting Peace

We Americans must be flexible enough to allow for our own rethinking in order to
seize new opportunities for a lasting peace.

If reform continues in the Soviet Union, I believe we can cut United States and
Soviet conventional forces in Central Europe and indeed nuclear weapons, by more
than anyone has been prepared even to talk about up to now.

It is within our power to create a different future, for as Solzhenitsyn said,
''History is us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Bill Bradley speaking last week in Chautauqua, N.Y.
(NYT/Joe Traver)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
If Elected, I Promise...

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


Seeing former President Nixon at a recent ball game, and a recent ball game, and
a recent ball game, served as a reminder that the Presidential campaign season
is well upon us.

It's not that Nixon is running for office again. In fact, it is heartwarming to
see the former President at a ball game with a grandchild or a pal, telling
anecdotes about the curveball of the great Camilo Pascual for a team called the
Washington Senators.

Going to ball games is perhaps the grandest thing one can do in retirement, the
very reason one labors 40 years or more, to be free to sit in the stands for
hours at a time and not worry about punching the old time clock down at the Oval
Office.

The problem is not former Presidents. The problem is active Presidents and Vice
Presidents who persist in getting involved in sports. The potential for mischief
is so great that we ought to incorporate a sports plank into the platforms of
both parties. Will they, or will they not, keep away?

This is the right time to formulate this plank. According to yesterday's front
page, merchants in Iowa are already spraying the foliage in preparation for the
quadrennial invasion of the candidate bug, which makes loud humming noises and
leaves behind huge unpaid bills. And Tom Wicker gave the impression that the
seven or eight Democrat candidates could bore us into terminal stupor.

Candidates are bad enough, but some of them actually grow up to be Presidents
and Vice Presidents, who then spend the next four or eight years proving their
worth by talking sports.

Who will ever forget President Nixon, unable to sleep at dawn during an anti-
Vietnam protest, venturing into the Mall to chat with youthful protestors, and
showing he was a hep guy by rattling off the sports nicknames of their colleges?
(''Syracuse? The Orangemen.'')


Sports are great, they give employment to a lot of us with no known social
value, but I will personally consider voting for any candidate who will agree to
this plank:

If elected, I promise I will never attend a sports event in person. I will never
place a call to a locker room. I will never invite a team to the Rose Garden.
And I will not use sports similes when explaining Presidential actions.

Attending sports events used to be easier for presidential types. Shortly after
his loss in 1960, citizen Nixon dropped into a locker room to shake hands with
the entire Ranger team. (''Doesn't he know they are all Canadians?'' a cynic
asked. ''This man will never be elected President.'') At the opening game in
Washington in 1967, Lyndon B. Johnson walked through the runway from clubhouse
to the dugout, right past sportswriters and other security risks.

For very good reasons, Presidents tend to stay away from events these days, but
attending games seems to be a large part of Vice Presidential duty. George Bush
has been spotted in Shea Stadium one-hopping a ceremonial first pitch from the
mound to home plate, then waving his arms like Gary Carter after a game-winning
home run.

This is nothing personal against the Vice President, who, if he knew of all
this, would say, ''Oh, I'm dreadfully sorry,'' but he disrupted the entire
village of Cooperstown, N.Y., when he showed up at the annual Hall of Fame game
a few years back. And security measures made thousands of people late for the
opening ceremony of the recent Pan American Games at the Indianapolis Speedway.

But the worst was when he chose to attend the Super Bowl in the one stinking
year they decided to hold it above the Arctic Circle in a place called Pontiac,
Mich. Grim-faced agents with tiny speakers clipped to their earflaps halted
traffic on the wind-swept roadways, forcing buses to dislodge the proletariat to
scramble up snowdrifts and across icy fields to reach the Arcticdome.


Presidents are not much better when they make telephone calls to championship
locker rooms. When it was a novelty, managers and players were tickled to
receive the call, but now that it is a ritual, like spraying champagne on
broadcasters, it has lost much of its meaning.

Then there is the possibility of telephone mischief. One thinks it was those
computer pranksters from California Polytechnic Institute who called into the
Super Bowl locker room a few years back and imitated a President making jokes
about throwing bombs, heh-heh-heh.

The use of the Rose Garden to greet championship teams should get the final
Golden Fleece award from the retiring Senator William Proxmire. The Rose Garden
is fine for honoring people who have brought glory to an entire nation - Nobel
Prize winners, astronauts, the gold-medal ice hockey team in the 1980 Winter
Games, for example - but not weary professionals who just won a seventh game in
Boston Garden or Shea Stadium.

Should politicians try to woo voters by showing they know sports? Senator Bill
Bradley, who is not a candidate, is so serious about his current line of work
that he would like you to believe it must have been some other Bill Bradley
hitting the jumper for the Knicks. Representative Jack Kemp's people wish he
would talk more to the voters about touchdown passes than tax issues.

Governor Cuomo, a former minor league baseball player, might agree to swear off
talk of pennant races and Final Fours. The Governor could still talk with great
passion about a leprechaun of a man named Joe Austin who ran a basketball
program for thousands of youngsters in a church gym in South Jamaica, Queens -
perhaps even make his old coach a national symbol of little people making a
difference - but, of course, Cuomo is not a candidate.

For all national candidates, there should be one uniform pledge. If the urge to
talk big-time sports ever comes over them, they should lock the White House
door, turn on the tube, and take the phone off the hook.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words




Comedy and Tragedy

A comedy from Costa-Gavras? From the director known for such volatile political
thrillers as ''Z'' and ''Missing''?

''It was just a kind of old dream,'' he said. ''I think everyone would like to
go in another direction.''

Mr. Costa-Gavras's comedy is titled ''Family Business,'' and it opens Sunday at
Cinema 2. Starring Fanny Ardant, Johnny Hallyday and Guy Marchand, it is the
story of a family whose business is burglary: a father, played by Mr. Hallyday;
his friend and partner, played by Mr. Marchand; a mother, played by Ms. Ardant,
who looks after the men's nutrition and training, plays the cello, drinks while
they are out on what they refer to as ''a project'' and has onion soup waiting
when they return. And there are two children - a boy who resorts to blackmail to
gain admittance to the family business at an early age and a little girl who is
adept at eavesdropping, has her own small collection of stolen goods and is
rapturous about stealing because she finds it thrilling.

''They look like people from another planet,'' said Mr. Costa-Gavras, ''but if
we look at them closer, I think they are like all of us. They have the same kind
of ideas on life, trying to have more goods, bigger cars and better houses.''

Mr. Costa-Gavras, who wrote the screenplay, adapted from a novel by Francis
Ryck, said he was attracted by the characters and his affinity for the writer.
''He writes thrillers, but they are something more than thrillers. They are
something more than spy mechanisms, thriller mechanisms. They are closer to
life.''

Although the movie has a comic spirit, Mr. Costa-Gavras said: ''It's a sort of
family tragedy because nobody understands anybody in that story. Everybody
follows his way. I think it's like life. I don't think it's a special family. I
think it's all families.''

Not everything in the movie is from the book. Mr. Costa-Gavras said he consulted
with safe builders, policemen and burglars. The last, he noted, ''say they are
retired.'' ''Those guys can open a safe like you open your car door,'' he said.
''Some of them even bet: We can open a safe in three minutes. In five minutes.''
And the director threw a personal obsession into his screenplay: ''You get in
your house. In your living room, you find a guy is waiting for you. So what are
you going to do? It's an old obsession I have.''

Mr. Costa-Gavras, who filmed ''Family Business'' last year, compared it with
directing thrillers by saying: ''Comedy is much more difficult. It needs more
rhythm, more attention to everything.''

Right now, he is in Alberta, Canada, back to making thrillers. His latest, about
which he would say no more, stars Debra Winger and Tom Berenger, carries the
working title ''Sundown'' and should be visible next year.

And after that, said the man who likes an occasional change, ''probably a
musical.''

13-Year-Old Swede

''I do it for fun.''

Thirteen-year-old Anton Glanzelius, who has been charming audiences for months
with his portrayal of the little boy at the sentimental and good-humored heart
of the Swedish film ''My Life as a Dog,'' was explaining why he acts.

A seventh grader in Gothenburg, where he has been studying English for the last
three years, Anton is the youngest of five children. His mother is an actress;
his father reviews music for a newspaper. And the role of Ingmar in Lasse
Hallstrom's film, about the boy's loss of his sickly mother and of his dog and
about his periodic journeys to live with relatives in a small town populated by
vivid eccentrics of all ages, does not mark his acting debut.

Anton thinks he was about 8 when his mother asked if he'd like to appear in a
television serial being directed by a friend, and Anton soon found himself
before the cameras. ''It was a very little part,'' he said, ''a boy who had
parents who are alcoholics, and they go from home to home, and he wants to go to
his real home.'' Anton also appeared on radio shows, but it was the television
portrayal that led a couple of years ago to ''My Life as a Dog.''

''Someone from the Swedish Film Industry had seen me,'' he said, ''and they
called me and asked me if I wanted to try for the part and I said yes. And then
I go to Stockholm and try. And some days after that, they said: 'You are too
young.' '' The news saddened Anton. ''But one week after,'' he said, ''they
called me again and said. 'We can't find anyone who is better and bigger than
you.' '' This time Anton was happy. As for acting technique, Anton said, ''I
only play myself.'' His father said that Anton and the boy he plays in ''My Life
as a Dog'' are not one and the same, although they share some traits. ''They are
alike in the way that they are very sensitive,'' Ingmar Glanzelius said. ''Anton
cries a lot and he laughs a lot. And he has a lot of imagination.''

As for an acting future, Anton is uncertain. ''I don't know,'' he said. ''Maybe.
If I like the script and the director. Also I don't know if I want to leave my
friends in school.''

He is much more definite on long-range plans. ''I want to be a professional
soccer player in Brazil. Because when they play, they have fun.''

After 'Metal Jacket'

''I'd always been a huge fan of Stanley's ever since I saw 'Clockwork Orange'
and '2001' and 'The Killing,' '' said Adam Baldwin.

So when the 25-year-old actor was approached by his agents about playing a role
in Stanley Kubrick's Vietnam War movie, ''Full Metal Jacket,'' he was excited.

What he had admired about the director, he said, was ''just the fact that he
took you away from emotionally uplifting films and commercially easy choices
that most other film makers take and that he really captures a sense of war, be
it psychological war, war in space or black-comedy war like 'Strangelove.' ''

He added, ''I liked the way he depicted war.''

To the English-based director Mr. Baldwin submitted some footage from his debut
film, ''My Bodyguard,'' in which he played a hulking high-school boy; from
''3:15,'' which the actor describes as '' 'High Noon' in high school,'' and a
scene from a play, ''Back to Back,'' which he described as ''about two guys
sitting in a foxhole in Vietnam.''

Not long afterward, Mr. Baldwin found himself in England, cast in the role of
the aggressive Marine Animal Mother. It was when he reached England that Mr.
Baldwin was finally able to obtain a copy of the Gustav Hasford novel that is
the source of the movie. ''The thing that really struck me about it,'' said Mr.
Baldwin, ''is it seemed to be such a tight claustrophobic picture of just these
few men. It really didn't go on to have many political statements. It just sort
of gave you that small portrait of the war and what it consisted of for these
few young men, and by doing that it was antiwar statement enough for me. I'm one
of those bleeding-heart liberals, and any left-wing statement against war is
something I agree with.''

Although Animal Mother comes across as bloodthirsty, Mr. Baldwin said: ''There
were guys like that, and they had to be portrayed. I don't think by playing the
part I'm making a right-wing statement at all. There were guys like that who
believed in the war, and once they got over there it was a whole different
thing.''

Mr. Baldwin said he took it easy for a while after ''Full Metal Jacket,'' but he
is now going to work in ''Going All the Way,'' based on a Dan Wakefield novel.
In it, he plays a football player in his final year of college who decides to
turn his back on his pro football contract and run to New York to live the
bohemian life. ''It's like a modern-day 'Graduate,' '' Mr. Baldwin said.

As for being cast as behemoths, hulking killers and football players, the
6-foot-4, 210-pound Mr. Baldwin is philosophical. ''I couldn't exactly play
someone who isn't 6-4,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

New Face;
A SEARING DEBUT IN 'HAMBURGER HILL': DYLAN McDERMOTT

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


''HAMBURGER HILL,'' which opened last Friday at neighborhood cinemas, has the
hard-edged and unavoidable reality of a documentary as it takes the men of the
101st Airborne Division through a 10-day battle to the hollow victory of a
captured hill in Vietnam. The film, directed by John Irvin, also chronicles the
gradual breaking down of Frantz, a weary, quiet young sergeant played by Dylan
McDermott in a critically acclaimed performance that captures the soldier's
increasingly exposed disaffiliation, pain and vulnerability. For Mr. McDermott,
a 24-year-old actor making his film debut in ''Hamburger Hill,'' the experience
was harrowing.

A cast of 14 relatively unknown young actors underwent preliminary military
training together at the United States Naval Base at Subic Bay in the
Philippines, where the film was made over three months last winter.

''The training was nothing compared to actually filming the movie,'' Mr.
McDermott said in a recent interview. ''We'd get up at 3:30 in the morning. It
was two hours to location, on bumpy, rocky roads. Sometimes it was raining and
we couldn't even get up the hill. We had 75 pounds of equipment to be
responsible for. They built stairways into the jungle. Sometimes we'd climb
8,000 steps a day. There was absolutely no glamour involved. It wasn't what I
thought movie making was. But I was glad. It gave us a hint about Vietnam.''

Mr. McDermott saw Frantz as a man very like the hero of ''Scooncat,'' a play by
Eve Ansler that is to open Off Broadway in mid-November. In that, Mr. McDermott
will portray a young man who fails to find love in his family or from his
computer and strikes out on his own in the world.

''I think Frantz is a little more responsible,'' he said. ''But the pain they
both have - a different kind of pain, but very deep, very alone, very dark, very
secret, their pain. Frantz has to keep it to himself, or he'll lose his mind.
That's why I have such tremendous respect for any kind of veteran, but
especially veterans of the Vietnam War.''

Meeting the Real People

The characters in ''Hamburger Hill'' are generally composites of soldiers the
film's scriptwriter, Jim Carabatsos, served with in Vietnam. Mr. McDermott got
to meet two of the soldiers at the film's premiere. ''It was wonderful to see
those guys,'' he said. ''They liked the film a lot. They were very moved. They
thought it was very real. They told me about the real Terry Frantz. I'd like to
find him and see what he thought.''

Like the characters they play, the actors in ''Hamburger Hill'' became friends,
which made the filming of some scenes even more painful. ''I had all these death
scenes,'' Mr. McDermott said. ''At 6 in the morning. As an actor I had nothing
left to give. How much death can you see before you go crazy? You shut off
emotions. You have to do something to protect yourself.''

Mr. McDermott grew up in Waterbury, Conn., where he and his younger sister,
Robin, were brought up by their grandmother, Avis Marino. Visiting and
eventually living with his father in New York City, he came into contact with
the theater through Ms. Ansler, his stepmother, who wrote him into a children's
play she was working on when Mr. McDermott was 17. ''I got hooked,'' he
recalled. He went on to major in theater at Fordham University, then, realizing
he was serious about acting and had potential, he enrolled in the Neighborhood
Playhouse where he studied acting with Sanford Meisner.

A Political Awakening

''I don't think I was really political until I started reading about this war,
talking to veterans, doing the film, and came home,'' he said. ''One of the
problems for young people - and many older people - is that this country is not
really political, for many reasons. We've never had a war here. We feel safe.
But it's too important now, in the nuclear age, not to be political.

''Vietnam was the first war that wasn't John Wayne. War is unnatural. I know
there have been wars since before anyone can remember. But eventually there will
be one more war and that will be it. That's why making this movie was a luxury.
There will be no more films then to say, 'Look how horrible war is.' That will
be it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dylan McDermott as Sergeant Frantz in ''Hamburger Hill.'' (Don
Mccullin)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 5, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Saturday News Quiz

BYLINE: BY DONNA ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 46.

1. This inverted candlestick has brought the Central Intelligence Agency some
unwanted attention. Why?

2. For the third time since Israel's national unity Government was formed in
1984, the Cabinet faced a monumental decision about Israel's future, with the
Labor Party's pragmatic approach winning over the Likud's visionary one. What
was the issue?

3. The Centers for Disease Control has concluded that they cannot proceed with a
major Congressionally mandated study on the effects of the herbicide Agent
Orange on American ground soldiers in Vietnam. Why?

4. The three-year contract announced by the New York City Board of Education and
the United Federation of Teachers would make the city competitive with
surrounding suburbs for the first time. What are the significant features?

5. Carl Lewis said: ''If you asked me before the race, could anybody run that
fast, I would have said no. Now that it's over, I can believe it.'' To what was
he referring?

6. The American Civil Liberties Union, overcoming its long-standing reluctance
to become embroiled in what could be seen as partisan political disputes, is
dropping a 51-year-old policy to join in a current battle. What is it?

7. Black miners agreed to end South Africa's largest and costliest strike after
three weeks, and although they failed to win the wage increases they sought,
experts called the strike a remarkable achievement. Why?

8. The drug lovastatin is expected to revolutionize treatment of what experts
say is the most important underlying cause of atherosclerosis and coronary heart
disease. What does it do?

9. The Justice Department announced the first court challenge to the
constitutionality of the 1978 special prosecutor law, which could undermine the
current investigations of alleged wrongdoing by senior Government officials,
including Michael K. Deaver, Edwin Meese 3d and Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North.
What is the constitutional issue?

10. Even though results had been encouraging, Dr. Gary Strobel's experiments in
an effort to prevent Dutch elm disease met with wide disapproval. Why? With what
outcome?

11. Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administation said the
successful test marked a major milestone for getting the space shuttle flying
again. What was tested?

12. If the results of a survey of the Philippine armed forces, taken last May
and just released, had been known beforehand, they might have given some hint of
the recent attempt by dissident soldiers to bring down the Government of
President Corazon C. Aquino. What did the study show?

13. Angel Cordero Jr. fell four victories short of winning his 12th consecutive
riding title at Saratoga Race Track. Who won the title?

14. The Reagan Administration postponed its call for an international arms
embargo against Iran. Why?

15. Chemical evidence has persuaded most scientists that eight meteorites, out
of the thousands of specimens in the world's collections, are particularly
unusual. Why?

16. ''The Americn people have the right to truth in airline scheduling,''
Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Hanford Dole said in announcing a new ruling.
What is it?

17. A substantial political achievement has cleared the way for the first direct
elections in South Korea in 16 years. What was it?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a stamp

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 5, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Correction

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 52 words


A Washington dispatch yesterday about cancer deaths among marines who served in
South Vietnam misstated the Veterans Administration's plans for more research.
The agency is collecting data to analyze whether Army troops who served in the
same areas of South Vietnam also suffered an excess of certain cancers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: CORRECTION

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BEGINS SALE OF SPACE SERVICES

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 5


The Soviet space program, once wrapped in secrecy, has begun to offer a diverse
line of goods and services to all who have the money.

The sales blitz is complete with slick brochures and managers eager to cut
deals, offering anything from launching services and communications satellites
to space photographs that rival those from spy satellites.

In private talks with American officials, the Russians have even offered to put
American astronauts into orbit atop Soviet rockets.

It remains to be seen whether the Soviet bid for a slice of the international
space market will be successful. The quest has already met considerable
resistance from some Western governments.

Yet the timing could hardly be better. The West is still reeling from a series
of space disasters that are likely to keep it off balance for some time.
Moreover, Soviet prices are temptingly low.

''There are very many customers for these services in the world,'' Aleksandr I.
Dunayev, head of the main Soviet space agency, said in an interview. ''The
potential of international cooperation on the basis of commercial contracting is
almost limitless.''

Art Dula, a Texas lawyer who recently set up an American company to market
Soviet rockets, including the Proton, the workhorse of the Soviet program, said
in a visit here: ''I never expected them to move as aggressively as they did.
The space program was so secretive. They had never even released a photo of
their Proton booster.''

Changes in the Soviet space program were mostly a matter of style two years ago
at the dawn of the current period of openness. Launchings and landings of
astronauts began to be broadcast live on Soviet television, breaking a practice
in the past of sketchy, after-the-fact reports.

An Intelligence Windfall

By contrast, Soviet space officials today are seeking big profits from
commercial ventures. The upshot for the West is not only the chance to buy a
wide range of goods and services but also to examine a flood of technical
information about Soviet satellites, rockets and space-based cameras. It is a
windfall that Western intelligence agencies once only dreamed of.

The latest marketing drive centers on photos of the earth taken from space. Such
Russian photography, done routinely for years, recently went commercial with the
founding of Soyuzkarta, a foreign-trade organization in a sprawling concrete
building on the edge of Moscow.

''We are sure that the demand is very big,'' Dr. Vyacheslav A. Piskulin,
director general of Soyuzkarta, said in an interview in his office. ''We have
great possibilities.'' Before the trade organization was founded, he said, ''a
lot of photos'' had already been sold to such socialist countries as Poland,
Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam.

A glossy 24-page Soyuzkarta brochure on his desk bristled with close-up color
photos of the earth's surface taken from space.

Photos Cost From $500 to $800

The venture is far larger than similar efforts in the West. According to
Soyuzkarta officials, the photo program draws on at least three classes of
spacecraft: low-altitude satellites that return their film to earth, manned
space stations that also return their film, and high-altitude satellites that
electronically beam their pictures back to earth.

Soyuzkarta officials eagerly hand out detailed price lists that put the basic
cost of photos from $500 to $800, and more if a customer wants enhanced
processing by computer.

''Our prices are competitive with those anywhere in the world,'' said Dr.
Piskulin.

He insisted that such pictures were only for the ''remote sensing'' of the earth
by cartographers, geologists and ecologists. But he also said the best cameras
had a resolution down to five meters, meaning that objects as small as five
meters in length can be photographed from space.

In the West, where governments have actively discouraged civilian cameras with
resolutions less than 10 meters, such photos are considered good enough for
high-quality spying from space. The two American Landsat satellites have a
resolution of 30 meters, and a French civilian satellite known as Spot has a
resolution down to 10 meters.

Could Photograph Lifeboats

The Soviet Union's chief cartographer, Dr. Viktor R. Yashchenko, recently
boasted in Izvestia, the Government newspaper, that while the American
satellites could barely see a steamship on a river, and the French satellite
could make out the deck, the Russian satellites could photograph the lifeboats.

So too, such photos could reveal tanks, missiles, ships and airplanes.

''A number of achievements in science can be used for military purposes,'' Dr.
Piskulin said. ''But we are advertising our activities with only peaceful aims
in mind. We are not specialists in military affairs.''

He ruled out the sale of space photos of the Soviet Union altogether, adding
that while few other restrictions were contemplated, the photos could not be
used to ''prejudice the interests of other countries,'' apparently a reference
to spying.

Rockets to Rides

Less sensitive from a military point of view are the marketing efforts of
Glavkosmos, which is trying to market everything from rockets to rides in orbit
about the earth.

''Our task is to commercialize the space program,'' Mr. Dunayev, head of
Glavkosmos, said with a confident smile.

For $40 million to $50 million, for instance, Glavkosmos will sell a buyer a
Gorisont communications satellite, one of the Russians' best. A slick color
brochure boasts a picture of the satellite and a list of its capabilities, which
include the relay of telephone calls, telegraph messages, black and white or
color television programs and mono and stereo radio broadcasts.

Both Iran and Finland have expressed interest in buying one, and both are
seeking permission to loft them from the international agency that doles out
prime orbital positions, Mr. Dunayev said.

Mass Production Cited as Factor

So too, Glavkosmos is selling launchings on seven different types of Soviet
rockets, including the Proton. Its price is a mere $26 million. Big Western
boosters can cost anywhere from $50 million to $100 million.

''The price is cheaper with us because of mass productions,'' said Mr. Dunayev.

Color advertisements for the Proton have begun to appear in aerospace magazines
around the world, one showing the rocket rising skyward on a pillar of flame.

An Indian satellite will soon be boosted into space on a Soviet rocket, Mr.
Dunayev said, adding that Indian technicians and officials will be allowed to
visit the super-secret Baikonur Astrodrome in Kazakhstan to witness the
launching.

Several American satellite makers whose plans were thrown into turmoil by recent
Western rocket failures have expressed interest in using Soviet rockets, Mr.
Dunayev said. The State Department, he added, has refused to issue export
licenses because it says it wants to keep high technology out of Russian hands.
The ban has been extended to satellites made anywhere in the world that contain
American parts.

''It's really just political,'' said Mr. Dunayev. ''It's written in your country
that we are enemy number one, so they don't want our help.''

Mr. Dula, the Texas lawyer whose Houston-based space commerce corporation is
trying to market the Proton rocket in America, said the issue boiled down to
whether ''the United States is going to allow them to be capitalistic.''

He added that such a move was in the nation's interest. ''We have an acute
shortage of launchers that is hurting American industry,'' he said. ''If we
don't meet our contractual agreements to put the satellites we build into space,
new orders are going to go somewhere else.''

Mr. Dunayev of the space agency said getting export licenses for American
scientific experiments would probably be easier since they could be tightly
packaged to banish fears of tampering.

Carrying such devices into space would cost $10,000 to $15,000 for each
kilogram, Mr. Dunayev said.

''We have offered to your experts not only commercialization in space but even
flights of astronauts from the U.S.A. with our cosmonauts,'' he said. For a
price? ''Yes,'' he answered, ''Absolutely, for a price.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. TO ALLOW AID TO HANOI IN RETURN FOR DATA ON G.I.'S

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5


Administration officials say the United States will officially encourage
charitable assistance for Vietnam in exchange for increased cooperation from
Hanoi in resolving cases of Americans missing in action during the Vietnam War.

Although the agreement, worked out with the Vietnamese last month, falls short
of Hanoi's request for economic aid or war reparations, it is the first time
that Washington has agreed to provide Vietnam with anything in return for help
on this sensitive issue. It also marks an expansion of United States relations
with Vietnam.

Without publicity, two doctors specializing in artificial limbs and other
prosthetic devices and the head of an international charitable organization held
talks last week in Hanoi where they had gone as an official United States
delegation.

Report on Humanitarian Needs

Based on its findings, the Administration intends to issue a report detailing
the humanitarian needs of the Vietnamese. It will focus on the thousands who
require prosthetic devices as a result of the war as well as those since
crippled by disease.

As a result, the Administration expects the Vietnamese to cooperate more fully
on solving the issue of military personnel still listed as missing in action
from the Vietnam War. Officials said they are especially hopeful that Vietnam
would be able to provide information to help clear up about 70 ''very
compelling'' cases.

''This means we crossed a line we never crossed before,'' said a senior official
familiar with the dealings with the Vietnamese.

Resulted From Vessey Visit

United States officials had steadfastly refused to discuss economic assistance
or war reparations as part of the talks about the missing servicemen. As a
compromise, Washington will facilitate aid from private groups, which are now
prohibited by a long-standing trade embargo.

The agreement was the result of a visit last month with senior Vietnamese
officials by John W. Vessey Jr., a retired general, who led a special delegation
to Hanoi to discuss the missing. The Administration will issue regulations
providing exemptions to trade restrictions that will allow licensing of private
organizations to provide charitable relief.

''When the United States Government gives its blessing to this, we're saying
that they're no longer a pariah,'' said the official.

'An Area of Accommodation'

Administration officials also depicted the agreement as an important step in
successful negotiations with Vietnam. ''This provides an area of accommodation,
of reconciliation,'' said one official. ''If they're smart, they won't try to
leverage it into any kind of official recognition. If they try to use it as an
opportunity and not a weapon, it can be promising.''

The United States has been seeking Vietnamese help in determining the fate of
more than 2,400 servicemen who were listed as missing in action or failed to
return from prisoner-of-war camps. American officials earlier expressed
exasperation in negotiating with Hanoi, accusing the Vietnamese of stalling, in
hopes that the discussions would include the normalization of relations and
economic aid.

Shultz Aired Pessimism

Before Mr. Vessey left for Vietnam, Secretary of State George P. Shultz
expressed pessimism that a breakthrough could be achieved. ''Humanitarian
reciprocity is one thing,'' he told a veterans' group in July. ''But any attempt
to trade information on our missing men for economic aid is another and we
cannot agree to this.''

The category of artificial limbs was chosen as ''a particularly suitable first
step,'' according to someone familiar with the negotiations. Artificial limbs
and prosthetic devices are ''something tangible, something the Vietnamese can
look at.'' He added, ''It's also especially appropriate after a war
characterized by landmines and grenades in which many people were disfigured.''

According to some estimates, there are 60,000 amputees in Vietnam as a result of
the war. There are also thousands of young people paralyzed from polio,
according to one official.

The Administration hopes to have Vietnamese cooperation on what are known as
''discrepancy cases.'' Officials described those cases as those in which a
serviceman did not return home after having been sighted alive after being taken
prisoner, such as by fellow prisoners-of-war in a camp or in photographs of
prisoners.

Dropped Its Insistence

American officials also say that Vietnam has dropped its insistence that they
would no longer discuss the issue beyond next January. In January 1986, the
Vietnamese said they would begin a two-year program to deal with the issue of
American servicemen missing in action once and for all.

Hanoi says that more than one million Vietnamese are unaccounted for from the
the war and that among the problems remaining are war widows, orphans,
defoliated forests, destroyed villages and children of American servicemen.

The team that returned this week included Frederick Downs, the chief of the
prosthetics service of the Veterans Administration; Dr. Carlton G. Savory, a
Georgia orthopedist, and Larry E. Ward, who has had long experience in
international relief organizations.

According to the National League of Families of American P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s,
Vietnam has returned the remains of 170 identified servicemen since 1974, of
which 94 have been returned during the Reagan presidency.

Many American officials are deeply resentful at what they believe is Vietnam's
intention to dole out the remains of other servicemen as talks progress.

A more intriguing, but murkier issue, is whether any American servicemen remain
alive in Vietnam. Vietnam has asserted that it has no other prisoners and has no
knowledge of any remaining live Americans in the country. Few United States
officials officials believe that any Americans are still being held prisoner.
But it is possible, officials say, that some Americans voluntarily remained
behind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 1987


SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 940 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-25



The U.S. will back aid to Vietnam by private groups for humanitarian causes. In
exchange, officials said, they expect cooperation on solving the issue of
personnel listed as missing in action from the Vietnam War.    Page 1



Central America's turmoil is fundamentally linked to its population growth rate,
one of the highest in the world. The growth rate is making it harder to provide
health care, housing, education and nutrition.    1



Changes are ahead in Nicaragua because of the regional peace plan adopted last
month, Sandinista leaders are warning their supporters. They made the warnings
in a series of statements this week.    15



Chadian troops drove into Libya and destroyed the air and ground base at Matan
as Sarra in Libya's southeast, Chad's military command reported. The official
Libyan news agency said Chadian troops struck at the ''civilian Sarra airport.''

  be,su1:1



A diverse line of space-age goods and services have begun to be offered by the
Soviet space program to all who have the cash. The sales blitz is complete with
slick brochures and managers eager to cut deals.    1



Israeli Air Force planes attacked Palestinian positions near the southern
Lebanese port of Sidon, and the Palestine Liberation Organization said 41 people
were killed and 40 others were wounded.    1



In Manila, the military coup's leader called on Filipinos to support him in his
struggle against the Government of President Corazon C. Aquino in his first
public statement since the Aug. 28 uprising.    1



Kuwait is expelling five diplomats from Iran, the country said, as tension
mounted between the two Persian Gulf countries over Iranian missiles fired at
Kuwait. Iran apparently fired a third long-range missile on Kuwait.    3



U.S. won't halt Haiti arms aid     3



Koreans warned on labor violence    4



French-speaking leaders in pledge      5



Turks vote today      6



Chain of events in Mecca tragedy emerge     16



Dispute over Amazon dam     18



Filipino Communists plan drive     22



Cameroon press is cautious     23



NATIONAL/26-37, 44-45, 50-53



The Pope has defined a strategy of promoting orthodoxy in Roman Catholic belief
and has developed his own set of tools to carry it out: jet airplanes,
television cameras and a remarkable stage presence.    1



Patients able to donate their lungs, kidneys, livers or hearts to people needing
such organs will have to be identified by hospitals across the country starting
next month under a new Federal law.     26



Increased investment in education and the health needs of children was called
for by some corporate leaders. Focusing on disadvantaged children, they warned
that up to 30 percent of public school students face a risk of educational
failure.    26



Firefighters struggled for a 6th day to subdue the blazes that have consumed
hundreds of thousands of acres in California, Oregon and Idaho in a campaign
that is warlike in its scope.    26



An experimental smoking ban on Air Canada will be extended, the carrier
announced. Surveys show that the airline's passengers support the ban. The move
comes amid indications that air travelers now favor smoking bans on many
flights.    44



Protectionist trade legislation should not be adopted by Congress, President
Reagan said in his weekly radio address. He insisted that the United States
should seek to ''meet the competition head on''    28



Campaign spending is heavy in Iowa this year, demonstrating the greater
strategic emphasis Presidential campaigns are placing on the Iowa caucuses.
Among Democrats, the caucuses are eclipsing the New Hampshire primary in
importance.     34



G.O.P.'s grand old man turns 100     29



Editor assails book as a grudge     32



Reagan asks study of how policy affects the family     36



Northwest is first in complaints     44



REGIONAL/38-43, 54-58



In the Howard Beach assault case, the first trial is to begin Tuesday after
eight months of bitter public debate and quiet legal maneuvering. Participants
say the jury-selection process will be difficult.    42



Workers in a garment factory in New York City do not have the basic working
conditions or standard of pay guaranteed by law. Officials say it is
representative of an increasing number of sweatshops.    38



Little League Baseball gave a boost to the town of Bristol, Conn., which has
been suffering from industrial decline. The group selected the city to be the
site for a $3.5 million Eastern regional center for 11 states.     38



A Jamaican apple-picking force of 1,550 legal aliens has come to New York this
year to harvest apples under an international program involving the United
States, New York State, Jamaica and the apple growers.    42



Charges that police officers beat a Queens man are being investigated. Witnesses
said the incident took place when the man was being arrested for riding his
bicycle against rush-hour traffic in mid-Manhattan.    42



A police officer has filed suit against New York City. The officer says his
career was sidetracked after he was ''falsely accused'' of sexual misconduct. He
is seeking $2 million in the Federal civil-rights suit.    43



Workers at Kennedy charge bias     38



Koch is back in form      40



Body found at airport     41


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE ASKING 'HOW LONG A WAR?'

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Nearly nine years after Vietnam invaded Cambodia and overthrew the Khmer Rouge,
driving Pol Pot back into the guerrilla warfare from which he had come in 1975,
the Vietnamese are asking how long the war will go on.

In letters to newspapers and in conversations with family and friends, people
often seem bewildered by the army's inability to put an end to guerrilla strikes
and the subversion of the Cambodian countryside.

''We receive some letters mentioning the problem,'' an editorial page editor at
a leading Communist Party newspaper acknowledged. ''They ask how this can be
resolved quicker and better.''

Vietnamese fear that Hanoi might not be able to fulfill its promise to withdraw
its troops in 1990. Officials say, however, that public opinion is one of the
factors pressing the authorities.

One of World's Poorest Nations

Vietnam, among the world's poorest nations, is denied aid not only from most of
the non-Communist world, but also from some Socialist countries, because it has
about 140,000 troops in Cambodia. Calling the occupation a major factor in its
decision, the United States has also withheld diplomatic recognition from Hanoi.

''The Cambodian issue can't avoid influencing the national economy,'' an
editorial writer at the newspaper Saigon Giai Phong said. ''Money and labor go
there. But we have no choice.''

Now and then, private expressions of bitterness are voiced to foreigners,
unusual for the Vietnamese, who do not seriously question their Government's
strategic reason for the war. The Khmer Rouge, who attacked and tried to annex
border areas of Vietnam during their years in power from 1975 to 1979, are still
seen as a real threat to Vietnam's southwestern provinces.

But Vietnamese appear to care less about the fate of the Cambodians themselves,
whom they accuse of being corrupt, ungrateful and unwilling to fight.

Cambodia a Topic for All

''Everyone is talking about Cambodia,'' a Vietnamese man now living in the West
said as he ended a visit with his relatives here.

Other overseas Vietnamese encountered on recent trips here agree, saying that to
many families the call to sacrifice a new generation of sons is hard to bear.
Many point to the dangers of service in Cambodia, where Vietnamese soldiers are
the targets of personal attack not only by three guerrilla armies but also
sometimes by Cambodian civilians harboring nationalist Khmer sentiments.

One elderly parent told how Khmer Rouge undercover agents were infiltrating
village governments. Such accounts, mirroring problems American forces faced
here more than a decade ago, have led some scholars in the West to call this war
Vietnam's Vietnam.

Historians point out that Pol Pot, once Hanoi's protege, learned a lot about
guerrilla warfare from the Vietnamese. The Vietnamese, never denying this,
sometimes say the Khmer Rouge hid their real aims from Hanoi until they came to
power.

Called Patriotic Duty

An editor of a Hanoi publishing house, when asked if Cambodia was one of the
many new themes appearing in fiction, said no. He then promptly began an account
of how he had to help convince a relative that her son should go to Cambodia as
part of his ''patriotic, internationalist duty.''

An unknown number of young men are avoiding military service - according to
accounts from both newspapers inside Vietnam and exiles who leave by boat - or
deserting on the Thai-Cambodian border.

''This can't be called an antiwar movement,'' said Huynh Son Phuoc, deputy
editor of Youth, one of the country's fastest growing newspapers. But he added
that ''some young people can't accept military conditions and escape the army.''

Gen. Tran Cong Man, editor of the Vietnamese Army newspaper, acknowledged in an
interview that most deaths in Cambodia were not in combat. ''Of course the
guerrilla war continues,'' he said. ''Disturbances are not reduced in quantity -
though the forces of counterrevolution are weaker - but there are mines on roads
and bridges. Most of our casualties come from mines - or malaria.''

Cambodian guerrillas say they have lately made a point of targeting Vietnamese
troops, not their Cambodian allies, as a way of building local confidence and
fanning Khmer nationalism inside the country.

Improvement in Cambodia Army

General Man said there had been some improvements in the Cambodian Army. He said
most Khmer soldiers no longer needed ''re-education'' to assure their loyalty to
the Heng Samrin Government installed by Hanoi.

''But in some areas, they still don't fight well,'' he said.

Nevertheless, the general said, Vietnam is planning a large and more complex
annual troop withdrawal in the next few months, later than usual.

''This year it will be bigger than before,'' he said. ''We will hand over many
things, and this will take time.''

Many diplomats say such withdrawals have usually been timed to precede a vote in
the United Nations General Assembly over who will get the Cambodian seat. It is
now held by the guerrilla coalition nominally led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

Whether withdrawal or rotation, a large operation at this point could signal to
both foreign nations and the Vietnamese themselves that Hanoi, possibly prodded
by Moscow, intends to do what it can to resolve its Cambodian problem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. and Vietnam Unite to Aid Leukemia Victim

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 561 words


Exceptional high-level arrangements by the Governments of Vietnam and the United
States will allow a 20-year-old Vietnamese-American student dying of leukemia to
receive a bone-marrow transplant from a sister who was permitted to leave
Vietnam.

The sister and six other family members who were also permitted to emigrate to
the United States arrived in San Jose, Calif., on Thursday. Doctors say the
operation will give the student a 50 percent chance of survival. Without it they
said, he would probably die within months. Bone-marrow transplant donations can
be made only by immediate family members whose tissues precisely match the
recipient.

The ill refugee, an engineering student in San Jose, immigrated to the United
States after the fall of Vietnam in 1975 with his father and a brother. His
father has obtained anonymity for the family from the doctors and officials
involved.

The student's mother and five sisters remained in Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City.
When the youth became ill, efforts to treat him with chemotherapy failed, and
doctors discovered that neither his father nor brother had the matching tissue.
That left the other family members in Vietnam. All of them had applied for
permission to come to the United States, but Vietnam has stopped issuing exit
permits in recent months.

Doctor Asked for Blood Samples

Dr. Ann von Gehr of the Permanente Medical Group in San Jose, the student's
doctor, brought the problem to the attention of Dr. Arnold Schecter, a professor
of preventive medicine at the State University of New York at Binghamton. Dr.
Schecter frequently travels to Vietnam to conduct research in public health.

During a trip there in July, Dr. Schecter asked Vietnamese authorities to speed
up action on the California leukemia case. He urged Hanoi either to permit the
drawing of blood samples from family members or to allow them to travel to the
United States.

Dr. Schecter also left a message in Hanoi for John W. Vessey Jr., the retired
general who went to Vietnam in August as President Reagan's emissary in
discussing the fates of missing American servicemen. Dr. Schecter said the
General helped expedite the case with the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry and the
State Department.

As a result, seven of the student's family members, his mother, three unmarried
sisters and a married sister with her husband and child, left Vietnam and
arrived in San Jose on Thursday. Within hours, Dr. Schecter said, blood samples
had been taken from the immediate family. On Friday, analysts at Stanford
University Medical Center determined that one sister had the required tissue
type.

The operation, similar to the emergency marrow transplants performed on victims
of the Soviet nuclear reactor accident at Chernobyl last year, will probably be
performed in the next two weeks, Dr. Schecter said.

'Immense Satisfaction

Dr. Schecter said he saw the exceptional action taken by Hanoi and Washington in
this case as potentially symptomatic of improving relations between the two
countries, even though the circumstances were unusual.

''In any case,'' he said, ''it's an immense satisfaction for someone whose
somewhat impersonal profession is public health to have a hand in helping anyone
directly.'' Whatever the outcome of the operation, he said, at least the patient
has been reunited with his mother and sisters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN OLD FOX KNOWS MANY THINGS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE; William Safire, a columnist for The New York Times,
is the author of ''Freedom,'' a novel about the Civil War.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2311 words



MAN OF THE HOUSE
The Life and Political Memoirs of Speaker Tip O'Neill. With William Novak.
Illustrated. 387 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.

A GRAY-HAIRED gentleman in a derby hat known as John (Up-Up) Kelly was an
advance man for the twice-convicted Mayor of Boston and Governor of
Massachusetts, James Michael Curley. ''He'd go into a hall where Curley was to
speak,'' Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. recounts in ''Man of the House,''

''and he'd bow to everybody and charm them, all the while looking at his watch.
Then, just before Curley came in, Kelly would start yelling, 'Up, up, the
governor.' . . . It was an amazing thing: Up-Up Kelly had that magic touch, so
that even people who hated Curley would be applauding.''

The art of the revealing sobriquet is gone. (I don't know one moving and storage
man extricating a piano from a small New York apartment today who recalls the
ropes-and-pulleys talents of Look-Out-Below Bernstein.) But in the most valuable
moments of what he calls his ''political testament,'' Tip O'Neill - in the role
of spellbinding Irish charmer - recalls with affection the era of idealized
corruption and profound voter sensitivity that marked his entry into the
political arena. (He was a member of the Massachusetts House for 16 years before
he was elected to Congress in 1952.) Old pols will smile at his variation of the
old collar dodge. Whenever a political figure prepares to face cameras after a
hospital stay, cunning aides who want to conceal weight loss bring their boss a
shirt with a collar two sizes smaller than when he entered. But Mayor Curley,
appearing in court for sentencing, wanted to demonstrate his frailty, so ''he
wore a collar that was too large for his neck, to give the impression that he
had lost weight. But when he was released from jail, he had miraculously
recovered.'' POLITICAL etymologists will smack their lips: ''the Chinese hat
trick'' is a form of ''running them in'' that enlivens vote fraud by having 10
hired Chinese men change their hats repeatedly so they can vote frequently;
''narrowback'' was an epithet derogating someone whose parents were born in this
country and who was hence not fit for hard honest labor; ''on his uppers,'' in
Mr. O'Neill's definition, refers to one who ''didn't even have enough money to
fix the heels on his shoes.''

But it is more recent politics that will attract the general reader. With
disarming frankness, Mr. O'Neill reveals his role as middleman in what will
strike some as an attempt by the Kennedy family to buy off Edward McCormack,
Edward M. Kennedy's opponent in the Democratic primary during Mr. Kennedy's
first race for the Senate. According to Mr. O'Neill, he was directed by
President John F. Kennedy to talk to his aide, Kenneth O'Donnell, who is quoted
by Mr. O'Neill as having said that, ''if Eddie drops out now, we'll make him an
ambassador to any country he wants. We also understand that he's in debt for a
hundred thousand dollars. If he [Mr. McCormack] gets out now, Old Joe will make
sure that the debt is taken care of, and Eddie will be retained as a lawyer for
some of the Kennedy ventures.'' According to the O'Neill account, the offer was
turned down by Mr. McCormack, who supposedly then exhibited an interest in a
Federal post that turned out to be promised to somebody else.

THAT account of what some post-Watergate moralizers would interpret as a blatant
bribe attempt instigated in the Oval Office may be colored by Mr. O'Neill's
evident pique at the late Kenny O'Donnell, part of what became known as the
Irish Mafia that he thinks made sure ''I was frozen out of the White House.''
The ire of the former Speaker at palace guardians is bipartisan; he shows
contempt for the aides to President Nixon (though he recalls recommending
Charles Colson to Mr. Nixon) and, sworn in as Speaker of the House in 1977, the
same year Jimmy Carter became President, he purples at the memory of the Carter
Administration's Hamilton Jordan, whom he labeled ''Hannible Jerkin.'' To Mr.
Jordan, in Mr. O'Neill's words, ''a House Speaker was something you bought on
sale at Radio Shack.''

However, the former Speaker accepts O'Donnell's contention that John F. Kennedy
''agreed with Mike Mansfield on the need for a complete military withdrawal from
Vietnam.'' Why did the President not give the public a hint of that position?
Mr. O'Neill's practical political reasoning will dismay idealists who think
candidates should express their true beliefs during campaigns: ''Because the
president knew that such a move might prove wildly unpopular with the voters,''
explains Mr. O'Neill, ''he intended to wait until 1965, the beginning of his
second term, to put that plan into effect.''

The apparent O'Neill approval of the Kennedy concealment of that plan is of a
piece with his practicality about other sources of unpopularity. ''I've always
been opposed to witchhunts, and I hated what [Senator Joseph] McCarthy was
doing. Unfortunately, he had a huge following in my district.'' And on why Mr.
O'Neill did not follow his conscience and vote, as he says he wanted to, against
the August 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution in Congress, which authorized
President Johnson to take ''all necessary measures'' in Southeast Asia: ''I just
didn't have the courage.'' Somehow, however, these candid admissions do not
vitiate the moral fervor with which Mr. O'Neill denounces Reagan Administration
motives in recent arms dealings: ''People around the president were willing to
do almost anything to bring the Beirut hostages home before November 4, 1986,
the date of the midterm elections.''

Historians will be less interested in Mr. O'Neill's opinions and confessions
than in his first-hand testimony about what famous figures said to him. We can
dismiss his pious ''I miss Jimmy Carter'' and note instead his insightful report
that President Carter once told him: ''People love to see you carrying your own
bags.'' That shows a certain manipulativeness, matched by the Speaker's sour
reminder that bellhops vote, too. And how many of us have wondered what the two
men seated behind the President were saying to each other during the State of
the Union addresses? Mr. O'Neill provides the answer, reporting that he told
Vice President Bush: ''Voodoo economics, George. You understand that, don't
you?'' ''Quiet, Tip.'' ''You don't actually believe this [barnyard epithet], do
you?'' The needling interchange was covered over by big smiles, and Mr. O'Neill
is delighted that the Vice President soon began to get letters complaining about
his being unduly friendly with the House Speaker.

The foreign policy stunner in the book is in a passage in which Mr. O'Neill
reports on a visit to Beijing and a talk with China's paramount leader, Deng
Xiaoping. ''Why are you always talking about Taiwan?'' the Speaker says he
asked. ''Here's a little island of less than twenty million people. The way I
figure it, Taiwan should mean nothing to you. Surely you have more important
things to worry about.'' Then - hold on to your Chinese hat, this may be an old
Curley trick - Mr. O'Neill writes that Mr. Deng replied: ''You're absolutely
right. . . . But just between us, it's something our people love to hear about,
and that's why I keep harping on it.''

DID Mr. Deng really say that? Did he really admit to a Westerner, through an
interpreter, that the Taiwan issue is a mere sop to the home folks? I wonder.
Was it recorded, or were contemporaneous notes made? Was it the account of a
politics-minded visitor who remembers what he would have said if he were Mr.
Deng? Was it a hazy recollection pressed into hard news by a ghostwriter
determined to make something solid out of something intriguing but vague?

We come now to a problem with many modern memoirs. Autobiography ain't ''auto''
anymore; the as-told-to technique is taking over, as celebrated figures under
deadline spill what they remember into a tape recorder for ''shaping'' by
authorized biographers, who then go to a list of former associates to fill in
more anecdotes. William Novak is the most successful of these well-materialized
ghosts; he wrote the best-selling ''Mayflower Madam'' for Sydney Biddle Barrows
and the blockbuster ''Iacocca'' for Lee Iacocca (who, O'Neill/Novak allows,
would make ''a hell of a President'' though he ''tends to pop off''). Mr.
Novak's ear for the lingo of the people he is ghosting is excellent, as we have
seen, although no Washington biggie would say ''Duke's Restaurant'' - only
''Duke's'' or ''Duke Zeibert's.'' ''Duke's Restaurant'' is an error in usage
similar to calling Claridge's in London ''the Claridge Hotel.''

Up to now, I have been reviewing Tip O'Neill's memoirs as if the book were an
autobiography, which it is not (nor is it so labeled). More accurately, it is a
biography written by Mr. Novak based on Mr. O'Neill's recollections and subject
to the subject's editing, buttressed by research done among Mr. O'Neill's
friends and aides (all duly acknowledged) and padded with stories and anecdotes
from elsewhere.

WELL, what's wrong with that? Nothing, if delivery on deadline of a publishable,
even page-turning, manuscript were all. The technique permits Mr. O'Neill to
produce a book without long delay, reward friends and punish enemies (the
Speaker hails the columnist Jimmy Breslin and rails against the columnists Evans
and Novak). He defends himself against some charges (he hardly knew the Korean
lobbyist Tongsun Park, whose gifts to Congressmen became a big scandal in 1977)
and ignores others (not a word about ''Tip's tips,'' his skillful placement of
campaign funds to loyal supporters). Moreover, the as-told-to product is
smoothly professional, zipping right along with freshened-up political jokes and
microwave-warmed anecdotes.

Mr. Novak is skilled in spicing his pages with provocative quips and fast
flirtations with controversial topics (the Nicaraguan contras are dismissed as
''a small ragtag army of racketeers, bandits, and murderers'') as well as
fascinating verbatim conversations that suggest his subject is, in S. J.
Perelman's phrase, ''afflicted with total recall.''

We are left to puzzle out how some of the fondly related stories reflect the
subject's beliefs; for example, an episode is delightedly relayed (through
Speaker John McCormack) about how Sam Rayburn, when he was Speaker, concealed a
$2 billion expenditure for the Manhattan Project during World War II in a score
of committee budgets, without ever telling the committee chairmen what all that
money was for. The wartime military secret was kept, of course, and we are led
to presume that Mr. O'Neill believes that the end justified the means of keeping
all but one member of Congress in the dark.

This book, I suppose, is a prime example of the new biography, a genre that
explodes its tiny time pills of anecdote on each page to reflag the reader's
interest. Elitists, academic historians and assorted other issue-freaks should
not be quick to knock it, because the consequence is to induce many public
figures to cooperate in the production of books that contain both intended and
unintended self-revelation, and thus to relieve us from having to plow through
turgid self-serving memoirs.

The name Tip, we learn, was taken from ancient baseball's Edward O'Neill, the
St. Louis Brown who tipped so many pitches foul that he became legendary for
drawing walks. His namesake, the subject of this last hoo-hah, rates more than a
base on balls for undertaking this memoir. For its evocation of the early Boston
days alone, ''Man of the House'' deserves to be a hit. The politically hooked
reader can hear, in the background, the voice of derby-hatted John Kelly calling
''Up, up -the Speaker!''

MAKING IT SOUND LIKE TIP

Between rounds of golf near his summer place in Harwich Port, on Cape Cod,
before setting out on a national tour for his book of memoirs, Thomas P. (Tip)
O'Neill Jr. talked by phone about his career as author. ''Around three years
ago,'' he said, ''my son Kip told me, 'You've got so many stories and memories
of people you've known for the last 50 years, why don't you write a book?' Then
this young fellow, Bill Novak, came to see me - he's from Newton, Mass., and I
represented Watertown, the next town over - and told me he was writing a book
with Lee Iacocca, and he said, 'I'd like to do one with you,' and I said, 'Come
back when you're finished.' Afterward I got an agent, Jay Acton, and then 14
publishers wanted the book.

''So we sat down and I dictated for 180 hours, and there was another 100 hours
of research. That was two years ago, but we tore up the first six chapters
because it didn't sound like Tip. Then I started to talk about James Michael
Curley, and the first thing I know we have a chapter on him, and from there I
went on to all the Presidents I knew, Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy and
Johnson and Carter and Reagan. I wanted to tell people the truth about Reagan in
my book; I felt an obligation to answer him and not remain silent. Doris Kearns
called me the other day, and don't forget she used to work for Johnson, and she
told me, 'Tip, I just read your book and nobody gets L.B.J. the way you do.'
That was very nice.

''What I'm trying to do is give a picture of what life is like in the United
States, the power of local politics, and the fact that two thirds of the people
were poor back in the 30's, and it all changed during the New Deal and President
Roosevelt, and we saw the growth of the middle class. I didn't want the book to
go and sit on the back shelf of a library and only be discussed by the college
professors. I wanted people to read it. So I enjoyed writing it, and we still
have enough great material left over on the cutting floor to put together
another book. But first let's see how this one goes.''

HERBERT MITGANG

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez); photo of Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. with then Vice President Ford (From ''Man of the House''); Photo of
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ENOUGH TRUE BELIVERS TO RUN A SMALL WAR

BYLINE: By HOWARD BLUM; Howard Blum, whose ''I Pledge Allegiance: The True Story
of the Walkers, an American Spy Family'' will be published next month, is a
former reporter for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1595 words



THE CRIMES OF PATRIOTS
A True Tale of Dope, Dirty Money, and the CIA. By Jonathan Kwitny. Illustrated.
424 pp. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. $19.95.

BEFORE dawn on a Sunday in January 1980, two Australian police officers were
patrolling a stretch of highway when they noticed, off on a lonely road, the
shining headlights of a parked Mercedes. Curious, they drove toward the car.
Inside it they found a man slumped in his seat, clutching a .30-caliber rifle.
The car was splattered with blood, and the man was dead.

That was how the body of Francis Nugan was discovered. Seven years earlier he
had been the co-founder of an international investment banking house that grew
to be known as the Nugan Hand Bank. With its main branches in Sydney and Hong
Kong, and offices in the Cayman Islands, the Philippines, Hawaii, Panama, Saudi
Arabia and Thailand, the bank was responsible for investing more than $1 billion
annually. Its ostensible services included money-market operations,
tax-sheltering plans and corporate financing. Yet within four months of Nugan's
mysterious death -murder? suicide? - the company was bankrupt. And this
financial disaster led to four Australian Government investigations that
ultimately focused on aspects of American foreign policy.

''The Crimes of Patriots'' by Jonathan Kwitny, a Wall Street Journal reporter
and the author of ''Endless Enemies,'' an influential book about United States
foreign policy, is important and timely. It is not simply a case study of how
the Nugan Hand Bank functioned as, in his words, ''a giant theft machine,''
moving billions illegally around the world, engaged in financing the heroin
trade, tax fraud and wound up bilking innocent investors of at least $50
million. But rather, ''The Crimes of Patriots'' is an indictment of a gung-ho
foreign policy that allows a mob of military and intelligence veterans to storm
about the globe breaking laws and making money in pursuit of an
extra-constitutional conception of the national interest. The purported
activities of the bank - and while Mr. Kwitny's reporting is impassioned and
convincing, his findings are still only allegations - included participation in
African arms deals, a middleman's role in the sale of a United States Navy spy
boat to Iran and the compilation of detailed reports describing military
capabilities and troop movements in Southeast Asia. Clearly, Nugan Hand was not
your average bank.

Reading ''The Crimes of Patriots'' with the drama of the televised Iran-contra
hearings playing in one's mind, the reader can't help feeling he's caught up in
a shrewd spinoff from producers very much like those of the summer's highly
successful and fascinating soap opera. There's the inevitable shredding-machine
scene, the shadowy arms merchants, the missing millions, the unanswered
questions that lead in a meandering and maddening path of innuendos to the
C.I.A., the officials with reluctant memories who, with prodding, provide only
arch and Delphic responses. Even some of the hearings' favorite characters are
brought out for walk-on roles - former Air Force Gen. Richard V. Secord and
former C.I.A. officer Thomas Clines.

In fact, while reading Mr. Kwitny's complex and often, alas, jumpy narrative,
one recalls the moment in the Iran-contra hearings when Lieut. Col. Oliver North
characterized the decision to use profits from the sale of arms to the Iranians
to support the contras as a ''neat idea.'' The Nugan Hand Bank's activities
were, it seems, another ''neat idea'' gone awry, another chilling episode,
according to Mr. Kwitny, in the twisted policy that holds that international
business is a continuation of international politics by other means. As the
author points out, his book ''was essentially finished before the Iran-Contra
affair exploded. . . . But actors come and go. It is the roles that stay, and
that we need to be concerned with.''

Yet consider the cast of characters he discovers working for and with the Nugan
Hand Bank. There are the bank's founders: Francis J. Nugan - ''the playboy heir
to a modest food-processing fortune with,'' Mr. Kwitny notes, ''strange
beginnings, even stranger criminal associations, and built in part on U.S.
military contracts,'' whose death officially has been ruled a suicide - and
Michael J. Hand, the Bronx-born Vietnam Green Beret war hero (Silver Star,
Purple Heart and Distinguished Service Cross) who was, the author reports, a
''CIA operative'' in Southeast Asia and who simply vanished after Australian
officials began investigating the bank.

Equally interesting are the people these self-made bankers - their seed capital
was less than $1,000 - attracted to work with them: Adm. Earl P. Yates, the
president of the bank, who had been the chief of staff for plans and policy of
the United States Pacific Command; Gen. LeRoy J. Manor, who ran the bank's
Philippine office and had been the chief of staff for the Pacific Command; and
Gen. Erle Cocke Jr., a World War II hero who ran the bank's Washington office.
Others tied to the bank by Mr. Kwitny include a handful of former C.I.A. field
men and researchers and Edwin Wilson, a former C.I.A. officer who is now serving
a prison term for selling arms to Libya. No wonder the author coyly observes
that ''Nugan Hand had enough generals, admirals, and spooks to run to a small
war.''

However, it was not a war that the bank was fighting. Its activities were
criminal. Mr. Kwitny carefully documents what he describes as ''a mammoth
drug-financing, money-laundering, tax-evading investor-fraud operation.'' He
also raises questions about the bank's possible role in contract murder,
manipulation of Australian politics and arms sales in Africa and the Mideast.
And then there is the $50 million - money from small investors, many of them
American servicemen who were confident to invest their savings in a bank that
had their former commanders' imprimatur - that simply disappeared.

All these crimes provoke a disturbing thought: why were so many honorable men
working for such a blatantly corrupt organization? Either they were duped; or
then again, perhaps their cooperation was prompted by something else. Could
Nugan Hand, though a private organization, have functioned as a bank for covert
C.I.A. operations?

Dutifully, Mr. Kwitny quotes the C.I.A.'s assertion that it ''had no ties with
the Nugan Hand Bank.'' Yet this denial, he feels, can only lead to a disturbing
conclusion. He quotes an Australian official who investigated the bank: ''What
you're left with is saying, here are all these patriots who have served their
country faithfully for years, suddenly saying, 'Let's all become criminals.
Let's forget our war service, our heroism, and go out and commit crimes against
the very country we've been working for.' ''

Mr. Kwitny, however, offers no firm resolution to this fools-or-knaves riddle.
Again like the Iran-contra hearings, there are no smoking guns, only a scatter
shot of fascinating speculations. Mr. Kwitny's search for truth becomes a search
for hypotheses. In the end, he offers not proofs but theories. And that is part
of the book's strength.

''The Crimes of Patriots'' is a model of responsible investigative journalism
because it avoids claiming to be more than it is. It is not, Mr. Kwitny
announces in the beginning, ''a book for people who must have their mysteries
solved.'' And, true to his word, there is, in fact, a list of 57 ''questions
whose answers are secret'' in an appendix. Yet, these mysteries only help to
reinforce one's admiration for Mr. Kwitny's reporting and the clues he
uncovered. The unanswered questions - and their implications about the conduct
of this country's foreign policy - are as resonant as the ones he does answer.

THERE is also a curious afterword to the book. A publisher's note explains that
Admiral Yates, who refused for five years to be interviewed by Mr. Kwitny, was
asked to write an unedited and unaltered rebuttal. He agreed, and he is given,
in effect, his own day on the stand. He's no salesman like Oliver North.

The admiral, calling the group of former military and intelligence officers he
helped attract to Nugan Hand ''The True Patriots,'' explains that when he first
joined the bank as its president he ''undertook an intensive self-taught
accounting and business-law course.'' And, equally commendable he apparently
feels, he was enrolled in the Harvard Business School when the bank collapsed in
1980. One wonders, though, if the admiral would be so enthusiastic if the Navy
had a policy that allowed him to become the commander of an aircraft carrier
(which he had been) before he had ever learned to sail a sunfish.

The admiral also asserts that ''The True Patriots served honestly and loyally
the interests of Nugan Hand and its clients. They had grown up in the military
service and spent their lives in the company of gentlemen well known for honesty
and honor, where it is commonplace to risk one's life, not just one's money and
reputation, based on the word of a colleague.''

Fine sentiments. And again one is reminded of a moment during the Iran-contra
hearings. Having listened to Colonel North's recitation of his patriotic motives
and praised the sincerity of his testimony, Representative Dante B. Fascell, the
vice chairman of the House Select Committee, turned to the witness and said,
''But I keep asking myself, 'How come I don't feel good?' '' It is in the
contemplation of an answer to that despairing question that one appreciates the
significance of ''The Crimes of Patriots.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Michael J. Hand, Francis J. Nugan, Adm. Earl P. Yates, Edwin
Wilson and Gen. Erle Cocke Jr. (From ''The Crimes of Patriots'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
GOING FOR BROKE: WHEN A DECISION IS FINAL

BYLINE: By R. L. CROSSLAND; R. L. Crossland is a corporate lawyer in Shelton and
the commander of the Reserve Sea-Air-Land unit informally known as the Newport
Detachment.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 28, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words


IN so many World War II movies, Jack Hawkins or another actor of his stripe
brings in a young commando lieutenant and asks him what he knows about the
drydock at Saint-Nazaire, France. Or the radar facility at Bruneval or the
merchant ships at Bordeaux or the Norwegian heavy water facility. And then he
sets that lieutenant and his men out to destroy one of those objectives.

I write this from a NATO facility in Britain, and I do the same in modern dress.
I send those lietuenants and their men forth on similar practice raids on the
continent in what the civilian world calls ''war games.''

Though this is peacetime and safety considerations control, the perils are still
there. Peacetime special operations exercises involve the same hazardous
activities as wartime; for night parachute drops, underwater attacks using
oxygen-rebreathers, assaults up sheer cliffs, the use of explosive charges, and
open water passages in small boats, are always hazardous.

Despite nearly two decades of experience in this field, I am still amazed at the
process. The lieutenant will examine the intelligence file on the objective and
suggest whether his organization can take it or not. Ultimately, between us, I
have the last say. If it is decided the objective can be taken, there are a
series of junctures at which the mission can be scrubbed. But common to all
raids, there is a final point of no return, a point at which the referee's hands
cannot signal ''T'' for time, or the participant's hand cannot be raised to be
excused. The concept of the irrevocable decision is accepted and considered
routine.

It must be understood that I am a reserve officer, and in the other part of my
life I serve as legal counsel to a corporation. The contrast is startling. I
regularly counsel against irrevocable decisions, structure contracts that can be
readily abandoned when onerous, counsel caution and advise minimal commitment.
This is necessary and understandable, for businesses must remain flexible to
respond to the exigencies of the market and commercial relationships may
continue only so long as they are productive. However, I am surprised to see how
often managers fail to realize that here, too, there must be irrevocable
decisions, ones that can't be changed at the last minute. Yet, how often in my
legal life I am called in to figure out how to pull the deployed parachutists
back in to the plane.

The universal training requirement for elite military units is parachute
training. In view of the small percentage of successful parachute operations
since the development of airborne doctrine in the 1930's, it might seem
surprising that this one technique has developed into the single most common
requirement for entry into special operations organizations. There is a strange
institutional wisdom to the requirement. Its value rests with the training and
not with the attained skill.

In Vietnam I made a training jump with the South Vietnam Rangers. It was a first
jump for them and they had, what a writer on Vietnam has described as,
''fried-egg eyes.'' Snow white showing all the way round the pupils, the
Rangers' eyes were wide with fear and excitement. Each parachutist had come to
the realization that the moment the light changed from red to green, and he
jumped clear of door, there would be no opportunity to change the course of
things, ask for help, or decline participation. He had volunteered and he and he
alone determined his fate. This was the moment of reckoning. He had made the
decision to jump and he must live with it. Military operations run better when
the combatants realize that junctures of this sort, though less dramatic,
pervade all significant military undertakings.

Later that year in An Xuyen province, it became apparent that my platoon had the
opportunity to stage a night raid to capture the finance and economy chief of
the Vietcong Fifth Military Region. We were to approach from the coast through a
mangrove swamp and capture the ''tax-collector colonel'' and his staff in one
hutch among several along the outer fringe of the U Minh forest. The main body
of the nearby Vietcong battalion was bivouacked deeper in the U Minh.

I decided we would go. We appeared to be favored by circumstances. No American
or South Vietnamese units had been in the area for years and the Vietcong had no
reason to believe any would. Aside from his immediate bodyguards, there were no
other known VC in the hutch complex. Furthermore, we had planned to attack at
3:30 A.M., a time when vigilance wanes. Finally rain was predicted for the
evening and morning of the raid.

That night, after I had delivered my briefing, my immediate superior informed me
with a smile that an aerial reconnaissance of the area performed only hours
earlier had disclosed that the colonel's hutch was at the center of a large
triangle with active Vietcong .51-caliber antiaircraft guns at each corner.

My immediate superior was not a pleasant or happy man and enjoyed bringing bad
news.

He had wanted to lead this operation himself. Three antiaircraft batteries would
be a serious concern since we would be taking our prisoners out by helicopter. A
helicopter caught in the triangular crossfire of antiaircraft guns could not
evade three streams of fire. I decided to go anyway.  Perhaps anticipating the
plodding analytical nature of my future civilian profession, I weighed the
risks, probability of success, and possible benefits. Tipping the scales was the
fact that we wanted the colonel for another reason; he had information about
American prisoners of war held in the U Minh. Foremost, however, in my mind
throughout was the knowledge that once we had committed - once we placed our
feet in mangrove mud - there was no way to back out gracefully. Actually, there
would be no way to back out at all. We would have arrived at a final point of no
return.

We made the raid, there was a fire fight. The colonel's staff and bodyguards
were there, he wasn't. The helicopters pulled us out and the sleepy
rain-drenched antiaircraft gun crews never fired a shot. To my considerable
satisfaction, Vietcong labor battalions worked for months constructing an
extensive series of new punji pits along the coast, correctly guessing how we
had arrived. Our impact had an immense effect on Vietcong morale and caused a
decline in tax collecting around the U Minh.

I watch my son and his friends play checkers and watch them try to undo moves.
''No, I didn't mean that,'' or ''My hand was still on it,'' or ''I made a
mistake, I meant to move the other one.'' I realize and hope that he will at
some point realize, that he will not be able to face manhood without making some
irrevocable commitment at some time and live with its consequences.

The Nisei 442d Infantry Regimental Combat Team fighting in Europe in World War
II knew the concept and adopted it as a motto. They called it ''going for
broke.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Getting Together: Dating for the Disabled

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6


Dateable - pronounced with the accent on the ''able'' - is a dating service for
single people with physical disabilities and illnesses, the first such service
in Washington and one of only a handful in the United States.

Dr. Lucy R. Waletzky, who founded the nonprofit dating service, which began
earlier this summer, said the idea grew out of her work as a psychiatrist at the
Medical Illness Counseling Center in Chevy Chase, Md. She is a co-director of
the center, which treats emotional problems associated with physical illness,
using psychotherapy, biofeedback and hypnosis.

''Several of my patients who were handicapped or had a medical illness like
cancer were single and hoping to meet other people,'' said Dr. Waletzky, a
daughter of Laurance S. and Mary French Rockefeller. ''They literally didn't
know where to turn.''

The basic concept is to find creative ways to help people with disabilities
become part of the mainstream.

'The Point Is to Link Them Up'

''Somehow it is as if handicapped people have given up their right to normal
social intercourse, that they are children of a lesser god,'' she said, ''rather
than people who, like everyone else, want and need human relationships. The
point is to link them up, initially with each other, then with the
able-bodied.''

The service is not a computerized operation but one run by volunteers, a
personalized effort at bringing people together as phone pals, dating partners
or new friends with similar interests. Social events are planned, and some 30
people, ranging in age from 19 to 70, attended the group's first cocktail party
last month. Members, who pay annual dues of $25, include those who are disabled
by spinal-cord injuries, blindness or arthritis; others have cancer, diabetes or
multiple sclerosis.

Ellen Stovall plays matchmaker, personally interviewing each applicant, who has
already filled out a basic questionnaire. ''It is not a matter of screening them
out,'' she said. ''It is screening them in.''

'Personal Goals and Desires'

Some have very specific things they are looking for, Mrs. Stovall said:
''5-foot-2, eyes of blue, but it's O.K. if they are in a wheelchair.''

Some have experienced disappointment and rejection; others have had no dating
experience at all. ''We go into their relationship history, what was positive or
negative,'' she explained, ''what they fantasize as the perfect date, their
personal goals and desires.''

Applicants are seeking a range of relationships, she said, and some check off
all four categories listed on the questionnaire: dating, platonic friendship,
phone pal, marriage.

''At this point,'' Mrs. Stovall said, ''the biggest disability they have is
loneliness. The paralysis or the blindness takes a back seat to being lonely. We
find a lot about the person's inner feelings during that part of the
interview.''

A couple of weeks ago, just as Edward R. Grebenstein completed an interview with
Mrs. Stovall, she said: ''I think I've got a match. I think he would be ideal
for a young lady whom I've previously interviewed.''

Mr. Grebenstein, who teaches children and adults to use computers, had heard
about Dateable through the local chapter of National Chronic Pain Outreach.

''I was attracted because it presented me with a way I could meet people who
would understand what is going on with me,'' said Mr. Grebenstein, who suffers
from migraines.

He had already attended one of Dateable's parties and had liked what he found.
''People were pretty open about who they were and why they were there,'' he
said. ''I didn't get a sense that anybody was pursuing a hidden agenda.''

His plans for the future date? ''Well,'' he said, ''we might go to 'Banjo
Dancing' at Arena Stage or maybe just have a picnic somewhere.''

Dateable's five-member board of advisers, all of whom have an illness or
disability, met recently to plan the group's next social gathering, a discussion
group to be led by a newly married couple, a disabled Vietnam veteran and his
wife.

One board member, Kit Kamien, a songwriter and recording artist with multiple
sclerosis who uses a wheelchair, recalled that he had been turned down by one
Washington dating service. ''I think I was the only one brazen enough to try,''
he said. ''Their attitude was: 'You should have known there was a problem. You
should stay in your place.' '' ''I think we have all experienced social
isolation at one time or another,'' said Ann O'Brien, a board member and former
cancer patient who suffers from a physical disability brought on by
complications from cancer therapy. ''We hope Dateable will bridge that gap -
serve to integrate people more in sort of able-bodied activities. That is one of
our major goals.''

Brochures concerning the dating service have been sent to professional groups,
doctors, physical therapists and ministers. A recent radio interview and an
advertisement placed in a local magazine have resulted in several dozen calls to
Dateable at 301-657-DATE (301-657-3283).

Group Therapy Available

Dr. Waletzky and a colleague, Natalie Zimmerman, a social worker, work closely
with Mrs. Stovall.

''We are a backup to the matchmaker,'' Dr. Waletzky said. ''If you take a
disabled person who is very frightened to do this, and he or she has a bad
experience and is stuck with it, that would be very unfortunate. So we have
group therapy available as a backup so that they may learn more social skills,
more communication skills, more sexual skills, so they will have a better
experience next time.''

It is not only a matter of changing the public's attitude toward people with
disabilities, she said, but also a matter of changing disabled people's attitude
toward themselves.

''It involves consciousness-raising for them as well,'' Dr. Waletzky said. ''In
fact, that is where it starts, because like most minorities, they are prejudiced
against themselves.''

She paused and added, ''I like a quote in Hemingway's 'Farewell to Arms' that I
feel sort of sums it up: 'The world breaks everyone and afterward many are
strong at the broken places.' ''

OTHER GROUPS

In addition to Dateable in the Washington area, following are some other
organizations for people with disabilities:

Dating for Disabled serves New York City and its suburbs and also offers a
national pen-pal service: P.O. Box 452, Katonah, N.Y. 10536; 914-232-8881.

Handicap Introductions is a national dating service: P.O. Box 232, Coopersburg,
Pa. 18036; 215-282-1577.

Peoplenet is a national newsletter that runs personal ads for people with
disabilities. A free brochure is available: 257 Center Lane, Levittown, N.Y.
11756.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kit Kamien, member of Dateable's advisory board, with Dr. Lucy
R. Waletzky, group's founder, and Ann O'Brien, board member (NYT/Paul A.
Souders)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words




International

French forces shot down a Libyan jet as it was about to bomb the Chadian capital
of Ndjamena, and some French officials fear the incident could lead to a direct
conflict between France and Libya.    Page A1



William H. Webster has moved to assert himself in his first three months as
Director of Central Intelligence, through such steps as tightening control over
covert actions.    A1



Moscow will permit the emigration of a group of prominent Jewish dissidents who
had been refused exit visas for many years on the ground that they knew state
secrets, Soviet officials said.    A1



East Germany met West Germany in Bonn when Erich Honecker arrived for the first
official visit of its kind. The East German leader, who 26 years ago directed
the building of the Berlin Wall, met with West Germany's Chancellor, Helmut
Kohl.    A8

The working class is suffering most in Central America's worst economic crisis
of the century. Many have been forced to accept living conditions and wages that
are equivalent to what they earned a decade ago.    A14



A West German was freed in Beirut after being held hostage for eight months by a
clandestine group demanding the release of suspected Lebanese terrorists. Alfred
Schmidt, an engineer, was handed over to his embassy in Damascus.    A3



Journalists in Vietnam challenge all in what is portrayed as their quest to
serve the masses. ''In the information world, there can be no sacred cows,''
said the editor of a Vietnamese Communist Party newspaper in Saigon.    A4



Two politicians who share a surname and the ambition to be South Korea's
President may add new divisiveness to an unsettled nation. Kim Young Sam and Kim
Dae Jung are rivals to oust the present Government in December elections.    A5

Vote ends Turkish political ban

    A3



Doctor's dismissal spurs clash

    A6



Peronists make a comeback

    A10



National    A16-21, B7-8



A chaotic session for Congress is shaping up as members return this week from
the summer recess with almost all of the year's most difficult legislative
problems - from taxes to arms control - waiting to be resolved.    A1



Fewer hands don't mean higher pay, at least in areas along the East Coast where
wages have risen only modestly despite a short supply of labor. Economists and
labor experts consider the situation an unusual phenomenon.    A1



American high schools foster elitism and class bias by failing to offer adequate
instruction in history and literature to millions of students, according to a
federally financed study conducted by two scholars.    A1

The Rev. Jesse Jackson will run for President. Mr. Jackson, preaching a message
of economic revival for America's displaced citizens, announced he will be a
candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1988.    A16



A Latin flavor is found on farms south of Miami. Hundreds of acres are being
converted every month to grow mamey, atemoya, malanga and other crops whose
supply from abroad cannot keep up with the burgeoning demand in America.    A16



Fourteen Belgians were denied visas in Kansas City, Mo., which had hired them to
teach French in the school district's new foreign-language magnet schools. The
new schools are part of a desegregation effort.    A16

Fertility rates fell to a record low in the United States last year, while life
expectancy reached a record high and marriage and divorce rates dropped to the
lowest levels in a decade, the Government reported.    A18



Complex planning for the Pope's trip to the United States this month reflects
the church's view that the voyage is one of the most important single efforts of
John Paul II's nine-year pontificate.    A19



Rules on airline service for disabled passengers are being written by a
Government-created panel. But both the carriers and the disabled agree that one
major issue - whether blind people should sit near emergency exits - may not be
settled.    B7

Parkersburg journal

    A16



U.S. to weigh shift in education aid

    B7



Washington Talk    A20



Key players in four major issues facing Congress this fall

Regional    B1-5, B20



Homeless people in the suburbs surrounding New York City have doubled in number
in the last three years, officials say, overwhelming emergency services and
causing wrenching social change.    A1



One person was killed when gunfire erupted at an anti-crime concert in Queens.
Five others were injured after a man pulled out a pistol and began firing after
arguing with another concertgoer, police said.    B1



A longtime labor leader was stricken and rushed to the hospital shortly before
he was to have led New York City's traditional Labor Day Parade. The labor
leader, Peter J. Ottley, became dizzy and nauseated at a Central Labor Council
meeting.    B1

Pollution along the Jersey Shore has begun to worry the families that have long
spent their summers on its wide white beaches. ''You just always assumed that
this beautiful natural resource would go on and on,'' one woman said.    B1

Two gangland-style shootings in Brooklyn do not appear to be connected,
investigators said. The police said they have found just the methods in the
deaths of a man shot on Sunday with two men gunned down last Thursday were the
same.    B3



News analysis: Mayor Koch's plan to remove more mentally ill homeless people,
who have become symbols of urban misery, from New York City streets has
demonstrated once again his acute sense of popular opinion and political timing.

    B3



A bid for wider voter power in New York State is being made by a group called We
the People, which is circulating petitions asking that the rights of initiative
and referendum be added to the State Constitution.    B20

The aerodynamics of the knuckleball are the subject of new research that shows,
among other things, a relationship between the baseball's stitches and the
knuckleball's peculiar trajectory.    C1


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HO CHI MINH CITY JOURNAL: IS A NEWSPAPER FOR THE MANDARINS, OR THE MASSES?;
Criticism of the Criticism

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Sept. 7


A Communist Party committee has delivered the first publicized warning to
Vietnamese journalists not to be overzealous in their criticism campaign.

At a meeting in late August of editors and party leaders at nine newspapers,
none apparently in the forefront of the anti-corruption drive, a party unit
described by the domestic Vietnamese radio service as ''the committee of the
bloc of central mass motivation organs'' raised concerns about journalistic
methods.

''There are still shortcomings, which can lessen the effect of various articles,
such as the lack of precise details, carelessness in the use of language and
excessive criticism,'' the radio report said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Ho Chi Minh City Journal;
Is a Newspaper for the Mandarins, or the Masses?

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


''In the information world, there can be no sacred cows.''

The editor of a Vietnamese Communist Party newspaper was speaking. The editor,
Tuat Viet of Saigon Giai Phong, is one of a small but influential corps of
journalists who say they are changing the way the press thinks and works in
Vietnam.

''There has been a struggle between two points of view: to serve the masses or
to serve the mandarins,'' he said in an interview at the paper's offices.

''Being a Government tool, just printing declarations, is always the easier
way,'' he said. ''We wanted to add commentary, criticism, real reporting to
this.''

Venality and Sloth

Corruption in the national airline, venal party officials, slothful bureaucrats,
inadequately educated doctors, men who avoid military service by marrying
officers' daughters, these are only a few of the targets that are attracting the
attention of writers and cartoonists.

''Where are the 300 liters of fuel?'' asks a headline in The Youth Paper, the
most daring of the new journalistic breed, in a report on bureaucratic theft.

Another article, ''Good news for drunks,'' notes that the price of almost
everything except beer is rising.

A cartoon in the same paper shows peasants confronting a luxury house newly
built in rice fields near Hanoi's international airport. The house, like many
others, belongs to a pilot who is enriching himself on smuggled foreign goods.

A Trove of Cement and Bricks

The accompanying article reveals details of how Vietnam Airline's former
personnel chief used the carrier's overworked planes to ferry construction
materials and laborers from south to north, to build himself a villa of princely
proportions.

In the process, the official, Ngo Dac Thuong, managed to steal or otherwise
procure the following: 14,000 pounds of cement, 2,500 pounds of iron and steel,
six cubic yards of stone, 102,800 bricks and a good deal of fancy hardware, the
newspaper said.

The Youth Paper, published in Ho Chi Minh City, also produces two newsprint
magazines: Youth on Sunday and The Laughter of Youth. All are sellouts, news
agents say.

But the editors of Saigon Giai Phong believe they were the first to question the
economic policies being forced on what was formerly South Vietnam after Hanoi's
victory in 1975. And they are now also the most frank in assessing the potential
opposition to change from hard-liners within the Vietnamese Communist Party.

Marxism Still Unquestioned

''There was time when even news of accidents or robberies was suppressed,'' Mr.
Viet said. ''This was not reflecting reality.''

''Party leaders did not want critics,'' he added. ''They were afraid of public
opinion. Leaders feared that to open the door would invite an attack on the
whole system.''

No journalist has been reported censored or punished yet in the outspoken
campaign for party and government overhaul, which so far has not questioned the
fundamentals of Marxism. But some editors have been challenged.

Among them is Gen. Tran Cong Man, editor in chief of the Vietnamese Army
newspaper, Quan Doi Nhan Dan. The paper has been on a sustained crusade against
general inadequacies of government as well as specific cases of corruption and
abuse inside and outside the military.

Role of an Army Paper

Analysts who follow events in the Vietnamese Army from Australia and the United
States say that the motive for the paper's campaign may be the army's need to
win for itself an influential place in peacetime, when its demands compete with
those of other interest groups.

The paper says in its editorials that the army cannot be effective in present
economic conditions, because soldiers are undernourished, inadequately fed and
skimpily supplied.

General Man said that from time to time party officials go over his head to try
to stop articles from appearing. He said reporters are being told to verify
carefully reports of malfeasance very carefully, so that there will be no
missteps.

At The Youth Paper, the deputy editor, 37-year-old Huynh Son Phuoc, says there
are four lawyers on call to check articles for potential legal problems.

The Newsprint Shortage

Vietnam's livelier papers say that it is only a shortage of newsprint that keeps
them from increasing size and production runs. Mr. Viet at Saigon Giai Phong -
where some journalists from the old South Vietnamese regime are employed - said
that his market research indicated the present circulation of 90,000 could
easily be more than doubled to 200,000.

The paper losing out these days, readers and journalists say, is Nhan Dan, the
Communist Party daily. Under a new editor, Ha Dang, it seems to be slipping back
from the bolder days of an editor named Hong Ha. Mr. Ha is now a high-ranking
official in the Ministry of Information.

Under Mr. Dang, who refuses to meet journalists from democratic countries, Nhan
Dan appears to prefer time-tested topics.

A recent editorial reviewing human rights in the United States announced that
the American Government had ''blacklisted'' 34 million of its own people as
security risks, and that ''the rights of minority groups and the foreign born,
especially those of Asian origin, are brutally suppressed.''

Several Vietnamese with relatives living happily in the United States, shrugged
when asked about the veracity of this. ''No one reads that paper any more,'' one
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Huynh Son Phuoc, deputy editor of The Youth Paper (NYT/Barbara
Crossette); Cartoon

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Priest in Jail Gets a Lift: He's in the News in Managua

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 405 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


When Senator Bob Dole, on a visit to Nicaragua last week, criticized President
Daniel Ortega Saavedra for jailing two opposition lawyers, Mr. Ortega countered
that he would gladly free them ''in exchange for the liberty of the Catholic
priest who has been jailed because he was protesting against the U.S. policy
toward Central America.''

Mr. Dole responded: ''We don't do that in our country. You've got us mixed up
with the Soviet Union.''

''I'm not confused,'' Mr. Ortega insisted.

The priest Mr. Ortega referred to is the Rev. Roy L. Bourgeois, a Roman Catholic
priest serving a nine-month sentence in a Federal prison in Oakdale, La.. He was
convicted of trespassing after a demonstration at Hurlburt Field, a military
base near Fort Walton Beach, Fla.

Father Bourgeois, in a recent telephone interview, said his morale improved when
he heard that his name had come up in Managua. ''The first thing I thought was,
hey, the Nicaraguan people know I'm here,'' he said.

In the highly unlikely event of an exchange agreement, Father Bourgeois said, he
''would be happy to go there and pick coffee for the rest of my days.''

The 48-year-old priest, who spent five years as a missionary in Bolivia and has
visited Nicaragua several times, now spends his days teaching English to Cuban
refugees in jail and thinking about how he ended up where he is. ''You get to do
a lot of thinking in prison,'' he said.

After serving with the Navy in Vietnam, where he was wounded, the Lutcher, La.,
native decided to become a priest with the Maryknoll missionary society. The
Roman Catholic order, which is the only American order dedicated entirely to
overseas missions, has been criticized in recent years for its work in volatile
political areas in Central America.

Father Bourgeois said he was deeply affected when two Maryknoll sisters he had
known through his work and training were raped and killed along with a third nun
and female missionary by Salvadoran soldiers in 1980. ''It felt like it was
family,'' he said.

Father Bourgeois said he sees some similarities between his case and that of the
two opposition leaders in jail in Nicaragua. ''We are both prisoners of
conscience,'' he said.

But Walt Riker, a press aide to Senator Dole, said, ''It is ludicrous to compare
our system with theirs.''

Mr. Riker, who called the encounter with Mr. Ortega a ''media circus,'' also
described the exchange offer as ''a gimmick.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

$39.95 Desk Holds Arms Data

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 281 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 7


A stack of military documents, some of them possibly military secrets, were
found by an advertising executive when he opened a locked drawer of a used desk
he bought for $39.95.

The executive, Mark White, said Sunday that many of the papers concerned an Army
attack helicopter that is being developed by the Hughes Aircraft Company and
other aerospace companies. One was marked ''classified.''

He called the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and said the bureau dispatched an
agent to collect the papers.

A spokesman for Hughes, Ray Silvius, said the company was awaiting word from the
F.B.I. on whether the documents contained secret information. He said Hughes did
not seem to apply the ''classified'' stamp in the same way that the military
did.

Data on Attack Helicopter

An Army duty officer at the Pentagon referred questions about the documents to
the Army's Los Angeles public affairs branch office, which was closed for the
long holiday weekend.

Mr. White had papers containing detailed specifications for the LHX attack
helicopter, including information on its maximum takeoff weight, top speed,
weapons and ability to evade detection.

The Army has called the LHX, which stands for light helicopter experimental, its
highest research priority and hopes to have it fully operational by 1995. The
LHX would replace thousands of helicopters, including the Cobras and Hueys that
flew in Vietnam.

One document found in the used desk showed comparative data for the Cobra and
Apache helicopters used by the American armed forces.

Mr. White said an office supply store let him have the big desk at a low price
because the drawers were locked shut and the key was lost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ON MY MIND;
Perils of High-Tech History

BYLINE: By A.M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 750 words


For decades to come, American scholars will be dissecting the Iran-contra
hearings that seemed so important back in the late 1980's, to find out for
themselves what they told about the Reagan era.

There is a chance now for scholars, historians and journalists to examine a new
kind of historical document that will have an impact on what tomorrow thinks
about today. It is like being in one of those time-warp movies.

The document is the videocassette of a contemporary event of historical
significance, packaged for the consumer market. These video documents will be as
easily available as books; libraries will stock them and good video stores of
the future will certainly have a history section, just as bookstores do now.

The historian or student or journalist of the near future will use them as
source material, popping them into a VCR to get an on-the-spot look at
yesterday. The advantage, of course, will be that the material will be
firsthand, not strained through the mind of another historian or journalist.
Pick any emotional controversy of the past -imagine being able to see Captain
Dreyfus and his accusers - and the importance of this kind of research document
becomes vivid.

There is just one problem. There are two video-documents of the Iran-contra
hearings now on sale that illustrate it; a visual record of an event can turn
out to be just as spotty, biased and misleading as any print version. The
historian will have to keep his guard as high as ever.

The cassettes now being sold deal almost entirely with Lieut. Col. Oliver North.
One is the 90-minute ''Oliver North: Memo to History,'' produced by MPI Home
Video. Its first section whips back and forth in short ''bites'' of Colonel
North at his most pithy, confronting his enemies. It is chopped up and does
neither historical nor journalistic justice to the colonel or his Congressional
interrogators. This section gives no idea of where a particularly feisty passage
came during the hearings, what led up to it and what was said in response.

It makes the whole document questionable as a piece of history or journalism.
Its value is only as an early example of something new and important, like
scratchy recordings of old radio news broadcasts.

The other cassette is the two-hour ''Lieut. Col. Oliver North: His Story.'' This
tape, produced by Turner Home Entertainment and Forum Home Video, uses film and
commentary by the Turner-owned Cable News Network. For journalists it is a
humbling demonstration of how an important news organization, in haste to get
something out, can go wrong; well, almost humbling.

CNN generally gives complete, fast, straight news and since it does that 24
hours a day, it is almost always on in newsrooms around the country. It can
influence journalists' responses and decisions. That in itself gives CNN
importance.

On the cassette, the student of the future will see first a CNN anchor, Bernard
Shaw, standing in front of the Capitol, and hear this message:

''This man from upstate New York, this man from the sweaty boxing ring at the
Annapolis academy, this decorated blood-and-guts man from Vietnam - where
bullets tore flesh and men died, this family man of love and care, this man
whose mortal enemy is Communism and aggression . . . [became] the switching
point for President Reagan's determined effort to help the Nicaraguan contras,
the freedom fighters, 'the resistance' - as North called them.''

Then follows two hours of selected North testimony virtually devoid of context,
questioning or contradiction. In a sense, the hearings were a trial before the
public and the Congress. The CNN version is not an accounting of the trial but a
statement for the defense. From a defense attorney, fine; from a news network, a
distortion of the historic reality.

It is an advocacy piece of work, just as some of the newspaper and magazine
stories that showed Colonel North as nothing but a hypocritical trickster were
advocacy pieces. On the cassette, Colonel North shows intelligence, a quick mind
and a lust for intellectual combat.

The problem is, since the CNN cassette is a job of advocacy history, the viewer
can never know where reality lies.

The videocassette of today will be a historian's tool tomorrow. These two
versions show that the videotape can be as untrustworthy as the ballpoint pen as
a recorder of history. The cassettes are reminders to journalists and historians
from way back in 1987: What counts is who is doing the recording, how and why.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Conscience and Laws

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: PARIS


The point where laws and a sense of higher moral obligation conflict is an
ancient human dilemma, regularly renewed. Recent examples highlight some of the
differences between honorable and smug, self-righteous responses.

There is the case of Mathias Rust, the 19-year-old West German who flew into
Moscow's Red Square. He apologized at his trial for the danger and insult he
caused, explaining that he wanted to dramatize the cause of peace in what he
thought would be an inoffensive though spectacular way.

His mother said he was a young man with noble ideals but without experience. The
Soviet court sentenced him to four years in prison. The requirements of judicial
procedure have been met, and it is to be hoped that mercy will now be shown by
sending him home. He risked his own life, actually harming no one, to call
attention to his hopes.

There is the case of Mordechai Vanunu, the Israeli who told a British newspaper
what had long been suspected about his country's nuclear preparations. He is now
standing trial in total secrecy in Jerusalem. Ingeniously, by writing on his
hand and holding it to the window of a police van, he managed to get out the
message that he was abducted by force. So now the windows are blacked out when
he is transported through the streets and he is obliged to wear a helmet to keep
him completely incommunicado.

He too violated laws to call attention to his fears, but not by espionage,
stealth or betrayal. Like Mr. Rust, he sought to appeal to public opinion by
trust in people's intelligence when they know what is hidden from them.

Israel's security interest would have been better served if its Government had
ignored him. He didn't give away the kinds of technical secrets that could do
real damage, as some American spies have done in recent years. His revelations
would have been put down as another not quite confirmed report if they weren't
corroborated by his kidnapping and star-chamber trial.

By wit and personal risk, not by violence or deception, both men tried to send
messages to the world against war and the hatreds that others work so hard to
inflame. The law is stern and they are obliged to submit, but they were not
dishonorable.

There is a distinction here put with great poignancy and integrity by James Bond
Stockdale in a speech he made last April that has just come to my attention. Mr.
Stockdale was a vice admiral in the U.S. Naval Air Force who was shot down over
North Vietnam and kept eight years in a Hanoi prison where he was repeatedly
tortured. He survived and never gave in to his captors' demands, by maintaining
what he calls ''resolve.''

''Resolve,'' he said, ''is too expensive to waste on trivial things and too
precious to throw away on anything you don't believe to your bones to be worthy
of you. On the other hand, the things we do consider worthy of ourselves demand
it.'' He didn't break any U.S. law but showed ultimate defiance to the pressures
of his circumstance because of his own moral commitment.

Mr. Stockdale is convinced that such an individual standard must also be
observed as a national standard if the country is to meet the trials of the
world effectively. ''National resolve,'' he said, ''is too valuable, it's too
hard to come by, it takes too much out of us, to commit it to any cause that is
not worthy of our nation.''

That is the answer to the lying, self-righteous, self-serving brand of
patriotism that Lieut. Col. Oliver North offered the public. It is an answer to
the argument that deception, cheating, dirty tricks, double-dealing are
justified when they are practiced secretly and illegally in the name of the
nation. Mr. Stockdale was addressing himself to the lie behind the Gulf of
Tonkin resolution, which launched America into the Vietnam War.

''It gave us false confidence in escalation theory and a guilty conscience,'' he
said. ''I say let us be aware that resolve and commitment and moral leverage,
the only glue that ties America's sons to their leaders, cannot be displaced by
throw-away concepts of finesse and trickery. These are not worthy of us, and
because they are not worthy of us we cannot rely on them.

''The deepest human resolve is not built on self-deception, rationalization, or
cuteness. It has its roots in the finer elements of human beings and of their
countries. Thus, resolve to stand for what is worthy of us, to live so that our
own best conscience is not offended. Only this will perpetuate the best of us
and our institutions for generations to come.''

The words were spoken well before the Iran-contra hearings but might have been
their peroration. It is bad to break laws. It is worse to be without conscience,
for a person or a nation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
ABC Shows Constitution In Action

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 523 words


THE Constitution endures and even prevails; for proof, watch ''The Constitution:
We Live It Every Day.'' Television is rife with observances of the great
document's 200th year, and this particular observance may be one of the best.
The program, on ABC at 10 o'clock tonight, is free of cliche, and at times it is
downright stirring.

The program, with David Hartman at his avuncular best, is concerned not with the
past but the present. Mr. Hartman scarcely mentions the Founding Fathers; he
looks at people who have inherited their legacy.

The legacy, Mr. Hartman says, means that ''we can go for it - make the most of
our lives.'' Does it mean more than that? Well, probably, but leave that for
another program, perhaps one with a panel discussion. Mr. Hartman's program,
which he produced with Felix Shagin, is concerned with everyday life.

Thus we get a high-school student in Louisiana, two elderly women in Wyoming, a
man of Albanian descent in Michigan and a woman with a family in Brooklyn. They
have little in common, except for United States citizenship.

The student, who was born in Vietnam, printed and distributed a newspaper with
an uncharitable view of her high-school teachers. The Albanian was arrested on
specious charges when he visited Yugoslavia. The two women were threatened with
eviction from a center for the elderly. The woman in Brooklyn thrives, but she
worries about her sister, who lives in Northern Ireland.

What are the constitutional issues here? The high-school student in Louisiana
and the two women in Wyoming test the First Amendment, but the program, directed
by Bill Geddie, is not concerned with scholarly interpretation. Its interest is
not so much in the Constitution itself; it wants to examine what it means to
live under its protection.

As the woman in Brooklyn says, referring to poor, bloody Belfast, ''There's no
comparison between here and over there.'' The man in Michigan says that he still
thinks and dreams in Albanian, and that he can ''be more Albanian living in the
United States'' than he can be in Europe.

''The Constitution: We Live It Every Day'' waves the American flag without
jingoism, breast-beating or self-consciousness. It is quietly and intelligently
patriotic. It also deals in charm. The two women in Wyoming, one 76 years old,
the other 81, complained when the director of the center wanted to replace
rectangular tables with round tables. On this, an issue was born.

The director of the center declined to listen to the two women, but they
persisted. Then he threatened to evict them unless they stopped complaining.
They took him to Federal court. ''I was pretty nervous,'' one says. The other
says, ''It was quite awesome.''

Nonetheless, a judge ruled in their favor. ''Senior-center policy,'' he said,
''is unconstitutional on its face.'' The two women won their point. ''Freedom of
speech,'' one tells Mr. Hartman. ''Isn't that wonderful?''

It is, and the program - written by Mr. Hartman, Mr. Geddie and Mr. Shagin - is
an affectionate American valentine that also has serious concerns. Watch it as a
meaningful celebration of the Constitution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a band at a center for the elderly in Tarrytown, N.Y., on
''The Constitution: We Live It Every Day''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 9, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Marshall Puts Reagan at 'Bottom' Among Presidents on Civil Rights

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


Justice Thurgood Marshall of the Supreme Court, in a highly unusual public
criticism of a sitting President, has said in a television interview that Ronald
Reagan ranked at ''the bottom'' of United States Presidents in terms of the
rights of blacks.

In the interview, to be broadcast Sunday, Justice Marshall said of Mr. Reagan:
''Honestly, I think he's down with Hoover and that group. Wilson. When we really
didn't have a chance.'' The word ''we'' was a reference to blacks.

Justice Marshall confirmed today that he made the remarks in an interview with
the columnist Carl T. Rowan. But he did not elaborate on his criticism of Mr.
Reagan.

The 79-year-old Justice, once a leading civil rights lawyer, is the only black
ever to sit on the Supreme Court. In his Supreme Court opinions, he has sharply
differed with the Administration's positions on civil rights and other issues.

A White House spokesman said there would be no immediate comment regarding his
comments.

In another interview on the same program, the woman whose challenge to a Texas
law prohibiting abortion led to the landmark Supreme Court decision, Roe v.
Wade, now says she lied when she said that a rape was the cause of her
pregnancy. [Page A23.] No sitting member of the Supreme Court in recent memory
has publicly criticized a sitting President in comments off the bench. In his
interviews with Mr. Rowan, Justice Marshall also gave unflattering assessments
of Presidents Roosevelt, Eisenhower and Kennedy on racial issues, while praising
President Truman as well as President Johnson, who named him to the Court in
1967.

The interviews were recorded in recent months and portions are to be broadcast
Sunday by WUSA, Channel 9, in Washington and other stations affiliated with the
Gannett news organization as part of a program on the Constitution called
''Searching for Justice: Three American Stories.'' The station released a
partial transcript today.

In a telephone interview this evening, Justice Marshall said that as far as he
recalled his interview with Mr. Rowan was the first formal news interview he had
given since he was named to the Court.

Treatment of Blacks

In the telephone interview Justice Marshall chuckled at times as a reporter read
back to him parts of the transcript, apparently amused by the interest his
comments had aroused. But he said, ''I'm not going to elaborate on anything.''

He also declined to comment on the pending nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to
the Supreme Court. Judge Bork, who has a conservative judicial philosophy, has
criticized many Supreme Court decisions in which Justice Marshall has joined.

In his interview with Mr. Rowan, Justice Marshall spoke bitterly at times of the
treatment of blacks throughout American history, including the present.

''The biggest thing we brag about in this country on the ethical side is that
it's the great melting pot,'' Justice Marshall said. ''As I sit and look at it
now at this late date, I have come to the definite conclusion that if the United
States is indeed the great melting pot, the Negro either didn't get in the pot
or he didn't get melted down.''

In a speech in May he denounced the ''perpetuation of slavery'' and other
actions by the framers of the Constitution. But in the interview with Mr. Rowan,
he said that with the addition of the post-Civil War amendments extending rights
to blacks, ''you'll never find a better Constitution than this one.''

Johnson's Plans 'Unbelievable'

Asked by Mr. Rowan to rate some of the Presidents and their impact on racial
justice in his lifetime, Justice Marshall said:

''I don't think Roosevelt did much for the Negro. But I think Truman is going to
come out on top. Eisenhower I don't think did anything, except to try to
undermine the school decision - which he did. Kennedy was held back by the
Attorney General, his brother. His brother said don't do anything for the
Negroes because you won't get re-elected - wait until you're re-elected and then
do it. And then he got killed.

''But Johnson, his plans were unbelievable, the things he was going to do. But
he was too far out for Negroes and civil rights. He wasn't thrown out because of
Vietnam; they just used that as an excuse to get rid of him.''

In response to a question from Mr. Rowan, he said he considered Johnson the
greatest President in terms of civil rights.

Of President Carter, he said: ''I think his heart was in the right place. But
that's the best I can do with him.'' Exchange About Reagan There followed this
exchange:

Mr. Rowan: ''What about Ronald Reagan?'' Justice Marshall: ''The bottom.'' Mr.
Rowan: ''The bottom?''

Justice Marshall: ''Honestly. I think he's down with Hoover and that group.
Wilson. When we really didn't have a chance.''

Mr. Rowan: ''Yet he's been one of the most popular Presidents the country ever
had in the polls.''

Justice Marshall: ''Is he more popular than the average movie star?''

Justice Marshall also discussed a case in which, as a lawyer, he had won a court
decree forcing the admission of a black man to the University of Maryland Law
School.

''Well, number one, they wouldn't let me go to the law school because I was a
Negro, and all through law school I decided I'd make them pay for it, and so
when I got out and passed the bar, I proceeded to make them pay for it.''

Asked by Mr. Rowan whether this has been ''sweet revenge,'' the Justice said:
''Wonderful. I enjoyed it to no end.''

Suspicion About Nixon

Justice Marshall also told Mr. Rowan that when he was ill with pneumonia at the
Bethesda Naval Hospital years ago, President Nixon had sought a report on his
condition, an interest that Justice Marshall suspected grew out of an eagerness
on the part of Mr. Nixon to have a vacancy to fill on the Court.

He said he had told a Navy officer at the time: ''Well, Admiral, you have my
permission to give it to him only on one condition: that you put at the bottom
of it, quote, 'Not Yet.' '' Mr. Nixon could not be reached for comment this
evening.

In more recent years, Justice Marshall has said emphatically that he had no
plans to retire as long as his health permitted, and he has reportedly told
friends that he would remain on the Court as long as he could, rather than
create a vacancy for Mr. Reagan to fill.

Justice Marshall, who has had serious health problems over the years and was
hospitalized for several days this summer with a potentially dangerous blood
clot in his foot, said in the telephone interview this evening that his present
health was good.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 9, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Trial Begins on Letting Veterans Hire Lawyers to Press Disability Claims

BYLINE: By KATHERINE C. BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 8


Testimony began here today in the trial of a Federal suit brought by veterans
trying to overturn a Civil War law that all but prevents them from hiring
lawyers to help file claims with the Veterans Administration.

The plaintiff, the Berkeley-based National Association of Radiation Survivors,
is representing nearly 5,000 veterans and their survivors who have filed claims
with the V.A. for exposure to radiation in the aftermath of the Hiroshima and
Nagasaki bombings and in nuclear testing in Western states after World War II.

Gordon Espramer, a lawyer for the association, said that some 220,000 veterans
had been exposed to radiation in this way and that many had suffered serious
health effects, including leukemia and other cancers. But of 7,787 radiation
claims decided since 1985, he said, only 41 have resulted in $1,500-a-month
disability benefits or $300-a-month death benefits from the V.A.

The plaintiff's first witness today, Keith D. Snyder, director of the National
Veterans Legal Services Project, who is a lawyer for Vietnam Veterans of
America, testified to a central tenet of the suit: that it is critical for
veterans or their survivors to be able to hire attorneys because the process of
filing disability and death claims is too complicated to be handled by the
volunteers who now assist in such matters.

U.S. Cites Nonadversary Role

Theodore Hirt, a lawyer for the Veterans Administration, declined comment on the
suit. He referred reporters to a Government brief that said the V.A. system
itself had been designed to help veterans file the claims, through an informal,
nonadversarial process.

The target of the suit is an 1864 law that prohibits veterans from paying
lawyers more than $10 for representing them in dealings with the V.A. The
purpose of the law was to protect Civil War veterans from exploitation by
lawyers attempting to charge exorbitant fees to file simple pension forms.

As a result of the law, veterans are represented, in a nonjudicial proceeding,
by unpaid representatives provided by veterans organizations. Although the
Government allows administrative appeals of V.A. decisions that deny benefits,
the agency's final decision may not be appealed to the Federal courts.

The suit here, being heard without a jury by Judge Marilyn Hall Patel of Federal
District Court, was originally filed in April 1983.

In June 1984, Judge Patel issued an injunction barring the Government from
enforcing the 19th-century law, ruling that it denied veterans due process
because it discouraged them from appealing denial of benefits to which they
might be legally entitled.

Supreme Court Reversal

That decision was overturned by the United States Supreme Court in June 1985. In
a 6-to-3 decision, the Court said that the Government had a valid interest in
keeping claim proceedings as ''nonadversarial as possible'' and that the law in
itself was constitutional.

However, the Court left open the possibility that veterans with complex or
unusual cases might be able to show that their constitutional rights were being
violated because of a lack of legal assistance that the law made unobtainable.
This narrowed issue was then returned to Judge Patel.

In a series of orders handed down this year, Judge Patel has imposed fines of
$145,000 against the Veterans Administration for destroying thousands of
documents it had been ordered to produce in the suit and for making misleading
statements about why those documents had not been turned over.

Her rulings followed a hearing last December in which Michael Dunlap, an
assistant director of the Veterans Administration's Compensation and Pension
Service, confirmed assertions made in anonymous letters to veterans that vast
numbers of documents had been shredded. But, Mr. Dunlap testified, the documents
were destroyed as outdated in a general purging of files, not to thwart the
lawsuit.

Other V.A. employees, however, testified that documents had been concealed or
destroyed to withhold them from use in the lawsuit and that such acts continued
even after the agency had received the court's requests for them.

The trial is expected to last about four weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 9, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMER MOVIES SET A RECORD

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 8


The unusual thing about the summer that ended for Hollywood on Labor Day is not
that it nosed out the summer of 1984 for the best box-office business in history
- a shade under $1.6 billion. That trophy came partly because of higher ticket
prices and because a late Labor Day gave the summer an extra week.

The unusual thing about the summer of 1987 was the number of pictures that
appealed to movie audiences. Hollywood is boom and bust, riding high because
someone else is falling low. The summer of 1984 hit its peak because of four
blockbuster movies - ''Ghostbusters,'' ''Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom,''
''Gremlins'' and ''The Karate Kid.'' ''Those four movies were a giant vacuum
cleaner,'' said Art Murphy, box-office analyst for Variety.

But this summer, teen-agers were more adventuresome and, except for ''Beverly
Hills Cop II,'' didn't simply go back to the same movie again and again. So, in
contrast to 1984, a dozen films have sold or will end up selling more than $40
million worth of tickets in 1987.

''Cop II'' in the Lead

The summer was led by ''Beverly Hills Cop II.'' At $150 million, ''Cop II''
would have been in third place three years ago. ''Cop II'' was followed by ''The
Untouchables,'' giving Paramount a one-two knockout punch at the box office.
Warner Brothers' ''Witches of Eastwick'' was third, pursued by ''Predator,''
''Dragnet,'' ''Robocop,'' ''The Living Daylights,'' ''Full Metal Jacket,'' ''La
Bamba,'' ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,'' ''Stakeout'' and ''Roxanne.''
(''Stakeout,'' a late summer hit, should leapfrog into third place by the time
it finishes its run. ''Summer School,'' ''No Way Out'' and ''Dirty Dancing''
have a slight chance to make the $40 million list.) More than half of the movies
- including ''Untouchables,'' ''Witches,'' ''Jacket,'' ''La Bamba,''
''Stakeout,'' ''Roxanne'' and ''No Way Out'' - are considered adult movies by
Hollywood, and their success reinforces the industry's recent feeling that older
audiences can be enticed back. (To the movie industry, older audiences are
people over 25.) This fall will see a large number of thrillers and melodramas
aimed at ''older'' moviegoers.

The unexpected success of ''La Bamba'' symbolizes this change. ''La Bamba'' is a
sweet but not exceptional movie about the early rock-and-roll singer Ritchie
Valens, who died in a plane crash in 1959 at the age of 17. ''La Bamba,'' which
tells an old-fashioned story without any high-tech car crashes, effortlessly
outshone a number of fantasy-adventure films that were expected to be high on
the list of summer hits.

''Innerspace,'' a fantastic voyage inside Martin Short by a miniaturized Dennis
Quaid was the quintessential teen-age movie. But the film, which cost around $27
million, sold a disappointing $26 million worth of tickets. ''Harry and the
Hendersons,'' the tale of Bigfoot in suburbia, also took in $26 million. And the
fourth installment of the Jaws saga, ''Jaws the Revenge,'' managed only $19
million.

''All those years of Steven Spielberg franchising his name finally caught up
with him,'' said Variety's Mr. Murphy about the high-budget ''Innerspace'' and
''Harry,'' which were produced by Mr. Spielberg's Amblin company.

Future of Fantasy

Certainly no one in Hollywood could have imagined that ''Roxanne,'' a witty
retelling of ''Cyrano de Bergerac'' by Steve Martin, and ''Full Metal Jacket,''
Stanley Kubrick's icy look at the Vietnam War, would soar above ''Innerspace,''
which insiders had picked to be the second most successful movie of the summer
after ''Beverly Hills Cop II.''

Fantasy-adventure isn't dead. Witness ''Dragnet,'' with human sacrifice in Los
Angeles, ''Predator,'' with Arnold Schwarzenegger battling a monster, ''The
Witches of Eastwick,'' with three modern-day witches battling a devil, and
''Robocop,'' with its half-man, half-machine hero. But it does appear to be
weakening.

''Can adult films do a little better?'' said Frank Mancuso, the chairman of
Paramount Pictures. ''Yes. And perhaps the youth audience is also beginning to
support them.''

''La Bamba'' also indicated the potential strength of the increasing Hispanic
audience. Columbia gambled by releasing ''La Bamba'' in 77 theaters in Spanish
language or Spanish-subtitled versions. Ticket sales in those theaters, which
are still going strong, have reached $2.4 million.

Hard to Transfer Success

How much a movie actually earns depends on its cost as well as its box-office
performance. Around 47 percent of the ticket money goes back to the movie
distributor as film rental. The revenues from ''Snow White,'' a movie which was
paid for 50 years ago, are almost all profit for Disney. Although most of the
other films on the list ranged in cost from $13 million to $35 million plus
another $9 million apiece for prints and advertising, ''La Bamba'' cost less
than $7 million to produce and $7 million to market.

The most shocking failure of the summer was Columbia's ''Ishtar,'' $50 million
worth of Dustin Hoffman and Warren Beatty that sank at the box office almost
instantaneously. The equally sudden death of ''Who's That Girl'' proved once
more that success in one medium cannot easily be transferred to another.
Madonna's summer concerts were packed, but theaters playing her movie were
empty. The reissue of the 1979 Vietnam War movie ''Apocalypse Now'' in six
cities also appears to be a failure, demonstrating again that a film's
theatrical life is over once it has been released on video cassette.

The cleverest placement of a movie was Orion's thriller ''No Way Out,'' starring
Kevin Costner. Although the movie was made before ''The Untouchables,'' Orion
held it back until ''Untouchables,'' which also starred Mr. Costner, ignited at
the box office.

The summer proved that Disney, which used to release two or three movies a year,
has now become a major force in the industry. Disney released six movies, more
than almost any other studio, and all did solid business, from ''Snow White,''
''Stakeout'' and ''Adventures in Baby-Sitting'' (which earned $32 million) to
''Benji, the Hunted,'' a film virtually without human characters, ''Ernest Goes
to Camp,'' a movie based on an obnoxious character in television commercials,
and ''Can't Buy Me Love,'' a teen-age romance. ''Benji,'' ''Ernest'' and
''Love'' have sold about $23 million worth of tickets apiece; each cost less
than $3 million to produce. Disney has kept its budgets well below the industry
average. ''Stakeout,'' its most expensive summer film, cost less than $13
million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from ''La Bamba''

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 9, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: ADVANCES;
VIDEO DOGFIGHTING LEADS TO IMPROVED WARPLANES

BYLINE: By Andrea Adelson

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


The first test flight of a prototype for the Air Force's new medium-range jet
fighter, the Advanced Tactical Fighter, is not expected before 1990. But by the
time the prototype hits the tarmac, pilots will have spent months at its
controls and will even have engaged in supersonic dogfights with MIG-29's over
both land and sea.

All of this will occur in multimillion-dollar simulators, which reproduce the
sights, sounds and feel of aerial battlefield conditions. These elaborate video
games are used by designers to identify and correct any deficiencies in the
plane's cockpit, which will be jampacked with three times as many electronic
readouts as a Vietnam-era fighter.

The General Electric Company and the Evans & Sutherland Computer Corporation of
Salt Lake City are the dominant players in producing simulators, which can cost
$20 million or more.

But such prices are small compared with what is at stake: a $46.9 billion
contract to build 750 A.T.F. craft, one of the biggest aircraft projects of the
next decade. Two groups are competing: The Lockheed Corporation is prime
contractor for the General Dynamics Corporation and the Boeing Company, and the
Northrop Corporation is teamed with the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.

Both Lockheed and Northrop have recently upgraded their simulation equipment
with powerful models that can simulate entire missions.

The use of simulators in the design of the new fighter, which will replace the
F-15, is particularly important because the Air Force wants a plane that is
capable of facing effectively a more sophisticated generation of Soviet missiles
and fighters.

''It used to be, you go out and build a plane and test it and rebuild it,'' said
Jack Drewett, manager of flight simulation for General Dynamics in Fort Worth,
where the company builds F-16's at $15 million each. Design errors were
corrected later, he said.

''Now, with all the capabilities you put in, you can't afford to do it wrong,''
Mr. Drewett said.

At first, simulation was limited to pilots practicing night landings or
aerodynamic tests in wind tunnels. Older models could not project a realistic
scene, nor could they simulate a continuous mission that might involve
air-to-air engagements, refueling and low-altitude flights over a array of
terrains. Some models had to be stopped to perform different tasks and were
often limited to certain speeds, altitudes and attitudes.

''You had to make a lot of compromises,'' said Robert E. Gunther, manager of
Lockheed's $60 million simulation center in Valencia, Calif., 60 miles northwest
of Los Angeles.

Because of their relatively small size, fighters are a difficult assignment for
design engineers. Simulation gives the engineers an invaluable assist, Mr.
Gunther said.

An A.T.F. pilot will be bombarded by data from as many as 20 sensors. ''One of
the huge challenges is how to present that information to the pilot, to boil it
down and put it in a usable context,'' said Terry L. Clawson, a spokesman for
Northrop in Los Angeles. ''If you gave him just raw numbers without interpreting
them, he'll be dead.''

In July, mock combat exercises began inside the 28-foot-diameter dome at
Lockheed's lab. About 130 people work in the modernistic, windowless building,
sheathed in a porcelain-like material to contain electronic emissions. A second
$30 million simulator is planned.

With a pilot at the simulator's controls, the A.T.F. noses into a cloudless
desert sky. One computer controls the flight, determining the plane's
aerodynamics, engine propulsion and firepower.

As the fighter gains altitude, mountains ringing the desert floor shrink away.
Two computers create the external world, including enemy planes and missiles.
One draws the outline of these objects, based in part on real-world data
obtained from classified sources. The other computer colors the panorama and
adds texture, such as pockmarks in asphalt or the bolt-pattern of an aircraft
wing.

As the pilot pushes the plane into a steep turn, he even feels the
body-crunching force of gravitational pull. Pneumatically powered pumps adjust
the pressure of the pilot's suit and seat.

When the plane's systems detect an incoming missile, the pilot pushes a button
to arm a weapon, locks on the target and fires. Yet another computer determines
whether the cockpit electronics hampered or helped the engagement.

The heart of Lockheed's new simulator is a scene creator made by General
Electric.

Assisting G.E.'s scene generator, called the Compu-Scene IV, is a special
purpose computer made by G.E. that makes five billion calculations a second, 10
times more computations than the previous model, said Kenneth Kilner, manager of
product support for General Electric's simulation department at Daytona Beach,
Fla.

The scene generator's power comes from the use of specialized integrated
circuits rather than software, he said. The computer updates the scene 60 times
a second, key to faithfully creating the illusion of high speeds without
blurring.

Since virtually every domestic aircraft maker already owns simulators - there
are fewer than 30 systems combined - future sales are expected to come from
overseas military contractors, Mr. Kilner said.

Nonmilitary customers of simulators are also emerging. Mercedes-Benz is using
them to design trucks. NASA bought one for space station design. And a film
maker used one to create a scene for ''The Last Starfighter.''

These simulators employ basically the same technology as that used for training
pilots, but the nonmilitary market is estimated at $2 billion annually, far
great than the $88 million that is expected to be spent on military aircraft
simulators this year.

Simulator developers have become better at selectively applying computing power
in critical areas, such as adding the dappled texture of tree leaves in a
close-up, but dropping it from the background where it goes undetected and is a
waste of computing resources.

Nevertheless, improvements could come by adding still more power and utilizing
more photographic data. Despite the realism of these simulators, some sensitive
pilots can detect a lag of about one-twentieth of a second between the time they
push the controls and the scenario changes.

The other weakness of computer dramatizations is probably impossible to fix: the
failure to capture the psychological impact of reality.

Said Lockheed's Mr. Gunther, ''No matter how hard we try - we have sound, we
have motion, he's been in the simulator four hours - he knows he can push a
little green button that says reset and he's safe.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article on the Business Technology page on Sept. 9, about simulators that are
used primarily to reproduce flight conditions, described the size of the
simulator market incorrectly. The market, including commercial and military
customers, is estimated at $2 billion annually.

About $88 million is expected to be spent this year on simulators for research
by military and nonmilitary buyers in other areas than flight training.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Rejects Linking Missing and Hanoi Aid

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 264 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 9


A spokesman said today that the State Department was not linking progress on the
issue of missing servicemen in Vietnam to private charitable aid to that
country.

Charles E. Redman, the Department spokesman, said a decision to encourage
private organizations to provide aid, especially prosthetic devices for
amputees, was not connected to American efforts to obtain information about
American servicemen missing since the Vietnam war.

''We believe that P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s is a separate issue which stands on its own
merits,'' Mr. Redman said, using the initials for American prisoners of war and
those missing in action.

The Administration, according to high-level officials, plans to facilitate
private charitable aid to Vietnam. The officials also said they hoped Vietnam
would be more cooperative in solving the issue of missing personnel, especially
about a group of ''very compelling cases'' said to number about 70.

Accords Reached Last Month

The agreements on both issues were worked out last month with senior Vietnamese
officials by Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. a retired general who led a special
delegation to Hanoi. After his visit, two official teams traveled to Vietnam,
one a medical team to study the humanitarian needs of the country and the other
to work on the 70 major cases.

Under the plan for facilitating non-governmental aid, the Administration intends
to issue a report detailing the needs and encouraging private groups to provide
it. The Administration will also provide exemptions from trade restrictions to
license such groups to provide the aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
The Price of Secrecy

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


William H. Webster, the new Director of Central Intelligence, has established
closer control of covert action. Three cheers for that; but even tight
supervision isn't enough, as the nation will discover again unless secret
political operations are banned altogether.

Secret intelligence-gathering, from advanced technology to a human spy in a
foreign capital, is indispensable. But secret efforts to achieve political
change, from subsidies for political parties to the overthrow of governments,
pose far more problems than they are worth. When exposed, they embarrass the
nation and erode the credibility of the President; even when not known to the
American public, they often damage rather than further U.S. interests.

Secret activities offer Presidents the alluring but often illusory promise that
they can achieve foreign policy goals without the bothersome debate and open
decision that are staples of democracy. Thus they undermine the supposedly open
nature of a democratic society, and can blacken its name to the world.

Mr. Webster seeks to minimize these dangers, made clear once again in the
Iran-Contra scandal, by establishing a committee of senior intelligence
officials to review all covert-action proposals, and placing at its head an
official not otherwise involved in clandestine activities.

The new Director also has re-established a proper chain of command within the
C.I.A. His adventurous predecessor, William J. Casey, permitted such operatives
as Alan Fiers, chief of the Central American task force, to report directly to
him, skipping several layers of management. That gave freer rein to Mr. Casey's
own taste for secret operations, as well as to those of subordinates whose
energy and daring appealed to him. Chain-of-command consideration should weed
out the more hare-brained schemes that the cover of secrecy and the absence of
acountability always spawn.

A report on Mr. Webster's takeover of the C.I.A. - by Stephen Engelberg in The
New York Times - describes him as ''not opposed'' to covert operations. The
steps he has taken display a healthy skepticism, nonetheless, and Mr. Webster's
voice could be a strong influence on the next President if he should recommend
cutting back secret activities to intelligence-gathering alone.

A strong argument for this approach already exists - not just in the long record
of dubious, failed and disastrous covert operations, from the overthrow of
Guatemala through the Bay of Pigs to the Iran-contra fiasco, but also in the
reasoned reflections of a former Attorney General and Under Secretary of State.

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, who held those and other offices in the Kennedy and
Johnson Administrations, wrote in October 1973 that the U.S. ''should abandon
publicly all covert operations designed to influence political results in
foreign countries.'' His proposal was part of an article in Foreign Affairs
arguing that secrecy had become too great an influence on foreign policy, which
itself was too oriented to ''cold war concepts of 'national security.' ''

Mr. Katzenbach asserted that the disasters of Vietnam and Watergate had made it
clear that foreign policy, to be effective, ''must be based on policy and
factual premises which are accepted by the overwhelming majority of the American
people.'' The truth of that has been demonstrated once again by the Iran-contra
disclosures, which have brought ''confidence in the honesty and integrity of
both the President and the Presidency'' to another low point of the kind that
prompted the Katzenbach article 14 years ago.

Nothing was done, unfortunately, to carry out Mr. Katzenbach's recommendations
that there be no further ''secret subsidies of police or counter-insurgency
forces, no efforts to influence elections, no secret monetary subsidies of
groups sympathetic to the United States, whether governmental, non-governmental
or revolutionary.'' If such activities had been banned, and secret operations
overseas confined to ''the gathering of intelligence information,'' there could
have been no Iran-contra scandal. The contras could not have been secretly
organized and funded, as they were by the C.I.A. at first, nor could they have
been maintained later by the lies, deception and trickery of adventurers on the
National Security Council staff.

American servicemen are risking their lives in the Persian Gulf, moreover,
primarily to redeem the loss of U.S. credibility and influence in the region
caused by disastrous ''covert operations'' in the Ayatollah's Iran.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

One Day, Any One of Us Could Be Homeless

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


To the Editor:

People in New York City who object to the construction of shelters in their
neighborhoods reveal a sad ignorance about the homeless. Perhaps they should
visit a variety of shelters to discover that the homeless are human beings
without homes and include a much wider cross section of New Yorkers than is
generally believed. The conspicuously and chronically homeless, the mentally ill
and addicts are in the minority.

As a writer researching material for a novel, I spent time in various shelters
as a monitor for the Coalition for the Homeless. I met other writers, jazz
musicians, graduates, Vietnam veterans, graphic artists, students, migrant
school leavers from the South, actors and bankrupt company owners. I met
families suddenly abandoned by breadwinners, pregnant women thrown out by
husbands, boyfriends or fathers, people who'd been burned out of their homes or
locked out by vicious landlords. Many people had become unstuck because of ill
health, losing their jobs and life partners. Thousands were desperate for work,
a decent home and a chance to start again.

Sure, I met some troublemakers and con artists, but you can meet them
everywhere. These shelters are simply a microcosm of society. Think about it.
One day any one of us could be homeless. Remember, both Schubert and Dickens
were once homeless.

PAMELA FERGUSON
New York, Aug. 22, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ON MY MIND;
200 Years in The News

BYLINE: By A.M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 764 words


American Navy in combat readiness in Persian Gulf. Hart raises privacy issue.
Killer executed in Florida. Justice Department organizes anti-obscenity drive.
Bork nomination dominates Washington politics. Anti-abortionists demonstrate in
state capital.

The stories have one thing in common - every one of them involves the
Constitution of the United States. So do dozens of other stories appearing every
day in newspapers and on TV.

The 200th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution falls next week and by
then the country may feel slightly bloated with celebration. But there is no
escaping the power of the Constitution in American life, politically and
emotionally. It is the very center of our day-by-day national debate -
particularly when we try to bypass it. That is its uniqueness and its
importance.

Two hundred years later the Constitution is not only providing answers but, just
as important, raising questions about itself and the society it encompasses.
There is no other country so involved in talking about fundamental law, its
limits and flexibility.

That is why we puzzle so many others. What is this Watergate business? What
crime did Nixon commit? An Iranian colonel, an aide to the Shah, asked me that
once. After a couple of minutes we decided to drop it.

Even democratic leaders, friends like Prime Minister Thatcher and President
Mitterrand, fail to understand American passion about the Constitution.
Europeans react calmly to incidents that would cause a constitutional furor in
the United States - like the British ban of a book published abroad, even
newspaper reviews, or the French blowing up of a ''peace ship'' in New Zealand
waters.

For Americans, the questions involved in the stories listed above are the stuff
of national life because they determine what kind of nation and life we have.

Does the Constitution guarantee privacy even for ordinary citizens? Where is it
written? Can it be assumed to be the intent? Or is it a matter for legislation
to decide?

Is execution of a murderer so cruel as to be unconstitutional? Is the number of
blacks executed so high as to indicate illegal bias?

Who has the right to say a woman can have an abortion? Who has the right to say
she cannot? Courts? State legislatures or Congress? Or is it a right she was
born with, inalienable?

Would England, France, Italy, Switzerland - name your own democracy - ever have
a public discussion, let alone a shouting political battle, over the appointment
of a judge?

But there is another story listed up there, the one about an American fleet on
combat alert in faraway waters. So, wait a minute before we break our arms
clapping ourselves on the back about the Constitution. Americans not only debate
and celebrate the Constitution, but are pretty good at violating it.

After the Civil War, segregation laws defied the 14th Amendment's prohibition
against abridging any citizen's rights. It took us almost a century to get
around to stopping that.

Throughout the year, school boards decide that books with naughty words and
thoughts should be removed from libraries, as if the First Amendment had never
been adopted - which, come to think of it, it might not be today.

And for a good part of our history, American Presidents have been violating the
Constitution by going into or getting ready for war without bothering to involve
the people, through its elected Congress.

The Constitution says Congress shall have the right to declare war, so
Presidents neatly get around it by just waging war, not troubling with its
declaration.

President Truman did that in Korea, President Kennedy and President Johnson in
Vietnam. In his own way, President Reagan, in the Persian Gulf, is doing some
fancy Constitution-evading of his own.

The charade of flying the red, white and blue over Kuwaiti ships carrying oil to
Japan is hokus-pocus not worthy of a great country. But openly sending the fleet
and declaring our national involvement was within international law and our
right.

Mr. Reagan has not declared war but he must be ready to fight it if the
unpredictable Iranian zealots hit our warships; otherwise we should clear right
out. Therefore the President has the obligation under the War Powers Resolution
of 1973 to inform Congress that American forces are now in a hostile situation.

Doing so would be a political headache. Not doing so violates the legislative
powers given to Congress by the Constitution; Congress weakly permits it.

There is nothing in the Constitution we live and celebrate about freedom from
headaches - not a word.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 12, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. and Vietnam in Accord On Amerasian Resettlement

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11


The United States and Vietnam have reached agreement in principle on a program
to resume the resettlement of Vietnamese children of American fathers, the State
Department said today.

The department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, said that the accord followed talks
in Hanoi earlier this week and that the United States expected the program to
resume ''perhaps as early as several weeks'' from now.

The Hanoi radio, in a broadcast monitored Thursday in Bangkok, Thailand, also
reported the accord on the Amerasian resettlement program.

The two countries have blamed each other for halting the program on Jan. 1,
1986. About 3,750 children and 5,400 relatives were allowed to leave Vietnam
before the program ended.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 12, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Maimed Protester, 46, Vows He Will Continue

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 203 words

DATELINE: WALNUT CREEK, Calif., Sept. 11


A Vietnam veteran who lost both legs when he knelt before a Navy munitions train
said today that he had no memory of being run over and vowed to continue
protesting United States policies in Central America.

''I do not remember anything from certain minutes before the accident to days
afterward,'' the 46-year-old veteran, S. Brian Willson, said at a news
conference at John Muir Hospital here. It was his first public comments since
being struck by the train at the Concord Naval Weapons Station on Sept. 1 ''I
plan to continue my actions at the Concord Naval Weapons Station,'' he added.
''I'm looking forward to walking out to the tracks.''

Tom Steel, a San Francisco lawyer who stood at Mr. Willson's side at the news
conference, accused the Navy of lying because it said the train was traveling
only 5 miles an hour and the protesters jumped on the tracks at the last moment.
The protesters say the train was traveling about 30 miles an hour and the Navy
had been notified that people would try to stop the train.

Mr. Willson, who has begun taking steps on artificial legs, has said his
experience in Vietnam led him to take an active role in protests against the
Government's policies in Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New Start for Massachusetts Youth

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 3, Page 70, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: PENIKESE ISLAND, Mass.


A one-room school, the first to be built in the state in 113 years, opens here
this semester but there will be few formal classes. The students' main lesson
came in building it.

This pristine 75-acre island between Martha's Vineyard and New Bedford is a
temporary home for boys who have been convicted of illegal drug use, burglary,
assault, even homicide.

Twelve at a time, they learn to fish, sail, cook and farm, supervised by a small
group of adults who also try to teach self-reliance, loyalty and trust.

There is no electricity or running water. Nor are there steel bars or locks.

The island, owned by the state, has five shingled buildings put up by the
students and staff members. It is the campus of the Penikese Island School, a
rehabilitation program for offenders 13 to 18 years old from around
Massachusetts. A third are from the Boston area.

Failure of Schools

Formal instruction comes mostly though individual tutoring, said Susan Devlin,
38, the school's education director.

''Schools have been a place of failure for our kids where they learn they're
stupid and useless,'' said Ms. Devlin, one of eight staff members. ''We'll have
some group classes, but informal learning works best for them. They learn
fractions when they cook, algebra and geometry from carpentry and the staff
grabs any chance to pull out a newspaper or encyclopedia.''

The success rate is still under study, but officials say it is at least as good
as other programs aimed at young criminals. For some boys, the officials say, it
is the one chance they have to turn their lives around.

In spare moments the boys, most of whom have not begun to shave, play touch
football and bury each other in the sand. Many have served time in more
traditional settings. They asked to come here for six-month stints and were
carefully screened before being accepted.

When they arrive, students take tests and help set up their own academic
programs. They may earn up to a year of academic credit and can study for a high
school equivalency degree. They do island jobs six hours a day unless they wish
to use the time for school. Through bonuses, they may earn money to spend on
off-island weekends.

Learning to Read

Some will learn to read in the new 15-by-25-foot pine school building. A state
education official said the only other one-room school in Massachusetts is on a
nearby island, Cuttyhunk, where it was built in 1874.

The Penikese school, with its stained-glass window and sleeping loft for extra
dormitory space, holds many lessons for students on the island.

''In a one-room school, people of different ages and levels can help each other
in a homey fashion,'' Ms. Devlin said.

Informality and self-reliance permeate the program. ''It's kids teaching kids
that cooperation, honesty and self esteem pay off here,'' Ms. Devlin said.
''After about two months they see that we're here to take care of each other,
the island and help them with their problems. But to be loyal to the program
means giving up everything else they know and that's difficult.''

Voices of Youth

The message does not always get through.

Domingo, 16, was arrested for a stabbing and like most of these boys has been in
several correction facilities. ''This place stinks,'' he said. ''I get seasick
looking at the water. I'm allergic to the grass and dust and there are no phones
or cars. People swear and eat too much sugar. It's good for a two-week
vacation.''

But to Sean, 17, ''it's like being over the rainbow.'' Committed to the
correction department in 1982 as a runaway, he was in the seventh grade for
three years and has spent time in a lockup and a foster home. ''People pay
thousands of dollars to be in a place like this with nice beaches and water all
around,'' he said.

Marty, 15, was first arrested when he was 9. He has been here for seven weeks -
''the longest I've made it in a program.'' ''We get lobster and steak and a lot
of freedom,'' he said. ''But that's because there's no place to go. We need a
convenience store.'' Oliver Twist and Boot Camp The school was started in 1973
by George Cadwalader, a Yale graduate who left the Marines as a major after an
injury in Vietnam, and David Masch, a Harvard-trained biologist. They have
raised about $1 million and receive $90 a day per boy from the state youth
correction department. They live in Woods Hole and commute a few times a week by
boat.

''I thought these kids would be like the Oliver Twist characters we had in the
Marines who got in touble because they had nothing else to do,'' the 48-year-old
Mr. Cadwalader said. ''But they're adrift human beings with no values. They've
been scared most of their lives and live in a world of contradictions and
fatalism. They don't realize their actions have an effect and that they can be
in control of their lives.

''In a boot camp, they could do well because they're chameleonlike survivors,
but they wouldn't have to deal with their problems. Here, they can be children,
and relax with reasonably stable adults in a community that makes sense.

''Cause and effect is clear and they can take control. If they don't chop wood,
the house is cold. If they don't garden, they don't eat.''

Half and Half

Mr. Cadwalader estimates that perhaps 20 percent of the boys go on to productive
lives, about 30 percent will have minor legal problems and 50 percent will be
career criminals.

But Edward J. Loughran, state juvenile corrections commissioner said: ''It's a
tremendous program for kids who can fit into the philosophy of rugged
individualism and need a setting with limitations. George does better than he
thinks. They probably do as well or better than the average program.'' A
recidivism study now underway is expected to give more exact figures.

Students have their own ways to measure success.

Domingo said he learned that ''when I break the law, ain't no one suffering but
me.''

Sean said he won't wind up in jail. ''I learned a lot about oyster cultivation,
carpentry, boats and that I can't play the child role in life. Years ago, I
would run away so I could feel like I could do something. Now, there's nothing
to run away from.''

Marty thinks he may steal again. ''But,'' he said, ''I won't get caught or go to
jail. It's a feeling.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of students and staff of the Penikese Island School working in
the garden outside the school (NYT/Victor Fisher); map of Massachusetts showing
location of Penikese Island (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET PROMOTING DISSIDENTS IN U.S.

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 12


A California protester who was critically injured there last week when he was
struck by a train during a demonstration against American support for the
Nicaraguan rebels has been embraced by the Soviet Union as the newest in a line
of American dissidents.

The protester, S. Brian Willson, who lost part of both legs when he was hit by a
munitions train leaving a naval weapons station in California, has been hailed
in the official Soviet press as a hero of peace, offered free medical care in
the Soviet Union, and held up as evidence that the United States violates human
rights.

''The bright name of Brian Willson was put down in the chronicle of human
nobility and courage,'' Genrikh Borovik, the head of the officially sanctioned
Soviet Peace Committee told television viewers Wednesday night. ''His selfless
deed is regarded everywhere in the world as a heroic feat in the name of
peace.''

Mr. Willson joins a pantheon of Americans lionized here, in what Western
diplomats view as a notable shift in the Soviet-American debate over human
rights.

Rights Issues Discussed

Where Moscow once brushed off Western complaints of rights violations in the
Soviet union, officials here now discuss them more openly, while hammering at
what they present as mirror-image abuses in the United States.

Americans relatively obscure in their own country have become official heroes
here, featured daily on national television as counterparts of Andrei D.
Sakharov or Natan Sharansky.

These are among Americans who have become well known here in the last year:

* Leonard Peltier, an American Indian imprisoned in the slaying of two agents of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Mr. Peltier is portrayed here as a
political prisoner who was the victim of an official frame-up. Soviet diplomats
now routinely raise his name as a rejoinder to American diplomats' complaints
about Soviet political prisoners. Soviet eye specialists were permitted to visit
Mr. Peltier at Leavenworth Prison this summer when he complained of an eye
problem.

* Charles Hyder, who a year ago set up camp in a park across from the White
House and announced plans to fast until President Reagan and the Soviet leader,
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, took steps to end the arms race. Before he ended his fast
in May - he said he ate nothing for more than seven months - Mr. Hyder was a
nightly feature on the Moscow television news, and the newspapers published
pages of letters addressed to him, including one from Gorbachev.

* Joseph Mauri, the star of a scathing Soviet television documentary last year
about the horrors of life in New York. Mr. Mauri is portrayed as a spokesman for
the American homeless and unemployed, athough he acknowledged that he had a job
as a substitute mailroom worker for The New York Times and lived in a West Side
residential hotel. He returned this summer to be greeted by top Soviet officials
and to give a press conference on the plight of the homeless in the United
States.

* Arnold Lochshin, a Houston cancer specialist who moved to Moscow last October
saying he was seeking asylum because of political persecution. He has been given
housing and a job in a research institute, and is periodically featured in the
Soviet press. He has said in the Soviet Union that he was a member of the
American Communist Party and active in the civil rights movement and received
death threats in the United States.

* Wade Roberts, a black American soldier who defected in April with his West
German fiancee. Soviet readers have followed in detail the couple's marriage,
Mr. Roberts's enjoyment of his hobby - snake handling - in the Central Asian
republic of Turkmenia, and his comments on racism.

Right Leg Was Severed

Mr. Willson, 46 years old and a Vietnam War veteran, had his right leg severed
below the knee and his left leg irreparably mangled Sept. 1, when a train
leaving the United States Naval Weapons Station in Concord, Calif., failed to
stop. He and other protesters had blocked the track to stop what they said were
Latin arms shipments.

The Contra Costa County, Calif., Sheriff's Office is considering whether to file
criminal charges against the crew that struck Mr. Willson. Peace groups in the
United States have expressed outrage at what happened.

Coverage of the event here has risen steadily, and has included interviews with
lawyers who denounced the failure of the authorities to stop the train and
commentaries saying the incident was deliberately arranged by the United States
military.

Tass, citing the American Communist Party newspaper Peoples Daily World,
reported that public protests had ''swept'' the United States ''from western to
eastern seaboard.''

In the Soviet Union, peace groups that are are not officially sanctioned are
forbidden, and independent public demonstrations are generally banned.

Wednesday night Soviet television broadcast a telephone conversation between Mr.
Willson's wife, Holly Rauen, and Genrikh Borovik, chairman of the Soviet Peace
Committee.

This morning's edition of Selskaya Zhizn, the national rural newspaper, cited
the case of Mr. Willson as an example of ''wild attacks on dissidents'' by
American authorities, and said the reason the United States complains about
human rights violations abroad is to perpetuate a false ''legend of the United
States as a beacon of Western democracy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Robert Bork's Views on a Wide Range of Legal Issues, in His Own Words

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, SEPT. 12


Following are excerpts from writings, speeches and court opinions by Judge
Robert H. Bork on a range of issues:

ON THE SUPREME COURT

We have a Court which is creating individual rights which are not to be found in
the Constitution by any standard method of interpretation. The Court itself,
from time to time, admits that, and more significantly, the defenders of the
Court's performance admit it.

...What the courts are doing. . .is in fact to create new constitutional values
which are nothing more than the imposition of upper-middle-class values on the
society.

''The liberty of free men, among other things, is the liberty to make laws,
which is increasingly being denied.''

  - 1982 speech to the Yale University Federalist Society.

ON ABORTION

Roe v. Wade is an unconstitutional decision, a serious and wholly unjustifiable
judicial usurpation of state legislative authority. I also think that Roe v.
Wade is by no means the only example of such unconstitutional behavior by the
Supreme Court. . .Without any warrant in the Constitution, the courts have
required so many basic and unsettling changes in American life and government
that a political response was inevitable.

  - 1981 Senate testimony on pending legislation.

ON AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

Justice Powell's middle position - universities may not use raw racial quotas
but may consider race, among other factors, in the interest of diversity among
the student body - has been praised as a statesmanlike solution to an agonizing
problem. It may be. Unfortunately, in constitutional terms, his argument is not
ultimately persuasive.

...Mr. Justice Brennan's opinion for the four-member bloc that approved racial
quotas fares no better.

...The argument offends both ideas of common justice and the Fourteenth
Amendment's guarantee of equal protection to persons, not classes.

  - 1978 Op-Ed article in The Wall Street Journal.

ON WAR POWERS

I think there is no reason to doubt that President Nixon had ample
constitutional authority to order the attack upon the sanctuaries in Cambodia
seized by North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces. That authority arises both from
the inherent powers of the Presidency and from Congressional authorization. The
real question in this situation is whether Congress has the constitutional
authority to limit the President's discretion with respect to this attack. Any
detailed intervention by Congress in the conduct of the Vietnamese conflict
constitutes a trespass upon powers the Constitution reposes exclusively in the
President.

...This conclusion in no way detracts from Congress's war powers, for that body
retains control of the issue of war or peace.

  - Remarks at a 1971 symposium.


As expiation for Vietnam, we have the War Powers Resolution, an attempt by
Congress to share in detailed decisions about the deployment of U.S. armed
forces in the world. It is probably unconstitutional and certainly unworkable.

  - 1978 Op-Ed article in The Wall Street Journal.

ON ANTITRUST AND CONGRESS

Congress as a whole is institutionally incapable of the sustained, rigorous and
consistent thought that the fashioning of a rational antitrust policy requires.
No group of that size could accomplish the task. Large bodies simply do not
reason coherently together. Congress could, for example, adopt a useful general
goal in the Sherman Act. It proved unable to supply sensible specifics in the
Clayton and Robinson-Patman Acts.

  - ''The Antitrust Paradox,''1978.

ON LIBEL AND ORIGINAL INTENT

The law of the First Amendment must not try to make public dispute safe and
comfortable for all the participants. That would only stifle the debate.

...The American press is extraordinarily free and vigorous, as it should be. .
.Yet, the area in which legal doctrine is currently least adequate to preserve
press freedom is the area of defamation law.

...Judge Scalia's dissent implies that the idea of evolving constitutional
doctrine should be anathema to judges who adhere to a philosophy of judicial
restraint. But. . .when there is a known principle to be explicated, the
evolution of doctrine is inevitable.

...In a case like this, it is the task of the judge in this generation to
discern how the framers' values, defined in the context of the world they knew,
apply to the world we know. The world changes, in which unchanging values find
their application.

...If, over time, the libel action becomes a threat to the central meaning of
the First Amendment, why should not judges adapt their doctrines?

...A judge who refuses to see new threats to an established constitutional
value, and hence provides a crabbed interpretation that robs a provision of its
full, fair and reasonable meaning, fails in his judicial duty.

  - Concurring opinion in Ollman v. Evans, 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Democrats Turn '88 Efforts Southward for a Day

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 39, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: HIGH POINT, N.C., Sept. 12


It had the atmosphere of a revival, and not just because of the the gospel music
and the country spirituals that occasionally wafted through the hall.

The tone for the North Carolina Democratic Party Funfair was set by Senator
Terry Sanford, who walked comfortably this morning along the thin line that
separates good Southern preaching from good Southern politicking. ''How do we
move out of the twilight of the Reagan years into the sunshine of the Democratic
Party again?'' the Senator asked his audience of believers, for whom a promised
land was in sight.

Mr. Sanford turned to introduce the four Democratic Presidential candidates
arrayed behind him on the stage and scornfully dismissed the designation often
applied by critics to his party's contenders this year, ''the seven dwarfs.''
With the expansiveness of the day, Mr. Sanford described them as ''seven blocks
of granite, immovable in their principles.'' The audience cheered.

Military and Economic Focus

In a campaign still being played out largely in Iowa and New Hampshire, scenes
of the first nominating contests of 1988, the Democratic gathering in High Point
today furnished a preview of the candidates' Southern appeal. There was a
definite regional inflection to the candidates' remarks on the military and
economics.

Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, for instance, declared, ''As a Vietnam
veteran, as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee and as a Democrat, I
believe in a strong defense.'' Former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona said the
Reagan Administration measured military readiness by the amount of money it
spent.

And in a region heavily dependent on the textile industry, Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri reiterated his support for a tougher posture on
trade. ''For too long, we have listened on this trade issue to Republicans and
editorial writers,'' he said. ''Isn't it time we started listening to farmers
and workers who are being crushed as well?'' The Rev. Jesse Jackson touched a
similar chord, saying the country needed to stop ''drugs flowing in and jobs
flowing out.''

Gore Invokes Southern Roots

The day was an opportunity for the North Carolina Democratic Party, long
battered by the Republicans but cheered by Mr. Sanford's Senate victory last
year, to flaunt its new-found confidence. The biracial coalition so essential to
Democratic victory in the South was alive and thriving today, with a black
gospel choir singing on one stage and a white country-western group on another.

There was a sprawling pluralism to the event, held in High Point's Market
Square, around and about furniture showrooms. Jazz mingled with the drums of
Indian dancers. Belgian waffles were sold alongside traditional country funnel
cakes. Jim Van Hecke, state party chairman, looked over the pandemonium and
smiled. ''We're a broad-based party,'' he said.

Not surprisingly, Mr. Gore made much of his Southern roots in his remarks. The
purpose of Super Tuesday is not necessarily to elect a Southern President, Mr.
Gore said, referring to the March 8 primaries and caucusesthat will blanket the
South, ''although I think that's a very good idea.'' Then the Tennessee Senator
looked over at Mr. Jackson, who was born in South Carolina but has spent much of
his life in Chicago, and joked, ''Not someone from Chicago.''

Among the questions posed by Democrats was one about ''traditional values,'' and
each of the four, who were joined later in the day by a fifth candidate, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, pledged committment to a heightened
emphasis on them. But Mr. Jackson added: ''I believe deeply in prayer, and I
respect the flag very much. But prayers and flags are not substitutes for jobs
and health and education and a way out for our children.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN INTRODUCTION;
An Ingenious Structure

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis; Anthony Lewis is a New York Times columnist and the
author of ''Gideon's Trumpet,'' a book about the Supreme Court.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 39, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2970 words


IT IS OUR ROCK AND OUR REDEEMER, THE civil religion of a society that has no
state church. It is a unifying symbol as powerful in our diverse Republic as the
queen in a monarchy. It is history: roots for a country with little sense of the
past.

For a restless people, it is the prime source of stability, of certainty.

The Constitution of the United States is all these things. But to state them is
to recognize a profound irony. For there is no certainty in the Constitution,
and there never has been. It was born in controversy. Its purposes were
contradictory: to create governmental power and to limit that power. Its framers
did not make clear and very likely did not agree on what they intended in
particular provisions. Through all its history, the meaning of the Constitution
has been subject to ferocious argument, and to change.

The great voyage that began in 1787 is far from over as we celebrate, next
Thursday, the 200th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution by its
framers in Philadelphia. In the essays that follow, students of the Constitution
with sharply differing views argue about its past and present as they examine
critical passages in the text and its amendments.

The United States has been shaped by arguments over the Constitution, as it has
been by the Constitution itself. The search for meaning in a written document is
lawyers' work, and by looking to the Constitution for answers to fundamental
political questions we have given lawyers and judges an extraordinary role in
our democracy. That has spilled over into a general reliance on law to solve
problems. Ours is a country not only of a constitution, but of
constitutionalism. In what other country could the nomination of a judge provoke
a national political debate like the one in which we are currently engaged?


IN THE BEGINNING, AT THE PHILADELPHIA CONVENTION of 1787, the delegates were
driven by opposing impulses. One was a desire for order. The 13 American states
were in chaos. They were independent not only of Britain but of one another.
They imposed tariffs on each other's trade. They had different coinages. There
was no national currency, no government to issue one. There was no President, no
Federal revenue - no central power to levy taxes.

Alexander Hamilton and James Madison and others had worked - plotted is not too
strong a word - to have a convention in order to create a central political
authority. Against the odds, the delegates wrote a charter to that end. But they
had to reckon also with another deep feeling among themselves and their
constituents. That was fear of power. They had made a revolution against a king,
and they did not want his concentrated power to reappear in another guise. But
they also wanted effective government. That was their dilemma.

The Constitution's solution was, first, to create a republic in which the
citizens would be sovereign. Theirs would be the ultimate power: to pass on the
acts of those who governed, and to change the government.

But that was not enough to prevent abuse of official power; the Constitution
adopted what Madison called ''auxiliary measures.'' These were devices to divide
official power and hem it in. Some power would be kept by the states, the new
Federal Government having only the authority specified in the Constitution. And
Federal power would be separated among the three branches of government:
legislative, executive, judicial. When one branch drew too much power to itself,
the framers reasoned, the other two would fight back - and the natural
tendencies of official life would protect the people from autocracy.

The system has worked to a remarkable degree as the framers hoped. The
separation of powers is such an abstract-sounding concept, but it is the real
world of American government: the rules of the game. When Congress and the
President are in conflict over covert actions, that is the separation of powers
in operation.

We are in such awe of the Constitution and its ingenious structures that we may
think it was greeted with similar deference by 18th-century Americans. Far from
it. The proposed Constitution was put to conventions in the states for
ratification, and there were passionate opponents. Such famous voices of liberty
as Patrick Henry and George Mason, both of Virginia, argued that a new central
government, however hemmed in, would lead to tyranny.

It was only by making a concession to that continuing fear of power that the
supporters of the Constitution won the day - a point of history that is often
overlooked.

John Hancock came up with the idea in the Massachusetts ratifying convention. He
asked the delegates to couple a vote for ratification with a call for the new
Congress to adopt specific limitations on the power of the Federal Government: a
Bill of Rights. His tactic persuaded enough opponents to switch that the
Massachusetts convention went for the Constitution by a vote of 187 to 168. The
other crucial states followed: New York by 30 to 27, Virginia by 89 to 79. If
Hancock's tactic had not turned the tide in Massachusetts, there would almost
certainly have been no American Constitution.

The result was the first 10 amendments, adopted in 1791. They may be celebrated
this year almost as if they were part of the original text, for they were the
condition of its approval. And they amplify the original devices to prevent
abuse of official power.


CONSIDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT'S CLAUSES PROTECTING expression: ''Congress shall
make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.'' To
Madison, who drafted the amendment, those words merely made explicit what was an
essential premise of the whole constitutional system: If the people were to be
sovereign, they must be free to express themselves on any political question.

The Madisonian view had a dramatic early challenge. In 1798, Congress passed the
Sedition Act: the only Federal law in our history designed directly to punish
the press. It was the last Congress controlled by the Federalists, and they
feared the rise of the Jeffersonians. The act made sedition a crime, defining it
as any false and critical statement about Congress or the President - John
Adams, a Federalist. (The Vice President was not protected from criticism, but
he was Thomas Jefferson.) Madison tried to rouse the country against the
Sedition Act. It ''ought to produce universal alarm,'' he said, ''because it is
leveled against the right of freely examining public characters and measures,
and of free communication among the people thereon, which has ever been justly
deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right.''

The Sedition Act expired in 1800, before it could be tested in the Supreme
Court. Jefferson was elected President that year; he pardoned the editors who
had been imprisoned under the act, and Congress remitted their fines.

There the matter stood until 1964. Then, remarkably, the Supreme Court told us
that the Sedition Act had indeed violated the First Amendment. It held so in the
great libel case of New York Times v. Sullivan. The Alabama courts had imposed
heavy libel damages on The Times for running an advertisement on behalf of the
civil rights movement that contained minor factual mistakes.

Quoting Madison, Justice

William J. Brennan Jr. said the civil law of libel could no more be used to
discourage robust discussion of ''public characters and measures'' than could a
criminal law, the Sedition Act.

The story of the Sedition Act and its eventual fate illustrates a central fact
about the Constitution: as it has worked in practice, its most striking feature
has been its enforcement as law by judges. Since Chief Justice John Marshall's
opinion in Marbury v. Madison in 1803, they have had the last word on what the
Constitution means.


IF THE TEXT WERE SELF-EXPLANATORY, if the framers had somehow anticipated future
questions and provided specific answers, then the power to interpret and apply
the Constitution would not matter so much. But it was not that sort of document,
and could not be. It was a constitution, as Marshall wrote in 1819, ''intended
to endure for ages to come, and, consequently, to be adapted to the various
crises of human affairs.''

So its language was spacious, with ''only its great outlines . . . marked.'' And
that made the power of its interpreters very great.

An illuminating example is the commerce clause of Article I: ''The Congress
shall have Power . . . to regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the
several States, and with the Indian Tribes.'' It is cast in terms of affirmative
power: Congress can act. But suppose a state interferes with the free flow of
commerce, and Congress does not act?

In the early 19th century, after Robert Fulton had invented the steamboat, the
New York Legislature gave him and his successors an exclusive charter to run
steamboats on the Hudson River. When a competitor began running boats between
New York and New Jersey, New York courts ordered him to stop. In 1824, the
Supreme Court overturned that order and struck down the monopoly. There were
other factors in the case, but the larger import was clear: when Congress has
not acted to remove an obstruction to commerce, the courts may do so.

It was a decision of astonishing boldness, in effect rewriting the commerce
clause to make it not only a grant of power to Congress but a judicially
administered ban on state obstruction of trade. And it was crucial to the
economic development of the country. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, skeptical as
he was of judicial power, said he did not think the United States would have
survived without the Supreme Court's willingness to strike down state
impediments to commerce.

Of course not all the Supreme Court's bold interpretations of the Constitution
have been wise. Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes described some of the Court's
decisions as ''self-inflicted wounds,'' among them Dred Scott, in 1857, which
held that blacks could not be citizens of the United States. That was reversed
by the 14th Amendment, after the Civil War. And even then the Court held, in
Plessy v. Ferguson, in 1896, that racial segregation was consistent with the
amendment's guarantee of ''the equal protection of the laws.''

The overruling of Plessy in Brown v. Board of Education, the school segregation
decision of 1954, showed how far the duty of expounding the Constitution has
taken the Supreme Court. In no other country has so deep and divisive an issue
been left to judges to decide. No other court has brought about what amounted to
a social revolution.

The school decision is an acute test of the theory, advocated notably by
Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, that the Supreme Court should read provisions
of the Constitution in terms of their framers' original intention. Mr. Meese
might have been expected to criticize the 1954 change of judicial mind. But no,
he said the school decision went back to ''the clear intent of the framers of
the Civil War amendments to eliminate the legal degradation of blacks'' - it was
the Plessy justices who strayed from original intention.

But the history is otherwise. When the 14th Amendment was adopted, in 1868,
schools were segregated - in the District of Columbia, among other places. The
gallery of the Senate that proposed the amendment was segregated. No Supreme
Court justice has suggested that history could have brought the Court to its
decision in the school case.

What produced the great change of constitutional interpretation in 1954 was a
change in circumstances, in our understanding of race in the human condition.
After Hitler, it was not possible to say, as the justices had said in Plessy,
that separation of human beings on account of their race was consistent with
''the equal protection of the laws.'' Segregation was an assertion of racial
inferiority. Under the American system, it was the role of the Justices to apply
that contemporary understanding of reality in construing the old words of the
Constitution.


THE CONSTITUTION IS FULL OF AMBIGUITIES THAT have provoked conflict over these
two centuries. None is more important than the question of Presidential and
Congressional powers in the making of war.

''The Constitution supposes,'' Madison wrote to Jefferson in 1798, ''what the
history of all governments demonstrates, that the Executive is the branch of
power most interested in war, and most prone to it. It has accordingly with
studied care vested the question of war in the legislature.''

''To declare war'' is listed among the explicit powers of Congress in Article I.
But Presidents have taken this country into many conflicts, among them the
terrible wars in Korea and Vietnam, without a Congressional declaration. And
Presidents have asserted powers of all kinds under the rubric of their
constitutional authority as Commander in Chief of the armed forces and chief
originator of foreign policy.

The war in Indochina occasioned what may have been the extreme assertion of
Presidential power so far. In 1973, after the Paris peace agreement brought the
Vietnam conflict to a supposed end, President Richard M. Nixon shifted squadrons
of B-52's to the bombing of Cambodia. The Tonkin Gulf Resolution, on which
President Lyndon B. Johnson had relied, had been repealed. No other act or
treaty authorized the bombing of Cambodia.

Congress passed a bill forbidding the bombing, but Mr. Nixon vetoed it. The
result was as if the Constitution had been amended to read: ''The President
shall have power to wage any war unless Congress, by a two-thirds vote of both
houses, directs otherwise.'' A political compromise then imposed the ban on the
bombing of Cambodia at a later date. But there was no legal response to that
bold assertion of a President's right to wage war as and where he wishes.

One great Supreme Court case did throw light on the relationship of Congress and
the President in matters of war: the steel-seizure case of 1952. That was during
the Korean conflict. The United Steelworkers union called a strike that seemed
likely to damage the war effort. To head off the strike, President Harry S.
Truman seized the country's steel mills and operated them under nominal control
of the Government. The companies went to court and protested that the President
had no authority in law to take their property. The President's lawyers argued
that he had what they called ''inherent power'' as Commander in Chief to deal as
he thought best during an emergency. The Court rejected the President's
argument. Justice Robert H. Jackson said, ''The example of such unlimited
executive power that must have most impressed the forefathers was the
prerogative exercised by George III, and the description of its evils in the
Declaration of Independence leads me to doubt that they were creating their new
Executive in his image.''

But it is not so clear that today's Supreme Court would decide the steel case or
one like it in the same way. For many years now, the Court has found no
Presidential violation of the separation of powers. And it has eagerly expanded
the authority of Presidents to act on their own in the asserted interest of
national security.

Two hundred years after the writing of the Constitution, the principal threat to
the system it created is the growth of power in the executive branch: power
often exercised in secret. James Madison could not have conceived that, under
his Constitution, agents of the President would operate around the world,
raising and spending large sums and carrying out warlike acts in violation of
legislated policies - all without accountability to anyone. But then, Madison
could not have imagined our world, in which the United States and the Soviet
Union each has more than 10,000 strategic nuclear weapons.

The cold war has created an American state very different from the one that
existed as recently as the 1930's. There was no large standing army then; there
never had been. The President did not have the huge personal apparatus now taken
for granted in the White House. In World War II, Franklin D. Roosevelt had a
smaller staff than Vice President George Bush has today. The exigencies of
national security, real and asserted, have made the President into a different
kind of creature: one with far greater power and far greater pretensions.

The nationalization of our economic and social system since 1933 has also had
its consequences. We look to Washington now - and that means mainly to the White
House - for cures to inflation and recession, for aid to the poor, for support
and medical care in old age. And television has focused our political life more
and more on the Presidency.

Changes in the realities of our world provide the great test of the American
Constitution on its 200th birthday. We no longer have, and cannot recapture, the
modest national government conceived by the framers. The question is whether the
devices they so artfully designed will work to keep far greater powers
accountable, and so keep us free.

In the end, the distinctive character of the American Constitution does not lie
in this particular clause or that. It lies in our willingness to accept the
Constitution, interpreted by judges, as law. Other peoples look to pageantry or
history or ethnic identity or ideology. Our national sense of legitimacy rests
on law.

Some Americans have always been impatient with the constitutional system. How
much more efficient we could be, they argue - and how much harder on our enemies
- if we cleared away the obstacles of law. But the United States is a country
extraordinarily rich and extraordinarily free. We have not achieved what we have
in the teeth of the Constitution. We have achieved it because of our commitment
to the ideas proposed on Sept. 17, 1787.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR POWERS;
Tug-of-War

BYLINE: By William Safire; William Safire, a New York Times columnist, is the
author, most recently, of ''Freedom,'' a novel about Abraham Lincoln and the
Civil War.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 61, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2139 words



ARTICLE I: Section 8. The Congress shall have Power ... To delcare War...

ARTICLE II: Section 2. The President shall be Commander in Chief...


IF WE CAN'T MOVE THE CONTRA PACKAGE before June 9,'' President Reagan told his
national security adviser on May 1, 1986, ''I want to figure out a way to take
action uni-laterally to provide assistance.''

That direct quotation of the President's (complete with the unnecessary
hyphenation of unilaterally) was in a computer note from John M. Poindexter to
Oliver L. North and five other members of the National Security Council staff.

''He has been reading Natanyahu's (sp?) book on terrorism,'' wrote Admiral
Poindexter of the President, ''and he was taken with the examples of
Presidential actions in the past without Congressional approval. . . . The
President is ready to confront the Congress on the constitutional question of
who controls foreign policy.''

Presidential aides like to describe the struggle between the President and
Congress as ''who controls foreign policy,'' but that is a misnomer.

Few have doubted that the President is pre-eminent in the formulation and
conduct of foreign policy, subject to varying degrees of legislative advice and
consent; George Washington made that clear when he gave a cool reception to
French Minister Edmond Charles Genet and later - without asking Congress -
requested his recall. The kernel of the issue, which is always in dispute, is
''who controls the extension of foreign policy known as the war power?''

When President Reagan decided to confront the Congress on his constitutional
ability to support a war in Central America, he was reading a book edited by
Benjamin Netanyahu (that's how you spell it), Israel's representative to the
United Nations, entitled ''Terrorism: How the West Can Win.'' In a section of
the book on ''The Legal Foundations for the War Against Terrorism,'' the
historian Walter Berns recalls the first words of the Constitution's Article II
- ''The executive power shall be vested in a President'' - and observes that if
John Locke was the framers' guide in this, as he was elsewhere, then the
executive power includes, in the philosopher's words, ''the power to act
according to discretion for the public good, without the prescription of law and
sometimes even against it.''


THAT MUST HAVE BEEN A HEADY thought for Mr. Reagan, who went on to read
Professor Berns's summation of President Abraham Lincoln's extra-constitutional
acts: ''Lincoln fought a war that was never declared; without congressional
authorization, he called for volunteers to fight that war; he established a
naval blockade of ports from Texas to Virginia; he suspended the privilege of
the writ of habeas corpus; he put enemy sympathizers in jail without trial and
ignored a demand of the Chief Justice to free them; most important, he used his
power as commander in chief to free the slaves, something not even Congress was
authorized to do.''

Of course, all that happened during the most extreme kind of emergency, which
was specified in the Constitution as ''in cases of Rebellion or Invasion.'' Mr.
Lincoln evoked the ''war-power'' (which he hyphenated) far more widely than any
Chief Executive before or since; but he was usually careful to justify his
Constitution-stretching by arguing that a measure made expedient by a war is no
precedent for times of peace.

The United States is not at war with Nicaragua; however, we are involved in a
kind of war against terrorism in the Middle East, which justified a raid by
United States bombers on Tripoli. Mr. Reagan and his security advisers
apparently put the shadowy war against (and negotiations with) terrorists in the
same bag with support for the contras' war against the Sandinistas.

''I have George's proxy on the [contra aid] package,'' wrote Admiral Poindexter
in his intriguing ''uni-lateral'' memo, referring, I presume, to George Bush,
not George Shultz. ''George agrees with the President that we have to win some
way and we will not pull out.'' On the constitutional question of ''who controls
foreign policy,'' the admiral suggested: ''We need to get Abe Sofaer and other
stalwart lawyers thinking in these terms. . . .''

The Reagan men could not have turned to a man more familiar with the subject.
Although Abraham D. Sofaer, the State Department's legal counsel, gained fame as
the judge in the Ariel Sharon-Time Inc. libel trial, he made his reputation with
legal scholars with his 1976 book ''War, Foreign Affairs and Constitutional
Power: The Origins.''

In that work, Judge Sofaer describes what little is known about the framers'
discussion of the war power in the Constitutional Convention. The draft
Constitution, prepared by the Committee of Detail, assigned to the legislature
the power to make war. James Madison moved to strike the verb make and
substitute declare, ''leaving to the Executive,'' as Madison put it, ''the power
to repel sudden attacks.'' Roger Sherman of Connecticut objected, on the grounds
that declare limited Congressional power too much. George Mason of Virginia
spoke up for declare, and Rufus King of Massachusetts agreed because, as Madison
noted, ''make war might be understood to 'conduct' it, which was an Executive
function.''


BUT THE FRAMERS DID NOT DEAL WITH THE GRAY area of muscle-flexing that might
make the use of military force inevitable. President Washington, as secure a
leader as we ever have had, was deferential: he sought the Senate's approval
before threatening to attack the Creek Indians, in 1789. John Adams took the
same cautious approach. But Thomas Jefferson - who was not present at the
writing of the Constitution, and who is famed for opposing Alexander Hamilton's
idea of a powerful executive - became downright assertive when he attained the
Presidency.

When a British ship disabled the American frigate Chesapeake, in 1807, Jefferson
proclaimed a ''qualified war,'' purchased ammunition without appropriation and
only later obtained Congressional approval. His rationale was best set out in
his explanation for absorbing the Louisiana Territory without a constitutional
amendment: ''To lose our country by a scrupulous adherence to written law, would
be to lose the law itself, with life, liberty, property and all those who are
enjoying them with us; thus absurdly sacrificing the end to the means.'' That
''higher law'' doctrine was cited over a century-and-three-quarters later in
front of a Congressional committee by Oliver L. North's secretary, Fawn Hall.

During the Civil War, Senator Ben Wade, a militant abolitionist from Ohio,
sought to turn the tables on Lincoln and take control of the actual making of
the war, but the President skillfully finessed this foray into the Commander in
Chief's bailiwick. Congress dutifully validated his war actions, although the
Supreme Court after the war refused to countenance his decision to invoke
martial law in places where civil courts were functioning.

President Woodrow Wilson in 1916 did not ask the approval of Congress to send
United States troops into Mexico in search of the provocative bandit Pancho
Villa, and he drew on what he considered his constitutional powers to bull
through policies concerning the war in Europe that Congress opposed.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt further expanded executive power when he swapped
50 ''over-age'' destroyers for British bases in the western Atlantic. Harry S.
Truman, a man of the Congress, turned out to be another President eager to
expand the executive war power. The Korean experience, wrote Arthur M.
Schlesinger Jr. in ''The Imperial Presidency,'' ''beguiled the American
Government first into an unprecedented claim for inherent presidential power to
go to war and then into ill-advised resentment against those who dared bring up
the constitutional issue.'' That refers to the ''great debate'' launched by
Senator Robert A. Taft to challenge the President's power to dispatch troops to
Korea and to Western Europe without Congressional approval. Truman prevailed in
the debate and, according to historian Schlesinger, ''dramatically and
dangerously enlarged the power of future Presidents to take the nation into
major war.''


CONGRESS IN 1964 WAS SOLIDLY BEHIND PRESIDENT Lyndon B. Johnson's Vietnam
policy; the Tonkin Gulf Resolution passed both houses with only two votes in
opposition. When the Tonkin resolution was repealed in 1971, President Richard
M. Nixon pointed to his constitutional power as Commander in Chief as giving him
the authority to reduce the level of United States troops in combat at the pace
he thought best. No constitutional confrontation arose because Congress kept
appropriating the money to fight the war.

Only after our pullout from Vietnam in the spring of 1973, did Congress assert
itself. Determined to wrench back the power to decide when the nation should
fight a war, Congress stopped our bombing in Cambodia by voting to cut off
funds. With the crippling of the Nixon Presidency after Watergate came the War
Powers Resolution, whose author, Senator Jacob K. Javits, declared: ''After 200
years, at last something will have been done about codifying the implementation
of the most awesome power in the possession of any sovereignty. . . . Wars
cannot be successfully fought except with the consent of the people. . . .''

That far-reaching legislation was passed over Mr. Nixon's veto. Congress
permitted an emergency executive response to an attack, but limited the
Commander in Chief's powers to send troops ''into hostilities, or into
situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the
circumstances'' by requiring a Congressional declaration of war or other
specific authorization. None of those Presidential excuses, such as ''inherent
powers'' or ''to uphold treaties'' or ''the need to protect American citizens in
danger,'' or even ''the necessity of secrecy in a surprise military action'';
the President is now required to consult with Congress before introducing forces
into hostilities, and - within 48 hours of sending combat troops into a hostile
situation - to report in writing to both houses about the estimated scope and
duration of the involvement.

No President since the 1973 passage of the War Powers Resolution has been
willing to recognize the act's constitutionality, but all have ''taken note of''
the act and reported to Congress ''consistent with'' though not ''pursuant to''
its provisions. Not one has declared that United States forces are actually in a
situation in which hostilities are imminent, because that would set in motion a
60-day mandatory-withdrawal deadline unless Congress approved the deployment.


WHERE DOES THAT leave us? We have declared war five times in our history and
United States troops have engaged in hostilities abroad about 200 times. Since
the War Powers Resolution, with belated and often grudging notification of
Congress, Gerald R. Ford recaptured the Mayaguez from Cambodians and Jimmy
Carter launched an abortive rescue mission inside Iran; and Reagan has landed
United States forces on Grenada, bombed Tripoli and dispatched the fleet to the
dangerous Persian Gulf.

It leaves us in the tension of uncertainty that I think the framers thought
best. The Constitution's makers, fearful of monarchy, surely intended to keep
the decision to go into war away from the executive, and just as surely kept
what was later called micromanagement of its conduct away from the legislature.
Authority for the gray area - ''getting us involved'' - has been wrested back
and forth through two centuries, and the answer seems to lie in the inability of
either branch to dominate the other.

With all the talk of separation of powers, the way it has worked out is that
power overlaps. Both forces check each other, and when one grabs too much, the
other reacts - perhaps overreacts - and the pendulum swings back.

If Admiral Poindexter had understood the workings of constitutional government,
he would have sent the President a simple answer to his complex question:
certainly there is a way to take action ''uni-laterally,'' but that way will
surely call down the institutional wrath of the rest of the Government. Is the
efficiency of refusing to consult in advance worth the resentment and opposition
that are sure to follow anything less than an overwhelming success?

Hamilton, Lincoln, Wilson would have said yes; Madison and Robert Taft would
have said no; Jefferson would have said yes as a lawgiver and no as an
executive. The debate goes on, the tension never lets up; that's the way it is
supposed to be. The strength of the system is that no center of power
exclusively controls the power to decide when and if we get into war, how long
we stay in it, and when and how we get out of it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing; photo of U.S. Navy helicopter flying over reflagged Kuwaiti
tank in Gulf of Oman, August 6, 1987 (Peter Turnley/Black Star) (pg. 64)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM: WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN

BYLINE: By ALAN TONELSON; Alan Tonelson is writing a book for the Twentieth
Century Fund about redefining America's foreign policy interests.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 828 words



IN THE JAWS OF HISTORY
By Bui Diem with David Chanoff. Illustrated. 367 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company. $18.95.

''IF only'' is more than one of the English language's saddest phrases. Used
often enough, it enables historians and especially memoir writers all too easily
to duck hard questions such as why wrong decisions were repeatedly made at
critical junctures, why opportunities were often lost and ultimately why certain
forces prevailed over others.

Such handwringing - and evasion - pervades ''In the Jaws of History,'' an
account of the Vietnam War from the losing side. Written by a leading South
Vietnamese civilian official who also served as Saigon's ambassador to
Washington at the height of the conflict (1967-72), and co-written by David
Chanoff, a journalist who has collaborated with Vietnamese on three other books
about the war, this memoir offers a game apologia for anti-Communist Vietnamese
nationalism between 1945 and 1975. But Bui Diem's insistence that a viable
democratic Vietnamese state could have been created with the right set of
leaders, the right programs and the right kind of help from the West will not
convince many opponents of America's war effort. If anything, this kind of
speculation strengthens the case that the ingredients for success never existed
to begin with. Born into a prominent anti-French Mandarin family in northern
Vietnam, the author, like many young Vietnamese, was drawn into the nationalist
struggle as Paris's rule began to crumble during World War II. Though taught
history with a Marxist slant by Vo Nguyen Giap, later the mastermind of
Communist Vietnam's defeats of France and of America and its Saigon allies, Mr.
Diem became alienated by the strong-arm politics of Ho Chi Minh's Vietminh. He
had by then signed on with Vietnam's non-Communist independence forces, which he
describes in detail as a fairly sizable but disorganized and philosophically
directionless lot.

Here the ''if only'' sequence begins, each one simultaneously begging and
exposing ever more damning questions about the political movement to which Mr.
Diem devoted his life. If only the non-Communists had had Ho's mastery of
organizational skills and military strategy; if only they had developed a
program or a vision to offer their fellow Vietnamese; if only they could have
attracted mass support; if only they had not had to rely on the stubborn French,
or on the indecisive Emperor Bao Dai. As Mr. Diem's account makes clear, the
fatal pattern of non-Communist Vietnam's politics was set in the 1940's:
political and military weakness led to dependence on foreign angels, which
reduced the non-Communists' legitimacy for many Vietnamese.

As the author describes his involvement with nearly every non-Communist
Vietnamese Government after 1945, the ''if only'' list lengthens. If only Ngo
Dinh Diem, South Vietnam's first president, had not been corrupt and autocratic;
if only Washington had cared more about democracy instead of stability after its
role in Diem's 1963 overthrow; if only America had focused on the relatively
clean task of blocking North Vietnamese infiltration instead of completely
taking over and intensifying the meat-grinder war in the South; if only
President Nguyen Van Thieu had tried to broaden his base of support and take
social and economic reform seriously; if only South Vietnam's officials and
generals had not been so corrupt. And lastly, during Mr. Diem's final assignment
as ambassador at large: if only Congress had permitted the Nixon Administration
to keep its promises to punish North Vietnam's violations of the Paris peace
accords; if only Mr. Thieu had not blundered militarily in 1975 and sealed South
Vietnam's doom; if only Congress had approved the Ford Administration's
last-ditch military aid request and enabled the improved South Vietnamese forces
to fight on.

YET Mr. Diem shies away from the conclusion suggested by so many ''if onlys'' -
that with the exception of the elite circles in which he moved all his life,
Vietnam during this period (at least) was for some reason fundamentally
incapable of generating political democracy, even loosely defined. Though the
author evidently disagrees, he scarcely presents any analysis of Vietnamese
political culture and thus neglects this issue.

Mr. Diem ever so reluctantly acknowledges that vital American interests were
never at stake in Vietnam. He nonetheless closes by imploring America not to
abandon the support of democracy around the world but simply to do the job
better than in the past. Yet as they thrash about for the right recipe for
intervention and reform in the third world, Americans should ponder this:
Washington is full of men like Bui Diem from many countries - humane, moderate,
honorable, tolerant, democratically inclined. Should American foreign policy
primarily reflect the wish, ''If only they could guide their countries'
futures''? Or the reality that they are all exiles?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

TRAVEL ADVISORY

SECTION: Section 10; Page 3, Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1358 words



U.S. Distributor Of Korea Games Tickets Awaited

With one year to go and no American agent yet selected to distribute tickets for
events at the Seoul Olympics, the United States Olympic Committee is maintaining
a list of people who ask about tickets, and promises to contact them when the
agent is named.

The lack of an agent is causing problems for travel agents who are eager to book
tours to the Games, which open on Sept. 17, 1988.

The next step, said Bob Condron, a spokesman for the United States Olympic
Committee, is for the Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee to name a ticket agent
and for the United States Olympic Committee to approve that agent. The selection
should be made by the first week in October, he said. Until then, Mr. Condron
said, people should write to the Public Information Office, United States
Olympic Committee, 1750 East Boulder Street, Colorado Springs, Colo. 80909. When
the agent is named, the committee will respond to requests for information to
those who have requested it. Those people will not, however, be given priority
for tickets.

Byoung-Shik Rhee, the director of the Korea National Tourism Office in New York,
said the fact that a ticket distributor has not yet been selected was not
related to the recent political upheaval in his country, but he did point out
that distributors had been selected in most other countries. But Mr. Condron
said there has been no delay. '

Several travel agents offering tours to Korea that include Olympics tickets
expressed concern. Eiji Kanno, the director of Pacific Select Tours, in New
York, said, ''It's our big headache. We are asking people just to hold off on
their booking for another month or so. We feel it's a bit irresponsible to sell
a tour without the guarantee of tickets.''

Tokyo New Year

Travelers planning to spend a winter vacation in Tokyo should be aware that much
of the city shuts down between Dec. 28 and Jan. 4 as the Japanese celebrate the
New Year. Schools, banks and many stores and restaurants close during that time.
As a rule, department stores close only on New Year's Day. Restaurants that stay
open often raise their prices to take advantage of the lessened competition.

The Japanese mark New Year's much as Americans do Thanksgiving, by traveling to
their hometowns, and there is an exodus out of Tokyo on the days approaching
Jan. 1. On New Year's Day, Tokyo residents who do stay in the city visit temples
and shrines, and visitors in search of open shops and restaurants are most
likely to find them in those areas.

Ancient Relics In Thailand

In northeastern Thailand, artifacts found during recent excavations at the site
of an early Bronze Age civilization are now on display in a national museum in
the I-San region.

Among the discoveries in this settlement, which dates back 5,000 years, are
bracelets, beads, tools, weapons and skeletons. The site, in the hamlet of Ban
Chiang, was discovered in 1967 and is still being excavated. The museum, the
National Museum at Ban Chiang (Udon Thani, Thailand) is closed Mondays and
Tuesdays, The hours are 8:30 A.M. to 4:30; admission is about 40 cents.

The I-San region itself, which makes up about one-third of Thailand, is one of
the least frequently visited areas of the country. Among the other attractions
is the Prasat Hin Pimai, an ancient stone palace and shrine. And near Sakhon
Nakhon, Bhuphan Ratchanivet Palace, the northeast residence of the Thai Royal
Family, is open to the public when the family is not in residence.

Tours of I-San vary in length from two to nine days. For more information
contact the Tourism Authority of Thailand, 5 World Trade Center, Suite 2449, New
York, N.Y. 10048; 212-432-0433.

Melbourne By Streetcar

Melbourne is a city of electric trams, and visitors can see many of the sights
by riding the No. 15. For about $1.60 riders can get a transit pass good for a
whole day. The Carlton section, in the north, is a good place to board. Near
here are the University of Melbourne, 19th-century terrace houses, and Little
Italy, with its bistros, wine bars, food shops and restaurants.

The No. 15 tram runs along Swanston Street, passing Chinatown (Little Bourke
Street) and the Myer Emporium, a large department store. Next stop is Collins
Street, noted for boutiques and shopping arcades.

The tram passes City Square and the Town Hall, then St. Paul's Anglican
Cathedral, withits Victorian, Gothic arches, Byzantine and Venetian
architectural features. After crossing the River Yarra, on the left is the
100-acre Botanic Gardens, which includes the National Herbarium, Shrine of
Remembrance (of war veterans) and the Sidney Myer Music Bowl. Opposite the
gardens is the Victorian Arts Center, which hosts concerts and art galleries.

After continuing down tree-lined St. Kilda Road, the tram passes St. Kilda Beach
and terminates near the St. Kilda Esplanade, where artists and craftsmen display
their work on weekends. Nearby is Luna Park, an amusement park, and St. Kilda
village, a busy area of restaurants and Jewish delicatessens.

Stops and Circles: Extending a Trip

If you're planning a trip to Asia, try to stay longer than the standard two-week
vacation; you owe it to yourself after the 12- to 15-hour plane trip and the
difficulties of change.

To that end, some airlines offer as many as four free stopovers along the route,
with additional stops for only $50 extra.

For a bit more than a round-trip fare, a Circle Pacific ticket gives travelers
many more options. With Circle Pacific fares, an airline, often in conjunction
with an Asia-based line such as Singapore Airlines or Philippine Airlines,
offers an itinerary in which the traveler leaves the United States for the
northern Pacific (say, Tokyo) and makes up to four stops leading to the southern
Pacific (say, Hong Kong, Bangkok and Sydney) belulu). Or the trip can go from
south to north. Additional stops usually cost only $50 each.

Such a ticket can be a significant saving over separately pricing each leg of
such a journey. For example, United Airlines estimates a New
York-Tokyo-Sydney-New York trip at $3,000, or $810 more than its Circle Pacific
rate, with two fewer stops.

U.S. Warnings On Asia Travels

Here are summaries of United States Department of State travel advisories for
American visitors to Asia:

Philippines. Travelers are urged to avoid Mindinao (except the cities of Davao,
Iligan and Gagayan de Oro), the Sulu Archipelago and the Cagayan Valley in
northern Luzon because of unrest. There were no new advisories resulting from
the coup attempt in late August.

Sri Lanka. Because of strife between Government forces and Tamil separatists,
avoid northern and eastern provinces.

India. Non-Indians planning to travel to the Punjab must get a special permit
from the Indian Government. Permission is likely to be difficult to obtain.

Pakistan. Several foreigners have been kidnapped in Baluchistan. Those going
outside the city of Quetta should travel in daylight and in groups. Avoid travel
in rural parts of Sind province, especially the Dadu and Larkana districts;
bandits have robbed and abducted travelers there.

Tibet. All areas closed to foreign travel except Lhasa, the road between Lhasa
and the airport and the road and designated stopping places between Lhasa and
the Nepalese border.

Vietnam. Americans are officially discouraged from traveling there because there
is no United States diplomatic or consular presence; hence, there is no
protection for citizens who encounter problems.

Thailand. Avoid trekking in remote areas along the Thai-Burmese border: bandits
and armed drug traffickers.

Malaysia. There is a mandatory death penalty for convicted drug traffickers,
regardless of the amount of drugs involved. The United States Government cannot
intervene in such cases involving its citizens.


Visas are required for these countries: Bhutan, Burma, India (those who enter by
plane without visa are usually sent out on the carrier's next flight leaving the
country, regardless of its destination), Laos, China, Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan,
Taiwan, Tibet, Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A table Sept. 13 in Travel Advisory incorrectly labeled some air fares to Sydney
as being offered by Northwest Orient. They are United Airlines fares.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Prasat Hin Pimai palace, Thailand; map of Melbourne,
Australia; graph of per diem expenses in Asia-Pacific region (Source: U.S. State
Department)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam for Visitors

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE; Barbara Crossette is the Bangkok bureau chief of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 9, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 3356 words


Vietnam: What other place in the world is so much talked about and so little
known? In a century of French rule, this country, with some of Southeast Asia's
most beautiful terrain, somehow never got around to welcoming travelers in any
significant numbers. Colonialism was followed by three decades of occupation
(Japanese) and war (French, American and Chinese).

This year Vietnam, poor but at peace within its own borders, decided to end its
isolation and put itself on the tourist circuit - a little tentatively, to be
sure.

''We don't promise you wonders,'' its first glossy tourist brochure says. ''We
simply propose to show you a country in all its human and geographic
diversities.''

But wonders are what you get: dynastic tombs, royal poetry reading pavilions
over lotus ponds, mountains of marble, empty white-sand beaches that stretch to
the vanishing point.

Moreover, Vietnam's towns, and most of its cities, its byways and landmarks,
exude the atmosphere of an Asia that has all but disappeared. Bicycle bells and
children's voices create what din there is in most towns. Before dawn along the
Perfume River in Hue, and in countless other places, the only sounds are those
of temple gongs or church bells.

This is a magic moment for the Westerner to visit Vietnam. People crowd around a
foreigner in genuine delight. Until now, most visitors of European descent would
automatically be assumed to be Russian, especially in the north and around the
large American-built bases at Danang and Cam Ranh Bay, now operated by the
Russians.

Tell them you are My (mee) - American - and children accustomed to chanting Lien
Xo! Lien Xo! (lee-en so, which means Russian) in a not-very-friendly manner will
giggle in disbelief. Fewer than 100 Americans have visited Vietnam this year as
tourists, officials say, and most of them were members of study tours or
potential relief donors looking at needs.

When questions come, they are direct: How old are you? Are you married? Do you
have children? A group of French tourists encountered in Ho Chi Minh City had
solved the identity problem by wearing T-shirts that said in Vietnamese: French.
An interpreter told the story of a European who dealt with all the recurrent
questions at once by having his shirt printed this way:
    I am not Russian
    I am Swedish
    I am 30
    I am single
    I can use chopsticks.

In Vietnam, hosts and travelers - and one is a traveler, not a vacationer, on
this jaunt -are learning together. But in almost any provincial hotel, a mere
signal that the service has fallen short, as it invariably does, provokes
remorse-stricken faces and a burst of celebrated Vietnamese ingenuity to put
things right.

What to see? Vietnam, short of accommodations, transportation and most consumer
goods, has designated a few dozen places, grouped around four or five major
towns, as tourist sites. Travelers may not wander freely in the country, though
foreigners wanting to travel alone by car along prescribed routes can do so,
usually at about 80 cents to $1 a mile, including driver and fuel.

All details of the trip must be arranged ahead of time with one of the
authorized tour operators in the United States. Flexibility is minimal in
Vietnam because services are limited and the bureaucracy is overwhelming.

The selection of tourist sites has been made well, offering a sample of
antiquities, natural wonders, varying ethnic regions and several beaches. All
tours, ranging from 3 to about 20 days, begin in Hanoi, the capital, or Ho Chi
Minh City, the country's largest metropolitan area, still known to most people
(and its own tourist board) as Saigon.

In both cities there will be set itineraries and probably no choice of hotel.
But the visitor with energy left should also take time to walk the streets
unescorted to get a closer look at life. In the last year or two, people in
Hanoi have stopped being afraid of contact with foreigners, who are free to go
anywhere. Reticence has never been a hallmark of Ho Chi Minh City.

Hanoi is a rundown but architecturally uniform French colonial town - a few
Soviet or modern Chinese-inpired buildings notwihstanding, and therefore a
potentially more beautiful city than concrete Saigon. Bicycle-powered cyclos ply
the streets for a pittance. One can be hired for an evening for a dollar or
less. (Vietnamese currency has several values: about 380 dong to the dollar at
banks, 550 in tourist establishments and 900 to 1,000 in the private shops of
Hang Gai and Hang Gao Streets.)


If you want to sample museums, Hanoi is the place to start. The Fine Arts Museum
has an attractive, systematic collection spanning the cultural history of the
country. Begin on the top floor of classical artifacts and descend, in more ways
than one, to the ground floor of agitprop revolutionary art.

The war museum is also a useful stop. For Americans who think there was only one
conflict here, the halls devoted to the struggle against the French and battles
with Chinese invaders in 1979 put the ''American'' war in context.

If you visit only one temple in Hanoi, try to make it the Temple of Literature,
an 11th-to-15th-century Confucian complex that was Vietnam's first university.
Although its grounds are badly in need of restoration, there are in one inner
court unique stelae, looking like giant gravestones on the backs of tortoises,
which record the country's literary achievements since 1443.

According to Nguyen Du Chi, an art scholar and curator at the Fine Arts Museum,
the center of Vietnam's last royal dynasty and the country's classical cultural
and spiritual capital, these stelae at the Temple of Literature are the keys to
succeeding periods of decorative arts. Scholars go to them for the finest work
of any given Vietnamese era.

Few scars of war are visible to the tourist in Vietnam; its cities, including
Hanoi, were not devastated by bombing. Deforested hills around Hue, for example,
are not the work of defoliants but of woodcutters fueling the cooking fires of
an overpopulated country.


When transportation is available, tourists can, however, visit some areas along
the Ho Chi Minh Trail, which were heavily bombed and defoliated. There are also
side tours of the Cu Chi tunnels outside Ho Chi Minh City, where the Viet Cong
maintained underground headquarters, as well as of orphanages and war museums in
several towns.

Hanoi is where most foreigners first encounter Vietnamese-style private
restaurants, which are a thing unto themselves. The food in these small
entreprenurial establishments is always better than hotel fare. But the ambiance
and hygienic standards might best be described as medieval - some would say
disgusting - because of the filth and flies.

If tables are cleaned at all, it is with a grimy rag, and sometimes you can
smell the toilets. Mangy cats wander around. The squeamish may not get past the
kitchen, which may be on the sidewalk out front. But once inside, there are
tasty meals that should cause no problems if you order carefully and eat only
hot, freshly cooked food.

Restaurants come and go in Hanoi. The hardy colony of international aid workers
and diplomats, some of whom live in hotels, near the central market, which
specializes in a fish-and-noodle dish; and Restaurant 202, in a
residential-commercial area farther afield, where the largely French menu
includes steak. With even a small tourist boom and no reversal of a more
liberalized economic policy, restaurants are bound to increase and improve.

Out of Hanoi, or Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam's attractions are mostly along its
coast, with the exceptions of Hue and the hill resort of Dalat. The seaside
scenery is remarkable in its beauty and lack of commercial clutter. This is true
even of a busy resort like Nha Trang. However, Vung Tau - a day trip from Ho Chi
Minh City -falls short of expectations, particularly on weekends.

From north to south, the sights most highly recommended are Ha Long Bay, near
Haiphong, with its unusual rock formations and grottoes; the royal city of Hue,
the beach at Danang (a city that seems to be rapidly developing into the
country's most prosperous community) and, farther south, the beach at Nha Trang
along the stretch of coast where the ancient Kings of Champa reigned. A small
collection of Cham towers, or temples, from the ninth century is still standing
on a hill above Nha Trang's small harbor.

Hue, where Buddhism thrives in well-tended pagodas, is Vietnam's most
architecturally interesting city. It is also a pleasant town along the placid
Perfume River, where an old American bachelor officers' quarters has become a
tourist hotel, the Huong Giang.

In Hue, by the way, the best place to eat is right in the hotel - not in the
air-conditioned rooftop dining room, where most tourists are guided, but in a
small, open-air cafe on the ground-floor terrace known as the Specialty
Restaurant. This little restaurant, run by a private owner under an unusual (for
socialist Vietnam) contract with the hotel, features the local Hue cuisine, the
best in Vietnam. While you eat, you can watch life on the river.

Though menus change from day to day in this restaurant, it is usually possible
to find a fragrantly seasoned or spiced rice dish. The best may be the Huong
Giang rice, which is lightly fried with sesame seeds, aromatic herbs, dried
shrimp, onions and chilies. There are also delicious fried meat rolls you
construct yourself in thin rice wafers.

Another Hue specialty is the khoai, a folded pancake that looks like a taco,
with a bean paste or other filling and garnishes. After dinner, or for a snack,
there might be sweet soup, a concoction of sweetened white or green bean paste,
lotus seeds or fruits served cold. (Avoid the ones with chopped ice.) Well fed,
the traveler can make an excursion around the pagodas, a city museum, the 18th-
and 19th-century tombs of the Nguyen Dynasty in the hills outside town and the
royal temples and halls inside the Citadel, the old walled city.

Three tombs are of special interest, for their variety and setting. The tomb of
King Minh Mang is the oldest of the existing Nguyen tombs, built in 1840-43. All
the royal burial places -more parks than mausoleums -were chosen for their
tranquil settings.

Another royal tomb in a large park of lotus ponds and pagodas is that of Tu Duc,
which was built in 1864-67. Within the grounds it has what is thought to be one
of the few private royal theaters left in Southeast Asia. The king did not die
until 1883. He had the burial park built early so he could enjoy it while
living. One of his favorite pastimes was reciting poetry in a pavilion, where
young Vietnamese now come to strum guitars and picnic with friends.

Most extravagant of the tombs is that of King Thai Dinh, built from 1920 to
1931. The tomb is a fantasy of styles: Hindu, European, and Vietnamese, with an
interior of brilliant rococo murals made of broken porcelain from all over the
world. Outside, a courtyard of life-size stone mandarins, with horses and
elephants, awaits the king's pleasure.


A brief stop might be made at Hue's unusual Roman Catholic Cathedral, the Mother
of Perpetual Help, which was designed by a Vietnamese architect under the old
South Vietnamese regime to give a Christian building local inspiration. Two
Redemptorist fathers in their 70's struggle to keep the building going with only
the support of their congregation.

South of Hue, through the Hai Van (Sea Cloud) Pass winding through mountains
that reach the edge of the ocean, a scenic road leads to Danang. There is a Cham
museum here, but it is in need of a good curator.

Danang's beach, in sight of the Marble Mountain, with its lookout points and a
cave with a Confucian temple carved into its interior, has the city's newest
hotel. Called simply the Tourist Hotel (nomenclature, like bell captains, have
yet to be invented here) it is on a long, sandy beach - a good place to unwind
and prepare for the next leg of the trip.

Unfortunately, the hotel dining room comes close to serving inedible food and,
to make matters worse, cuts off a view of the sea with curtains, leaving already
spiritless diners with a view of only the barren room's Early Socialist decor.
If you can swing it, here's the place for a picnic on one of the hotel's
terraces, or right on the sand.

The next major resort south of Danang is Nha Trang, the rest and recreation lure
of Russians now and the Americans before them. The beachfront has been carefully
maintained, though many of the town's buildings have deteriorated. The beach
here, unlike Danang's, has a special character: It is the town's lively and
popular municipal park, where people come at dawn to do exercises and in the
evening to enjoy the sea view and the breeze.

Inland from Nha Trang, a bumpy road winds through mountain passes to the Central
Highlands and the hill station of Dalat, the French Empire's Simla. Here
colonial administrators established a summer capital and built European-style
villas on pine-covered hills overlooking a lake.

Lodgings here, more than almost anywhere else (save for Hanoi's Thong Nhat, once
the Metropole, and Saigon's Cuu Long, the old Majestic,) have character. The
Dalat Palace, a wood-paneled, cavernous genteel resort hotel that dominates the
town center, has been lucky. It may have deteriorated physically, but for more
than 40 years it has had the presence of Thai Vien. Now 67 and the manager, Mr.
Vien, whose career has been unbroken since 1946, remembers the service standards
of happier years and has tried to keep the Palace's spirits high against all
odds.

For a very few extra dollars, you might get to stay in one of the suites, with
old pewter and china still on the shelves, the way it was when guests of another
era walked away from Dalat - and Vietnam.

In the morning, on a walk along misty streets with horse-drawn wagons, you can
sense that age again. Like the pagodas of Hue, or picnics by the sea, the quiet
landscape and relaxed people of Dalat tell a visitor that while so much is
radically different now in this country, there is also much of traditional
Vietnam that has survived.

PLANNING A TRIP

What to Take

Here are the things to bring along to Vietnam to help avoid frustration:

Medical Supplies. Everything you could possibly need, down to aspirin and
bandages. If you are prone to motion sickness, bring tablets for the rough roads
and internal flights. Most drugstore items are not available, except on the
black market, if then. Also bring insect repellent or mosquito coils, as there
is some malaria here, imported from Cambodia, as well as dengue fever. Cholera,
hepatitis and tetanus inoculations are often recommended.

Money. A few hundred American dollars in small denominations. Even if the trip
is already paid for, you may be charged for extras (excluding food), in dollars.
No one ever has any change. Dollars are also used in government handcraft and
art shops. Traveler's checks are rarely accepted outside major cities. Credit
cards are useless.

Toiletries. Bath soap, shampoo, cosmetics, sanitary napkins, toothpaste and
washing powder. If you stay in one place several nights, laundry service will
usually be good, however. If you can not live without soft American toilet
paper, add that. And bring rubber flip-flops for sloshy floors.

Food and Drink. Bring bottled water. Mineral water is available in some places
some of the time, and local beer is safe, if warm. But while you are getting
acquainted with the country, especially in hot weather, it does not hurt to have
a few bottles of spa water from abroad. Travelers can get very sick in Vietnam,
and medical services are minimal. Insist that locally bottled drinks be opened
at the table. Also bring antiseptic towelettes. It is never impolite to clean a
glass, cup, bowl or chopsticks. The Vietnamese do it with whatever is at hand.

Bring instant coffee, sugar, nondairy creamer and instant soup packets or
boullion. All hotels will provide an insulated flask of near-boiling water that
can be trusted. You might also bring a thermos for hot or cold drinks on the
road. Some people swear by an emergency supply of jam, or tiny cans of fish or
pate, with can openers. Canned foods can make a meal with bread and tea or
coffee. They are also good gifts.

Cigarettes. They are useful, not only if you smoke, but also to offer as small
tokens of thanks to people who will assuredly go out of their way to help you.
Remember, however, that some duty-free goods - a few brands of beer, whisky,
brandy and cigarettes - can also be bought in so-called dollar stores in Hanoi
and Ho Chi Minh City.

Odds and Ends. Film, batteries, an alarm clock, extra pens. Paper products, from
a good supply of facial tissues to notebooks, paper or plastic cups and plastic
spoons.

Emergency Help

The State Department cautions travelers that the United States does not maintain
diplomatic ties with Vietnam. Therefore, the usual consular services, like
emergency funds or help in locating missing travelers, are not available.
However, Vietnamese tourism officials say that if an American tourist faces any
serious problem - an accident or heart attack, for example, the Government will
notify the United States Embassy in Bangkok after tending to emergency needs.
Most seriously ill foreigners who can do so leave Vietnam as soon as possible
for medical care. The embassies in Hanoi of friendly countries - Britain, France
and Australia -can also help in an emergency, and there is a French consulate in
Ho Chi Minh City.

Crimes - thefts from hotel rooms, muggings, and the like - are almost unheard
of.

Vietnam requires visas and can impose stiff penalties for those who enter the
country without them. Visa processing is handled through one's tour operator and
can take considerable time, up to eight months. (Visas are processed in Bangkok
and Paris.) The State Department warns Americans who were born in Vietnam that
they may be dual citizens and subject to military service or taxes if they
re-enter the country. The advice is to carry only U.S. passports with the proper
visa and nothing that identifies the traveler as a Vietnamese citizen.

Generally speaking, Americans are prohibited by the Treasury Department from
doing business in Vietnam. However, personal expenditures, like transportation,
lodging, meals and the purchase of goods for private use, are not prohibited.
For additional details, contact the Licensing Section, Office of Foreign Assets
Control, Treasury Department, Washington, D.C. 20220; 202-376-0236.

Tour Operators

You can go to Vietnam only on a group tour. According to Nguyen Dang Quang,
first secretary of the Vietnamese delegation to the United Nations, the
following companies offer tours:

Indochina Consulting Group, 844 Elda Lane, Westbury, N.Y. 11590 (516-333-6662);
Go Worldwide Tours, 233 Sansome Street, Suite 600, San Francisco, Calif. 94104
(415-781-3388); Orient Flexi-Pax Tours, 630 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017
(212-692-9550); Philippine Airlines, 556 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10036
(212-575-7850; 800-554-5444); Economy Tours, Post Office Box 18881, Irvine,
Calif. 92713 (714-559-5256); Lindblad Travel, Post Office Box 912, 1 Sylvan Road
North, Westport, Conn. 06881 (203-226-8531; 800-243-5657 outside Connecticut);
Marazul Tours, 250 West 57th Street, Suite 1311, New York, N.Y. 10107
(212-582-9570).

Typical Costs

One 16-day trip to Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand, scheduled to depart from
Seattle on Nov. 2, is offered by Lindblad Travel at $2,500 a person in double
occupancy. The price includes air transportion within Vietnam and Cambodia, but
air fare from the United States is extra.

Individually, hotels normally cost between $15 and $35 where there are suites or
other special rooms, as in Dalat. (The charges are always in United States
dollars.) Food is unbelievably cheap, with the average main-course dish in most
places about $1. Food and local beer can be paid for in dong, the Vietnamese
currency.    - B. C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of the harbor at Nha Trang; Markers at Temple of Literature
(Barbara Crossette); map of Vietnam (NYT); tomb of King Thai Dinh, on a Hue
hillside (Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'ONE-PARTY SYSTEM' IS ROOT OF ILLS

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 27, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 433 words


Reference is made to the recent controversy surrounding the filing of the
nominating petitions for Democratic candidates in the Town of North Hempstead.
Some have taken issue with the people involved with the filing. I believe,
however, the problem lay with the nominating process contained within the
election law rather than the people who participate in the process.

Members of the Democratic organization in North Hempstead are mostly volunteers
whose only real motivation is a sincere desire to see the political process
function. It is certainly not for personal gain.

The election process itself in New York State is unnecessarily complex.
Election-law technicalities have provided vehicles for ''grandstanding'' such as
the recent filing by the Republican organization of ''general objections'' to
the Democratic candidates' petitions in North Hempstead.

The arrogance manifested by such a maneuver sould sock one's sense of equality
and fair play - distinct American traditions. Apparently the Republicans do not
want to merely dominate all public office, but want to completely obliterate all
opposition and dissent. Why else would they attempt to knock a slate of
opposition candidates off the ballot?

The Democratic candidates have a legitimate message of choice on the issues of
environment in North Hempstead. Many voters in North Hempstead have not realized
that the key to change is in their grasp: vote the current administration out of
office!

Very effective and well organized civic groups have tried to address their
environmental concerns through the courts as well as through feisty public
demonstrations. Unfortunately, none have stopped the Republican juggernaut.

People in the United States have always had control of governmental policies.
Witness the defeat of Lyndon Johnson's Presidential bid, America's withdrawal
from Vietnam and Richard Nixon's resignation. The voting public in North
Hempstead can and should strike a telling blow against the ''one-party system,''
which, unless changed, insures the tragically flawed environmental policies now
in place and looms as an eventuality of life in North Hempstead.

LEWIS C. EDELSTEIN
  Port Washington

The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include
the writer's name, address and daytime telephone number. Letters should be
addressed to The Editor, Long Island Weekly Section, The New York Times, 229 W.
43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. We regret that because of the large volume of
mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND GUIDE

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 19, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1422 words




QUILTING TODAY
With fads in folk art seemingly cyclical, the wheel of fortune has now alighted
on quilts and quilting, at least on the East End, where there's enough interest
on the part of artisans, collectors and, apparently, the public to prompt three
exhibitions devoted to this American craft. The Water Mill Museum on Old Mill
Road got there first with a display of more than 50 old and new quilts.
Augmented by a series of lecture-demonstrations - today at 2 P.M. there's one on
strip piecing; tomorrow at 1:30 the practitioners do their Folded Star bit - the
show runs through next Sunday. For hours, a schedule and admission information,
call 726-4625.

Starting Friday, and with an opening reception Saturday at 4 P.M., the Gayle
Willson Gallery on Job's Lane in Southampton shows ''Pieces of America: New
Quilts.'' Featuring contemporary works by five leading exponents of the craft,
some of whom Ms. Willson said carry traditional designs further, while others
take off on completely unexplored tangents, the exhibition runs through Nov. 22
and can be seen from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Thursdays through Mondays.

Essentially, the Willson show is meant to complement ''Homage to Amanda: Two
Hundred Years of American Quilts From the Collection of Edwin Binney 3d and Gail
Binney-Winslow,'' a traveling exhibition that opens at the Parrish Art Museum in
Southampton on Sept. 27. Including one dating to 1796, the 46 historic quilts on
display are one of a kind and said to be among the finest examples of the craft.
For hours call 283-2118.


PRINT AND PLATE SHOW



Not the least bit superstitious, the Graphic Eye Gallery is currently mounting
its 13th annual Print and Plate Show. And not only does the Port
Washington-based gallery - the longest-lived artists' cooperative on the Island
and the only one devoted exclusively to the graphic arts -show the prints, but
also it tells all about them in two distinctly different ways: in accompanying
studies on the walls that visually trace the evolution of the art, and through a
series of lectures at libraries. The exhibition runs through Sept. 30 and
there'll be a reception for the participants today from 2 to 5 P.M. at the
gallery, 301 Main Street. The lectures begin Wednesday at 8 P.M., when the
printmaker Stanley Kaplan appears at the Hewlett-Woodmere Public Library, 1125
Broadway in Hewlett, to delve into woodblock printmaking. For a schedule and
exhibition hours, call 883-9668.


FROM LATIN AMERICA



Undoubtedly it's a sign of the times and geography, but one of the segments in
''Democracy in Communication: Popular Film and Video in Latin America,'' a
traveling program of independent work that will be screened tomorrow at the Port
Washington Public Library, is a music video from Panama - a music video ''about
the horrors of living under a military government.'' Much of the rest of the
program that Karen Ranucci of Downtown Community Television will show and
discuss at 8 P.M. is somewhat more predictable. These snippets from Mexico,
Brazil, Chile and Nicaragua deal with such subjects as a squatters' village
outside Santiago, Chile, or the disparity in pay between men and women on
Nicaraguan cooperative farms. The library is at 245 Main Street, and the program
is free.


UPTON PIANO PREVIEW



While taking a show out of town for tryouts is traditional in the theater, it's
not too common in the music world. So those music lovers who like to be ahead of
things might consider traveling Thursday to Upton, where, at Berkner Hall at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Roger Press, the young American pianist, will
perform works by Chopin, Prokofiev, Rachmaninoff and Franck. A preview of Mr.
Press's New York City debut recital, the program opens Berkner Hall's 1987-88
chamber music concert series, which in future outings will feature such
performers as the Composers String Quartet, the Cremona Arts Trio and the New
Zurich String Quartet. The concert is at 8:30 P.M. at the laboratory, on William
Floyd Parkway. For ticket or series information, call 828-2345.



SENIOR GAMES



The games that senior citizens play! Things like tennis, darts, softball,
archery and boccie. And if those over 55 years of age who indulge in such
activities are the least bit competitive, they'll probably be at Mitchel Park in
Uniondale, Nassau Community College in Garden City and Eisenhower Park in East
Meadow on Friday and Saturday to vie for honors in the 1987 Long Island Senior
Games. Participants pay $11 to play; the fee includes lunch, awards,
certificates and a T-shirt. For registration information, call 542-4440.
Spectators don't pay anything to watch the action, which starts at 4 P.M. Friday
and 8 A.M. Saturday.



FALL SIGNS



Nature lovers need not go where the wild goose goes to get the full flavor of
changing seasons. Saturday, a trip to the Mutttontown Preserve in East Norwich
will do just as well, for in its ''Autumn Meadows Nature Walk,'' the resident
naturalist will point out what the wildflowers, trees and migrating birds have
to say about where we are on the calendar. The two-hour program starts at 10
A.M. and is free, but registration, at 922-3123, is required. The preserve is on
Muttontown Lane in East Norwich.


DOWN TO THE SEA



Going down to the sea this weekend doesn't necessarily mean beaching it.
Instead, it could mean jumping on the festival bandwagon, for it's that time of
year when adherents to Long Island's maritime past celebrate its varied present.
There are three nautical fests on tap.

In Lido Beach, at the town park, Hempstead holds its seventh annual Salute to
the Maritime Industry, on Saturday from 11 A.M. to dusk, and next Sunday from 11
A.M. to 6 P.M. In addition to a seafood and crafts sales, there'll be air-sea
rescue demonstrations by the Coast Guard, and surf casting, Hobie Cat and
sand-sculpturing contests.

Traveling east, the Long Island State Park Commission turns Captree State Park
into the site of a two-day Captree Carnival, with scuba diving and
fish-filleting demonstrations, nautical displays, crab races, a clam-shucking
derby and free boat rides, along with the sale of seafood specialties. The fair
is from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Saturday and next Sunday at the park in West Islip.

The Captree and Lido festivals are free; you pay for what you buy.

Farther up the shore a bit, in West Sayville, the Suffolk Marine Museum sponsors
its fourth annual Old Timers Regatta at the museum boat basin. The race for
sailing craft gets under way at 1 P.M. Saturday, and then at 11 A.M. next Sunday
there'll be the parade and judging of antique vessels, followed by awards
ceremonies. Admission to the park, on Montauk Highway, is by donation of $2.50,
with children under 12 admitted free.


LONG ISLAND SALUTE



When the Town of Brookhaven and the Grucci fireworks people join forces in a
Salute to Long Island -and they will on Saturday for the third year in a row at
Bald Hill Park in Farmingville - they go all out. This time, in a salute
dedicated to Vietnam veterans, not only will the world-class fireworks display
be choreographed to music simulcast on local radio and cable television
stations, but also United States Field Artillery cannons will punctuate the
visual effects.

The evening, which also includes the dedication of a site for a permanent
monument to Vietnam veterans, gets under way at 7 P.M. with a concert by the
United States Military Academy at West Point, with the fireworks scheduled for
9:15 P.M. The salute ends officially next Sunday at 2 P.M. with a Long Island
High School Marching Band Exhibit and Parade down Main Street in Patchogue.
Everything is free, but spectators must take their own seating to Bald Hill.


FROM HESTER STREET



A maven on Sherlock Holmes, Agatha Christie and Houdini, Arthur Liebman of
Roslyn Heights, an English professor, is also knowledgeable about the Yiddish
stage. The Brooklyn-born Dr. Liebman, after all, attended a yeshiva. So, on
Saturday, he and his wife, the pianist Joyce Ann Liebman, who comprise a
familiar team on the local library circuit, turn their performing attention to
''From Hester Street to Hollywood: The Yiddish Theater From Second Avenue to
Sunset Boulevard.'' They'll break in this new slide-lecture-with-music act
steeped in nostalgia at the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Suffolk. The program is at 8:30
P.M. at the Y, 74 Hauppauge Road in Commack. For ticket information call
462-9800.


BARBARA DELATINER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOWNS JOIN BICENTENNIAL

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 1, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1514 words


MORE than 50 Connecticut communities are planning events this week to celebrate
the 200th anniversary of the signatory birth of the United States Constitution.

The chairman of the United States Constitution Bicentennial Committee of
Connecticut, Ralph G. Elliot, said that initially not many towns signed up.

''Things have been picking up a lot as the day draws closer,'' Mr. Elliot said.
''Every day, I'm getting applications now.''

Connecticut, which was the fifth state to ratify the Constitution, on Jan. 9,
1788, had two signators at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia 200
years ago - William Samuel Johnson, a Stratford native, and Roger Sherman, who
was born in Massachusetts but lived for most of his life in New Milford.

It was Sherman who proposed the Connecticut Compromise. A great debate had arose
at the Convention around the proposed legislature, with large states wanting
representation by population in each chamber and small states seeking equal
representation in a single house. The delegates adopted Sherman's compromise,
giving the House proportional representation and the Senate equal
representation.

Governor O'Neill has designated the week beginning tomorrow as Constitution
Week. ''Our Constitution is at root a magnificently human and public-spirited
document and was so brilliantly conceived and executed that it stood as the
basis for our government for 200 years,'' the Governor said in a statement. He
also designated Sept. 17 as Constitution Day.

Mr. Elliot said that one of the reasons the celebration started slower might be
that Sept. 17, the day on which the Constitution was signed in 1787, has never
been a national holiday.

''The Constitution is a intellectual and cerebral document,'' he said. ''It's
hard to have a lot of hoopla about it.''

The celebrations this year pose another problem. ''Thursday's not necessarily
the best day of the week for the type of observances that are being planned,''
said the executive director of the Connecticut Historical Commission, John W.
Shannahan.

He added that compared with the 1976 Bicentennial of the Declaration of
Independence, the planning for the anniversary of the Constitution started late.
The national committee for the the 1976 bicentennial was formed in 1966.

For the bicentennial of the Constitution, the national commission was formed a
few years ago and the state committee, last year.

Federal grants were available for state and local groups in the 1976
bicentennial. No money has been set aside for the Constitution observance.
''Having the time and resources to get people geared up was a good thing,'' said
Mr. Shannahan.

He agreed with Mr. Elliot that Constitution Day is harder to promote than
Independence Day.

''The nature of the celebration is so different,'' Mr. Shannahan said. ''The
Declaration of Independence is associated with fireworks and militiamen dressed
in colorful period uniforms fighting these exciting battles. How does that
compare with the image of a bunch of attorneys working on this document in
Philadelphia?''

''But as the day draws near,'' Mr. Elliot said, ''more people are getting
excited about it, and more people are participating in it.''

Mr. Elliot said more than 50 of the 169 municipalities in the state had asked to
be Designated Bicentennial Communities. A designated community is one that has
''established a bicentennial committee broadly representative of the community;
has developed and approved plans for a commemorative program that will educate
its residents about the meaning and significance of the Constitution, and has
received an official designation from the Federal and state commissions,''
according to the National Commission on the Bicentennial of the United States
Constitution.

''Each of those communities is doing something unique, something special to that
town,'' Mr. Elliott said.

West Hartford, which celebrates Noah Webster's birthday with an annual spelling
bee, will draw all the words this year from the Constitution, said Mr. Elliot.

''We've been trying to put a big push on the last couple of weeks,'' said the
chairman of the Stamford Commission for the Bicentennial of the Constitution,
Richard C. Harper.

Mr. Harper said his committee, with the local chapter of the Daughters of the
American Revolution, will sponsor a display of flags on Thursday in the foyer of
the Government Center.

Among the flags will be a 13-star American flag, a flag of each state, a flag
from each branch of the Armed Forces, a Vietnam battle flag, the official flag
of the Secretary of the Army and the flags of countries the United States has
fought. The collection is owned by Philip Dagneault of Newington.

Mr. Harper said the major event in Stamford would be a $35 dinner-lecture next
Sunday at 6 P.M. in the Westin Hotel. The speakers will be Drew Days, a Yale Law
School professor who was an Assistant United States Attorney General under
President Jimmy Carter, and Jeffrey St. John, a journalist who has written about
the Constitution. About 200 tickets have been sold. Reservations may be made
until tomorrow by calling Mr. Harper at 977-4318.

''We'd like to see more reservations, but there has been some stirring of
interest in the last week,'' Mr. Harper said.

Colleges and universities are planning symposiums and other observances.

''We think it's an important celebration,'' a spokeswoman for Norwalk Community
College, Joan B. Antell, said. ''And as an academic institution, it's important
for us to get involved for the education and enrichment of the community. That's
the mission of a college.''

Ms. Antell said that at 3:45 on Thursday, the time of the original signing, the
college would take part in ''Bells Across America,'' ringing bells, chimes and
carillons for 200 seconds, coupled with the release of 200 red, white and blue
balloons.

The college will sponsor a daylong symposium on Nov. 17, open to the public at
no charge at the Holiday Inn in Norwalk, said Ms. Antell. The session will
feature discussions of freedom of the press, the Constitution and the death
penalty, and the Constitution and women.

In addition, Ms. Antell said, the college has applied for designation as an
official bicentennial campus, to continue its role in the celebration for four
years, the time it took from the signing to the ratification of the
Constitution.

In Falls Village next Saturday, the public will be mock Supreme Court Justices
in the case of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's swapping American destroyers
for British bases in 1940, before the United States entered World War II.
Arguing for the legality of the exchange under the current law will be Paul
Altermatt, the outgoing president of the Connecticut Bar Association. Francis J.
McCarthy, a former Superior Court judge, will argue the swap was illegal.

Judge James L. Buckley of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit will preside over a panel hearing the case. The other judges
will be Harold Koh, professor of law at Yale, and Mark Weston Janis, professsor
at the UConn Law School. The judges will render their decision after a vote by
the audience. The debate will be at 8 P.M. in Housatonic Valley Regional High
School.

The Connecticut Bar Association is planning lectures in each Congressional
district, with each featuring a visit by the district's representative.

The series started yesterday with a lecture at the Norwalk Oyster Festival and
will continue with talks tomorrow at the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury, next
Saturday in Room 127 at the Yale Law School, next Sunday in Oliver Hall at
Connecticut College and at the University of Connecticut Torrington campus and
Sept. 21 at the Old State House in Hartford. All the programs are at 7:30,
except in Hartford, which is 2 P.M.

The chairman of the celebration committee of the bar association, James R.
Greenfield, said, ''We felt by having a series of programs in each of the
Congressional districts, we could approach it from a grass-roots level and
encourage people to recognize and participate in it.''

The official observance of Constitution Day will be Thursday at the Old State
House, the original seat of government in Connecticut.

From 10 A.M. to 1 P.M., a symposium will focus on ''The Constitution: Alive and
Well?'' From 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M., a 9-foot-by-54-inch canvas reproduction of
the Constitution will be available for passers-by to sign. Shortly after noon,
Lieut. Gov. Joseph J. Fauliso will read the Preamble to the Constitution.
Afterward, 10 schoolchildren from Hartford will each read a Bill of Rights
amendment. Mr. Fauliso is Acting Governor because Governor O'Neill is in China
on a trade mission.

In the late afternoon, the State Library will open an exhibition on the
Constitution.

And part of the celebration in Wethersfield on Thursday will be the dedication
of a street: Constitution Way.

More information on bicentennial events is available from the Constitution
Bicentennial Commission of Connecticut, Old State House, 800 Main Street,
Hartford, Conn. 06103. 522-6766.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Constitution

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words


INTERNATIONAL    A3-15

The Soviet Foreign Minister arrived in Washington for talks that may set the
stage for a visit to the United States later this year by the Soviet leader,
Mikhail S. Gorbachev. The talks are scheduled to begin Tuesday.    Page A1

Trade sanctions against Toshiba could cost American businesses billions of
dollars, a handful of America's largest and most politically influential
corporations argue. They have begun a major lobbying effort to block the
proposal.    A1

Anti-Communist rebels in Angola, armed with American defensive missiles and
backed by South Africa, continue to frustrate the well-equipped Angolan army and
its Soviet-bloc military advisers.    A1

U.S.-Angolan talks to continue    A14

A non-nuclear cruise missile that would hit within inches of its target,
compared with today's accuracy of several feet, is being developed by the
Defense Department, Pentagon and Congressional officials say.    A12

The Iranian Parliament's Speaker informed the United Nations Secretary General
that Iran would accept a cease-fire in its war with Iraq if Baghdad was merely
identified as the aggressor by the U.N. without any promise of punishment.    A3


U.N. chief in Iraq after talks in Iran    A3

Salvadoran peace-talk preparations are moving slowly. The Government and the
rebels say too many hurdles remain for the negotiations to begin on Sept. 15, as
proposed by President Jose Napoleon Duarte.    A6

Some officers in the Filipino Marines question the strength of the loyalty of
the corps to the Government of President Corazon C. Aquino. They say the corps
should not be counted upon to become a ''palace guard'' for Mrs. Aquino.    A9

Hanoi has ordered the release of more than 6,000 prisoners to mark two
anniversaries of national independence, the official Vietnamese press agency
said. The Plans for the releases were first announced in August.    A15

Copenhagen journal    A4

German visit brings touch of TV unity    A5

New Caledonia votes to remain French territory    A7

Fierce battle on Bataan    A9



NATIONAL    A16-17, B8, B10-12, B14

The Pope urged American Catholics to reform the ''unjust social structures''
that perpetuate poverty. Speaking in Texas, he said this work must begin by
converting the hearts of the nation's leaders.    A1

Thousands of Mexican Catholics are visiting the United States to see Pope John
Paul II. The Pontiff is making stops in Texas, Arizona and California and
speaking in Spanish as well as English.    B11

News analysis: The Senate battle over the confirmation Robert H. Bork's
nomination to the Supreme Court holds the potential for political gain or peril
for many of those involved. Hearings on the nomination begin Tuesday.    A1

Judge Bork's nomination is opposed by the leaders of the Association of the Bar
of the City of New York because his judicial philosophy is ''counter to many of
the fundamental rights and liberties protected by the Constitution.''    B14

Pat Robertson has shaken his rivals for the second time in a year by winning a
key test of organizational strength. Mr. Robertson won a straw poll Saturday
night organized by the Iowa Republican Party.    A1

The teamsters' union has support from other unions in what is expected to be a
long battle with the Justice Department over a plan to put it under Government
control.    A16

Talks between the U.A.W. and Ford are bogged down over job security, the union's
president said. A strike deadline of midnight tonight has been set by the union.

    A17

News analysis: The biggest deficit ever in the nation's foreign trade, which was
reported Friday, illustrates the power of partisan politics over theories of
sound economics that even partisan politicians say they subscribe to.    D1

Chicago journal    A16

An inlet in Texas town becomes a dividing line    B12

Judges join to scold colleague    B14



WASHINGTON TALK    B8

Politicians make Central American the trip of choice

Profile of new I.L.O. official



REGIONAL    B1-7

A new psychiatric ward at Bellevue is at the center of Mayor Koch's plan to
remove severely mentally ill homeless people from the streets. It will bring
homeless people together for treatment in a single ward.    B1

The mentally ill in Westchester can develop marketable skills in a program that
trains and employs adult men and women with psychiatric disabilities.    B6

A bill to end tenure for principals in New York City and dissolve the Board of
Examiners, the licensing body for principals, will be pushed in the State
Legislature, Robert F. Wagner Jr., president of the city's Board of Education,
said.    B1

The mayoral race in Danbury, Conn., has been strange, officials say. The
Republican candidate has virtually refused to speak. The two Democrats have
taken drug tests, and one of them is being investigated by the F.B.I.    B1

Primary Day in New York City on Tuesday is overshadowed by contests for the
Republican and Conservative nominations for Suffolk County Executive. The major
primary in the city is for the Democratic nomination for Bronx borough
president.    B2

Neighbors and friends of a teen-ager in Riverhead, L.I., who says sexual abuse
by her father led her to hire a classmate to kill him took the witness stand and
told how they had suspected the problem for years.    B7

Rainy weather in New York City washed away thousands of weekend plans in a
downpour that turned the penultimate weekend of summer into a collection of
drenched clothes and rain dates.    B1

A man was shot to death as he stood outside his car on Third Avenue, the police
said. The man, Theodore Fay, was shot in the back. Two Bronx residents were
arrested soon after the slaying and charged with second-degree murder.    B3

Kennedy attends dedication in Bronx    B3

Pixieish pioneer is recalled    B3

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

New Minesweeper Commissioned

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: STURGEON BAY, Wis., Sept. 13


The Navy has commissioned its first new minesweeper, the Avenger, since the
Korean War.

Navy representatives declined to speculate on the $153 million ship's first
assignment, but a congressional aide noted that the aging minesweepers now on
the way to the Persian Gulf were being towed because of doubts they could make
the trip under their own power.

About 1,000 people watched Saturday as James Bond Stockdale, a retired vice
admiral and former Vietnam prisoner of war, accepted the Avenger into the fleet.

Comdr. Robert S. Rawls, a veteran minesweeper sailor, is to be commanding
officer of the 224-foot ship, built by Peterson Builders Inc. of Sturgeon Bay.

Mr. Stockdale and other speakers, including Representative Les Aspin, Democrat
of Wisconsin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, and Senator Robert
W. Kasten Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, alluded to the Avenger's possible
assignment to the Persian Gulf, where United States Navy ships have been
escorting oil tankers because of the Iran-Iraq war.

The Avenger was launched June 15, 1985, and sailed 15 or 20 test voyages in Lake
Michigan.

The Avenger is to remain in Sturgeon Bay for more tests until November, and will
then go to Charleston, S.C., for eventual deployment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Is Said to Order Release of 6,000 Prisoners

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 413 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 13


The official Vietnamese press agency said today that Hanoi had ordered the
release of more than 6,000 prisoners to mark two anniversaries of national
independence.

The agency did not say today what kinds of prisoners were involved in the
amnesty, plans for which were first announced in August, or how many had
actually been freed.

But today's announcement indicated that more than 300 people associated with the
defeated regime of South Vietnam had been released in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly
Saigon.

The report from Hanoi said that among those to be freed were 480 military and
civilian personnel of the former South Vietnamese government. Saigon was
captured by the North Vietnamese in April 1975, and many people were arrested in
the following months.

Many Flee Country

Western diplomats say that prisoner releases are to be expected at this time of
year, when Hanoi celebrates Vietnam's National Day, Sept. 2, and the Aug. 19
proclamation of the first Communist government in what was then North Vietnam.

Diplomats also say that the prisoners released may have been sentenced for
security or civil offenses. Tens of thousands of political prisoners who were
detained but never sentenced are thought to remain in custody.

The periodic release of prisoners in recent years has led to a surge in people
trying to flee the country by boat, or overland through Cambodia.

The Hanoi radio's domestic service announced on Aug. 17 that certain groups of
prisoners were due for freedom.

Categories for Release

These included people who had served two-fifths of their prison terms and who
had ''sincerely repented.'' Other prisoners may have their sentences reduced,
according to the August broadcast, including those who had ''reformed themselves
well.''

The August statement said that other categories to be released or to have their
sentences cut included prisoners who had ''recorded achievements''; people who
were old or very ill; those who had ''numerous children,'' or whose children
were very young, and those who had parents or others to care for who were too
old and without support.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz has offered to resettle Vietnam's political
prisoners, most of whom are suffering because of their involvement with a string
of United States-backed Saigon regimes.

Vietnam, after first supporting such resettlement, has since backed down, saying
that the issue of poltical prisoners needs to be discussed at higher levels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: POLITICIANS ABROAD;
You Haven't Been Anywhere if Not to Managua

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


As the Boeing 727 taxied down the runway at Dulles Airport, a flight attendant
greeted the passengers over the public address system.

''Ladies and gentlemen, we welcome you aboard Mision Libertad,'' she said
cheerily. ''Our first stop will be Guatemala City. It is a Federal regulation
that all carry-on luggage fit under the seat in front of you.''

The passengers, including Representatives Jack F. Kemp, Republican of New York,
and Beau Boulter, Republican of Texas, and more than 50 leaders of conservative
research groups, lobbies and publications were only the latest - although by far
the largest - delegation to make Central America the Governmental destination of
choice this summer.

At the same time Mr. Kemp's group was visiting Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador
and Costa Rica last week, Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, was dropping in
on Nicaragua. Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate's Republican leader, led another
Central American ''codel'' (Washington shorthand for Congressional delegation)
at the end of August. Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut,
chairman of the new Central American Negotiations Observer group, is planning a
fly-in within the next few weeks. And Mayor Koch of New York will be leading an
independent observer group to Nicaragua in November.

The 'In' Place to Go

''It is kind of the 'in' place to go just now, isn't it?'' said Representative
Henry J. Hyde, an Illinois Republican who, as a member of the Foreign Affairs
Committee and the Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs, has joined more
than a few codels.

''If you're a leftist, you go to see how the cute kids in Nicaragua's schools
are learning to count hand grenades,'' he said. ''And if you're on the right,
you go to find out that the contras are really nice folks after all.''

Central America is by no means the first spot on the map to become a political
mecca. In the 1950's politicians who aspired to be statesmen absolutely had to
set foot in West Berlin. A decade later, the trip to make was a ''fact-finding''
mission to Vietnam.

''In the late 1970's over two thirds of the House went to Egypt,'' noted
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat who is a frequent
Congressional flier.

More recently, Ethiopia and its famine became such a strong magnet for
legislators that American Embassy officilas in Addis Ababa occasionally grumbled
about spending their time as tour guides.

Far-away places have always held allure for those running for office.
Presidential candidates regularly visit the ''3-I League'' of Ireland, Israel
and Italy, thereby touching base with the ethnic groups most vital for electoral
success. For the 1988 campaign, Central America stands to become a new division
in this league.

''The nice thing about Central America compared to those other places is that
it's so convenient,'' said Eddie Mahe, a Washington-based campaign consultant.
''Just an hour and a half from Miami and you've got a neat little war and
guaranteed press coverage.''

Whether voters now feel so strongly about the region that they would reject a
candidate who didn't know his way around downtown Tegucigalpa is uncertain. But
the serious contenders are all expected eventually to head south and campaign at
least briefly in what is being called the ''Central American primary.''

''If you're on the campaign trail these days,'' said Senator Dodd, ''you almost
have to be able to say, 'And I told Danny Ortega . . .,' '' a reference to the
Nicaraguan leader.

Proponents of Congressional travel say even those with ulterior motives can
profit from a trip abroad. ''If you talk to different people - peasants, labor
people, everybody - then you can learn something and have a valuable
experience,'' Mr. Hyde said.

Mr. Mahe added: ''I know of almost no one who ever went on a codel and came back
with his opinions changed. But I still think it's better to go than not to go.
There's something you get from being there that you just can't get from
newspapers and television alone.''

But the slice of reality that visiting dignitaries get may be less than
complete. Typically, a delegation arrives on a military or chartered plane, is
met at the airport by beaming officials, waived past any gun-toting border
guards or avaricious customs officials, chauffeured to elaborate meals and
specially prepared hotel rooms, then returned to the airport for the
presentation of souvenirs and a fond diplomatic farewell.

On a trip to Angola this summer, Representatives Howard Wolpe of Michigan and
Mickey Leland of Texas, both Democrats, were deeply involved in discussions
about improved relations and the liberalization of that country's Marxist
regime. Only later did they learn that an American reporter who had come to
cover their visit had been roughly incarcerated at the airport.

''What gets me,'' said F. Andy Messing Jr., executive director of the National
Defense Council, a conservative foundation, ''is these Congressmen who go down
to Central America and just hold court at the hotel bar. That's no way to run a
codel.''

In recent years, Mr. Messing's organization has sponsored more than a dozen
Congressional visits to Central America in conjunction with the State
Department. ''Anyone who goes with me meets with people on both the left and the
right,'' he said. ''I take them into the outback, to civilian hospitals and
refugee camps. I take them out where they can get shot.''

Back on Capitol Hill, those who have been abroad may try to use the experience
to bolster their points of view. In a House debate over a bill to condemn
Ethiopia's Marxist government for human rights violations, Mr. Leland repeatedly
taunted his opponents by asking whether they had actually visited Ethiopia, as
he had.

Finally, Representative Toby Roth, Republican of Wisconsin, replied that while
he had not personally been to the Horn of Africa he had spent a great deal of
time discussing the situation with such people as the former Ethiopian
ambassador to France and the former chief of the Ethiopian famine relief effort,
both of whom had defected to the West.

''All of whom are my friends, all of whom are my friends!'' Mr. Leland shot
back.

The Koch Delegation

Such tactics may soon be ineffective where Central America is concerned simply
because it will become too difficult to find politicians to debate who have not
been to the region.

So what if, for example, Mr. Dodd's observer group comes to conclusions that
differ sharply from Mayor Koch's observer group? ''Then the public can make its
own decisions about who is right,'' the Mayor said.

Although the Koch trip is being sponsored by Freedom House, a nonprofit
corporation, it has been the subject of some criticism.

Mr. Mahe, the political consultant, called it ''funny as a $3 bill - I didn't
even realize New York had a foreign policy.''

Mr. Koch noted that in the years he spent as a Congressman he had observed
political systems from Mississippi to Moscow. Besides, he said that he had been
asked to head the group and that unlike most other politicians he would be going
to Central America on his own time.

''I only took off four working days to have my stroke,'' he said, referring to
his recent hospital stay. ''I think I've got a few days coming to me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rep. Jack F. Kemp with Col. Enrique Bermudez in Honduras (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE PAPAL VISIT: 'CONFESSION IS AN ACT OF HONESTY AND COURAGE';
Excerpts From John Paul's Homily and Addresses to 3 Groups

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2878 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, Sept. 13


Following are excerpts from the texts of a homily delivered today by Pope John
Paul II at an outdoor mass in San Antonio and from addresses made in separate
meetings with Catholic Charities USA, seminarians and Hispanic Americans. In
each instance, the Pope did not use Biblical or other citations, but these were
provided in the printed texts.



HOMILY

. . .In the eucharist, our lives are touched by Christ's own radical victory
over sin - sin which is the death of the soul and, ultimately, the reason for
bodily death. . .

And so, the eucharist begins with the penitential rite. We confess our sins in
order to obtain forgiveness through the Cross of Christ, and so receive a part
in His resurrection from the dead. But if our conscience reproaches us with
mortal sin, our taking part in the mass can be fully fruitful only if beforehand
we receive absolution in the sacrament of penance.

The ministry of reconciliation is a fundamental part of the Church's life and
mission. . . It is important for me to emphasize that it is above all in the
sacrament of forgiveness and reconciliation that the power of the redeeming
blood of Christ is made effective in our personal lives.

In different parts of the world there is a great neglect of the sacrament of
penance. This is sometimes linked to an obscuring of the religious and moral
conscience, a loss of the sense of sin or a lack of adequate instruction on the
importance of this sacrament in the life of Christ's Church. . . Sometimes there
is a hesitation or an unwillingness to accept maturely and responsibly the
consequences of the objective truths of faith.


The Second Vatican Council never intended that this sacrament of penance be less
practiced; what the council expressly asked for was that the faithful might more
easily understand the sacramental signs and more eagerly and frequently have
recourse to the sacraments [cf. Sacrosanctum Concilium, 59]. And just as sin
deeply touches the individual conscience, so we understand why the absolution of
sins must be individual and not collective, except in extraordinary
circumstances as approved by the Church. I ask you, dear Catholic brothers and
sisters, not to see confession as a mere attempt at psychological liberation -
however legitimate this, too, might be - but as a sacrament, a liturgical act.

Praise for the Act of Confession

Confession is an act of honesty and courage - an act of entrusting ourselves,
beyond sin, to the mercy of a loving and forgiving God. It is an act of the
prodigal son who returns to his Father and is welcomed by Him with the kiss of
peace. . .The potential for an authentic and vibrant renewal of the whole
Catholic Church through the more faithful use of the sacrament of penance is
immeasurable. . .

To those who have been far away from the sacrament of reconciliation and
forgiving love, I make this appeal: come back to this source of grace; do not be
afraid! ...

In Jesus Christ the world has truly known the mystery of forgiveness, mercy and
reconciliation, which is proclaimed by God's word this day. At the same time,
God's inexhaustible mercy to us obliges us to be reconciled among ourselves.

This makes practical demands on the Church in Texas and the Southwest of the
United States. It means bringing hope and love wherever there is division and
alienation. Your history registers a meeting of cultures, indigenous and
immigrant, sometimes marked by tensions and conflicts, yet constantly moving
toward reconciliation and harmony.

People of different races and languages, colors and customs, have come to this
land to make it their home. Together with the indigenous peoples of these
territories, there are the descendants of those who came from almost every
country in Europe. . .There are descendants of those who came in chains from
Africa, those from Lebanon, the Philippines and Vietnam, and from every Latin
American country, especially from Mexico.

This land is a crossroads, standing at the border of two great nations and
experiencing both the enrichment and the complications which arise from this
circumstance. You are thus a symbol and a kind of laboratory testing America's
commitment to her founding moral principles and human values.

Movement of People Northwards

These principles and values are now being reaffirmed by America as she
celebrates the bicentennial of her Constitution and speaks once more about
justice and freedom, and about the acceptance of diversity within a fundamental
unity - a unity arising from a shared vision of the dignity of every human
person, and a shared responsibility for the welfare of all, especially of the
needy and the persecuted.

Against this background, one may speak of a current phenomenon here and
elsewhere -the movement of people northwards, not only from Mexico but from
other southern neighbors of the United States. On this matter also there is work
of reconciliation to be done.

Among you there are people of great courage and generosity who have been doing
much on behalf of suffering brothers and sisters arriving from the south. They
have sought to show compassion in the face of complex human, social and
political realities.

Here human needs, both spiritual and material, continue to call out to the
Church with thousands of voices, and the whole church must respond by the
proclamation of God's word and by selfless deeds of service. Here,too, there is
ample space for continuing and growing collaboration among members of the
various Christian communions.

In all of this the Hispanic community itself faces the greatest challenge. Those
of you of Hispanic descent - so numerous, so long present in this land, so well
equipped to respond - are called to hear the word of Christ and take it to
heart: ''I give you a new commandment - love one another. Such as my love has
been for you, so must your love be for each other [John 3:34].''



CATHOLIC CHARITIES

. . .Catholic Charities is a title that speaks wonderfully well of the generous
commitment of the Catholic people of the United States to the cause of human
solidarity and Christian love. It gives me great joy to be among you, members of
Catholic Charities USA, your associated agencies and your colleague
organizations in social ministry. Through your efforts you help to make the
loving compassion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ present to human needs.


You carry on a tradition and you live out a teaching grounded in sacred
Scripture, proclaimed by the Church and relevant to every age. Service to the
needy not only builds up social harmony, it reveals God, our Father, the rescuer
of the oppressed.


The initiatives of Catholic charities in the United States go back to before the
Declaration of Independence. Countless institutions and structures have been
established to assist the orphan, the immigrant, the ethnic groups, all persons
in need of every race and creed. Countless Americans of all extractions have
made the compassionate service of their fellow human beings the whole purpose
and method of their lives. In particular, generations of religious, women and
men, have consumed themselves in selfless service, under the sign of love.

The Church has always proclaimed a love of preference for the poor. Perhaps the
language is new, but the reality is not. Nor has the Church taken a narrow view
of poverty and the poor. Poverty, certainly, is often a matter of material
deprivation. But it is also a matter of spiritual impoverishment, the lack of
human liberties, and the result of any violation of human rights and human
dignity.

The Poverty of Selfishness

There is a very special and pitiable form of poverty: the poverty of
selfishness, the poverty of those who have and will not share, of those who
could be rich by giving but choose to be poor by keeping everything they have.
These people, too, need help. The Christian view is that human beings are to be
valued for what they are, not for what they have. In loving the poor and serving
those in whatever need, the Church seeks above all to respect and heal their
human dignity. The aim of Christian solidarity and service is to defend and
promote, in the name of Jesus Christ, the dignity and fundamental human rights
of every person.


Service to those in need must take the form of direct action to relieve their
anxieties and to remove their burdens, and at the same time lead them to the
dignity of self-reliance. In this respect, I wish to express the Church's
immense gratitude to the many Americans who are working to help their fellow
human beings, in all the different forms which relief and development take in
today's world. And I solemnly thank the American people for the generous way in
which they respond to the appeal for financial support for the many splendid
programs of assistance carried out in their name.

In the case of the many programs run by the Catholic Church, I wish to invite
all who have responsibility for them to insure that they will always be, and be
seen to be, in full accord with Catholic principles of truth and justice.


Service to the poor also involves speaking up for them, and trying to reform
structures which cause or perpetuate their oppression. As committed Catholics
involved in helping to meet people's many concrete needs, you are still called
to reflect on another dimension of a worldwide problem: true relationship
between rich societies and poor societies, rich nations and poor nations. Your
insights must be prayerfully joined to those of many other people to see what
can be done as soon as possible to purify the social structures of all society
in this regard.

In the final analysis, however, we must realize that social injustice and unjust
social structures exist only because individuals and groups of individuals
deliberately maintain or tolerate them. It is these personal choices, operating
through structures, that breed and propagate situations of poverty, oppression
and misery. For this reason, overcoming ''social'' sin and reforming the social
order itself must begin with the conversion of our hearts.



SEMINARIANS

. . .As men preparing for priestly ordination, it is important for you to have a
clear understanding of the vocation to which you feel called so that your
promise of lifelong fidelity may be maturely made and faithfully kept. Your life
in the priesthood will closely join you with the Eucharist; you will be
ministers of the mysteries of God; you will be expected to preach and teach in
the name of the Church.


The priest needs to know the real living conditions of the people he serves, and
he must live among them as a true brother in Christ. He can never be separated
from the community. But there is a real sense in which, like the Apostle Paul,
he is in the very words of Scripture ''set apart to proclaim the Gospel of God
[Romans 1:1].''


Each one of you is called to embrace freely a celibate life for the sake of
Jesus and His kingdom, in order to become a ''man for others.'' If modeled on
the generous, divine and human love of Jesus for His Father and for every man,
woman and child, your celibacy will mean an enhancement of your life, a greater
closeness to God's people, an eagerness to give yourself without reserve.

By embracing celibacy in the context of the priesthood, you are committing
yourself to a deeper and more universal love. Above all, celibacy means the gift
of yourself to God. It will be the response, in Christ and the Church, to the
gifts of creation and redemption. It will be part of your sharing, at the
deepest level of human freedom and generosity, in the death and resurrection of
Jesus.

Humanly speaking, this sacrifice is difficult because of our human weaknesses;
without prayer, it is impossible. It will also require discipline and effort and
persevering love on your part. But in your gift of celibacy to Christ and His
Church, even the world will be able to see the meaning of the Lord's grace and
the power of His paschal mystery. This victory must always be visible in your
joy.



HISPANIC AMERICANS

This is a moment of great joy for me. I have looked forward to this meeting with
you, members of the Hispanic community of San Antonio, present here as
representatives of all your Hispanic brothers and sisters in the United States.
You are here, too, as a parish community, and through you, therefore, my words
are addressed to every parish community throughout the United States. . .I am
particularly happy to speak to you in the beautiful Spanish language, in this
square named in honor of Our Lady of Guadalupe. . .

The Hispanic heritage of San Antonio and the Southwest is very important for the
Church. Spanish was the language of the first evangelizers of this continent,
precisely in this region. The missions here in San Antonio and throughout the
Southwest are visible signs of the many years of evangelization and service
carried out by the first missionaries. . . Today it is your turn, in fidelity to
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to build your lives on the rock of your Christian
faith. It is your turn to be evangelizers of each other and of all those whose
faith is weak or who have not yet given themselves to the Lord. . .

Today I wish to speak to you about your parish, which is the place and community
in which you nourish and express your Christian life. I wish to speak of the
parish as the family of families, for parish life is especially related to the
strengths and weaknesses and needs of the families that make it up.


. . .The vitality of a parish greatly depends on the spiritual vigor, commitment
and involvement of its families. The family, in fact, is the basic unit of
society and of the Church. It is ''the domestic church.'' Families are those
living cells which come together to form the very substance of parish life.

Some are healthy and filled with the love of God, which is poured forth into our
hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us [Romans 5:5]. In some
there is little energy for the life of the Spirit. Some have broken down
altogether. The priests and their collaborators in a parish must try to be very
close to all families in their need for pastoral care, and to provide the
support and spiritual nourishment they require.

The pastoral care of families is a vast and complex field of the Church's
ministry, but it is a most urgent and pressing service. Each parish must be
fully committed to it, especially in the face of so much breakdown and
undermining of family life in society.


Just as the parish is responsible for the family, so the family must be aware of
its obligations to the parish, which is the larger family. Today, Catholic
couples and families must think especially of the service which they have a duty
to render to other couples and families, especially those who experience
problems.

This apostolate of couple to couple and family to family can be carried out in
many ways: prayer, good example, formal or informal instruction or counseling
and material assistance of many sorts [cf. Familiaris Consortio, 71]. I appeal
to you, the Catholic families of the United States: be true families -united,
reconciled and loving. And be true Catholic families - prayerful communities
living the Catholic faith, open to the needs of others, taking part fully in the
life of the parish and of the church at large.

Another fundamental aspect of parish life is the worthy celebration of the
sacraments, including sacramental marriage. This sacrament forms the stable
basis of the whole Christian community. Without it, Christ's design for human
love is not fulfilled; His plan for the family is not followed. It is precisely
because Christ established marriage as a sacrament and willed it to be a sign of
His own permanent and faithful love for the Church that the parish must explain
to the faithful why all trial marriages, merely civil marriages, free unions and
divorces do not correspond to Christ's plan.


Everyone involved in parish life should be concerned to encourage and support
family prayer by every means available, and families themselves should be making
efforts to engage in family prayer and to integrate that prayer into the
prayer-life of the wider ecclesial community.

I am happy to know that the number of Hispanic priests and men and women
religious is growing. But many more are needed. Young Hispanics: is Christ
calling you? Hispanic families: are you willing to give your sons and daughters
to the Church's service? Do you ask the Lord to send laborers into His harvest?
Christ needs Hispanic laborers for the great harvest of the Hispanic community
and the whole church.

And finally, I wish to encourage all families and parishes not to be
inward-looking, not to dwell on themselves. Jesus commands to serve our
neighbor, to reach out to those in need. . .

I invite all of you who are unsure about the Church or who doubt that you will
be welcome to come home to the family of families, to come home to your parish.
You belong there! It is our family in the Church, and the Church is the
household of God in which there are no strangers or aliens [cf. Ephesians 2:19].

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Pope John Paul II during his visit to San Antonio, Texas (AP)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Gen. J. Lawton Collins, 91; Led World War II Troops

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 529 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12


Gen. J. Lawton Collins, a combat leader in World War IIa former Army Chief of
Staff, died Saturday at his home of cardiac arrest. He was 91 years old.

The New Orleans native had his first military service with the occupation forces
in Germany after World War I. He won the nickname ''Lightning Joe'' when he
commanded a division early in World War II on Guadalcanal. Gen. Dwight D.
Eisenhower selected him to lead one of the two Army corps that landed at
Normandy on D-Day, June 6, 1944. His VII corps, part of Gen. Omar Bradley's
First Army, then led the breakout from Normandy at St. Lo.

General Bradley later called him ''one of the most outstanding field commanders
in Europe'' for his leadership in battles across France, Belgium and Germany.

Won a Silver Star

When he received the Silver Star for achievement at Guadalcanal, one of his many
honors, the citation accompanying the presentation said General Collins had
''walked through some 800 yards of recently captured ground infested with enemy
snipers.

''His example and the word of praise and encouragement with which he continually
encouraged the men contributed materially to the success of the offensive
operations.''

After the war, he was deputy commanding general and chief of staff of the Army
Ground Forces, director of information of the War Department, deputy chief of
staff and vice chief of staff.

President Truman named him to succeed General Bradley as Chief of Staff in 1949
after General Bradley became chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In the
tumultuous period leading to President Truman's decision to relieve Gen. Douglas
MacArthur from command in the Far East, General MacArthur communicated with the
administration in Washington through General Collins.

General Collins's tenure as Chief of Staff ended in August 1953. Over the next
two years, before he retired in 1956, his posts included service as special
envoy to Vietnam.

At Anniversary Ceremonies

In 1957, he became vice chairman of the board of Pfizer International
subsidiaries, and in 1984 he was President Reagan's personal representative at
the Normandy ceremonies commemorating the 40th anniversary of D-Day.

General Collins's honors included three Distinguished Service Medals and two
Silver Stars. His foreign honors included the British Companion of the Order of
the Bath; Russian Order of Suvorov, second class; French Legion of Honor, Degree
of Office, and the Belgian Order of Leopold II, Grand Officer.

J. Lawton Collins, the second youngest of 11 children, was born May 1, 1896, the
son of an Irish native who joined the Union Army in the Civil War at the age of
16. He graduated from West Point in 1917. In 1919, he was sent to command a
battalion of the 18th Infantry at Koblenz, Germany.

He is survived by his wife, Gladys, whom he married in 1921; a son, Col. Joseph
E. Collins of the Army, retired, of Lewiston, Idaho; two daughters, Gladys
Stenger of Potomac, Md., and Nancy Rubino, of Bethesda, Md.; 17 grandchildren
and eight great-grandchildren.

He is to be buried Wednesday at Arlington National Cemetery after a Mass of
Christian Burial at the Fort Myer Chapel, all in Virginia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Remembering Vietnam

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11


Some 50 writers, film makers, musicians, visual artists and photographers will
gather in Washington over a three-month period beginning next Thursday to
participate in a series of public art programs that explore the continuing
implications of the Vietnam experience. ''War and Memory: In the Aftermath of
Vietnam,'' two years in the making, is the brainchild of the Washington Project
for the Arts, a nonprofit arts organization.

''This came out of the reaction we've witnessed to the Vietnam Memorial,'' said
Jock Reynolds, executive director of the arts group, ''not only in Washington
but across the countryside. We've seen how a contemporary artwork can serve as a
catalyst in bringing forth discussion and rethinking about the Vietnam
experience. Art serves as a way for people to transform powerful personal
experiences.''

The $200,000 project has been financed by a number of foundations and arts
organizations, including the National Endowment for the Arts and the William
Joiner Center for the Study of War and Social Consequences. It includes
photography, sculpture and five commissioned art installations as well as eight
weeks of panel discussions and video, musical, writer-in-residence and public
reading programs. Vietnam veterans will join with historians, journalists,
writers and artists in discussing how they have resolved their feelings and
opinions about the issues raised by the war.

Exercise in Reconciliation

In many ways, ''War and Memory'' is an exercise in reconciliation, for it is a
collection of the voices of Vietnam. Some participants served in Vietnam as
soldiers, nurses and conscientious objectors. The project includes the work of
antiwar demonstrators, Vietnamese poets and French and Dutch film makers.
Minority artists and veterans were brought into the project, said Mr. Reynolds,
with the help of Wallace Terry, author of ''Bloods,'' and the Black Veterans
Task Force.

Five contemporary artists - Cynthia Carlson, Terry Allen, Joe Shannon, Richard
Turner and Richard Posner - were invited to create new works. Miss Carlson was
in town recently to install two walls of collage boxes inspired by the artifacts
left at the Vietnam Memorial: combat boots, teddy bears, Indian eagle feathers,
medals, American flags.

''I visited the National Park Service's storage facility where all these things
are kept in drawer after drawer,'' she said. ''I found it incredibly moving and
felt it collectively addressed the issue of how people remember war. To me it
has more of an emotional impact than the heroic mythology of something like the
Iwo Jima Memorial.''

Twenty hours of video material compiled by the Peabody Archive at the University
of Atlanta will run continuously at the arts organization's Seventh Street
gallery, where 300 photographs will be on view. The display will range from
pictures by Larry Burroughs to those taken by combat veterans.

Film Series Scheduled

A 12-week film series of 20 programs is scheduled in cooperation with the
American Film Institute and the Martin Luther King Jr. Library. It will include
Oliver Stone's ''Last Year in Vietnam,'' made when Mr. Stone was a student of
Martin Scorsese at New York University; ''Karma,'' a feature made in Vietnam by
Ho Quang Minh; ''In the Year of the Pig,'' a documentary by Emile de Antonio,
and ''Seventeenth Parallel,'' a documentary made by a Dutch director, Joris
Ivens, in 1968.

''We shied away from showing the big films already seen,'' said the curator of
the series, Philip Brookman.

Many of the programs will coincide with national Veterans Day observances in
mid-November, when many veterans and their families make pilgrimages to the
capital.

A series of public readings, organized by Jane Creighton, will feature such
writers as W. D. Earhardt, John Balaban and Allen Glick. Ellen McLaughlin will
give a reading of her play ''A Narrow Bed'' at the Folger Theater, and Terry
Allen, a songwriter and visual artist, has collaborated with several other
musicians on new music and anthems about Vietnam. The group will perform a
concert of its work and arrangements of other compositions at the Smithsonian's
Baird Auditorium.

''We are not trying to create the definitive Vietnam show of all time,'' Mr.
Reynolds said, ''but we are trying to bring together a diversified group of
people and assemble and commission works of art that continue the process of
remembering.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Copter Crashes Embitter Manila Aid Debate

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Sept. 12


Fatal crashes involving two Vietnam War-era helicopters in recent weeks have
highlighted a controversy over the purchase of used aircraft by the Philippine
Government to make United States aid money stretch further.

As a result of the crashes, one of which took the life of a Filipino general,
the Philippine press has been critical of the United States aid program, which
some editorials have charged provides the Philippines with substandard and
shopworn equipment.

The Philippine Air Force reportedly believes faulty rotor clamps caused the
accidents and has grounded 27 of its remaining 54 UH-1H helicopters until
repairs can be made. The director for operational readiness and flight safety
for the Philippine Air Force was not available for comment on the cause of the
crashes.

Accidents' Cause Investigated

The American authorities conceded the helicopters that crashed were old and had
been reconditioned, but said they met all American safety and operational
specifications before they were turned over to the Philippine Air Force. These
authorities say that they do not know the cause of the accidents, but that they
are being investigated.

A senior military officer in Washington had earlier expressed concern over the
ability of the Philippine Air Force to service and maintain its growing fleet of
helicopters.

The sale of reconditioned military equipment to the Philippine armed forces
illustrates how the Aquino Government must support its counterinsurgency
campaign against the Communist New People's Army by shopping for bargains.

By spending a part of its limited aid money on reconditioned helicopters, the
Philippines can buy five of the used aircraft for the price of a comparable new
one.

''We are like a large but poor family with many needs,'' said a Philippine
officer. ''We must set priorities on how we spend our meager income and then
look for the cheapest buys.''

American officials say they recognize this problem and try to help the Filipinos
spend their aid dollars wisely.

A Need for Mobility

Currently about 7 percent of the Philippine budget goes to the military. Most of
that money is used to pay, feed, clothe and supply the armed forces. The
Philippines looks largely to the American military assistance program to finance
major pieces of equipment such as helicopters.

An American official said that to fight the Communist insurgency, the Philippine
Army needed mobility. He said that the UH-1H helicopter was useful for
transporting small military units from place to place and that the armed forces
could use as many as it could get.

The two helicopter crashes last month raise the questions about aircraft
maintenance. A senior American official in the Philippines said the Philippine
Air Force maintenance program could keep pace with increased deliveries of
helicopters. The official noted that the Philippine maintenance record was good,
with 70 to 80 percent of the air force's helicopters availabe to fly at any
time. This, he said, is comparable with American availability rates, although he
conceded that the Philippine Air Force applies somewhat less stringent standards
than the United States armed forces does.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Changes in Burma Spurring Unrest

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 14


Burma, struggling with a rapidly deteriorating economy and the imminent danger
of food shortages, has embarked on the most radical trade and monetary changes
in a quarter of a century.

The steps have provoked student protests and led to confusion in the
marketplace. All educational institutions have been closed indefinitely,
according to Government radio broadcasts.

Over the last two weeks, the Government of Ne Win, who seized power in 1962,
announced without warning that all restrictions on trade in staple foods were
being lifted to get needed supplies into circulation.

Burmese were told on Sept. 1 that they are now allowed to buy, sell, store and
transport rice, corn and bean crops free of Government control. Since 1966, most
commodity prices and distribution systems have been set by the Ne Win
administration.

Some Currency Withdrawn

In addition, farmers will be required to pay taxes in foodstuffs, not cash, the
Government said.

On Sept. 5, all currency notes except small denominations were withdrawn from
circulation.

Reports reaching here from Rangoon, the Burmese capital, say that the cumulative
effect of these decrees has thrown trade into confusion, with many shops closed.


Students Voice Frustration

For the first time since 1974, there have been student disturbances in Rangoon,
apparently prompted by the withdrawal of 25, 35 and 75 kyat notes, leaving only
small bills in circulation. An American dollar is worth about 6.6 kyat at
official rates, and six or seven times that amount on the black market.

On Sept. 6, a sweeping Government ordinance closed all universities, colleges,
technical institutes, medical and dental schools, high schools, primary schools
and part-time educational institutions, such as night schools and vocational
schools, until further notice.

Students were reported to be voicing the frustrations of a wider public. Burmese
interviewed earlier this year say many people have still not received new notes
for bills turned in in 1985, when the Government changed the currency to cut
down on black market trade.

Students Join the Unemployed

Students, who say there are fewer and fewer jobs being created to meet their
qualifications as the economy stumbles, are joining the unemployed or
underemployed in large numbers.

Many are the children of parents who were formerly middle class, but who have
seen their professions shrink under a military-dominated ''Burmese Way to
Socialism,'' the official credo of the ruling Burmese Socialist Program Party.
Most Burmese have been forced into some black market buying or selling to
survive.

High Literacy Level

Before the 25th anniversary, in March, of General Ne Win's seizure of power from
a democratically elected government, Burma had asked the United Nations to
classify the country as being among the ''least developed.''

Burma, with a high literacy level, is thought to have a per capita gross
national product of about $180 a year -more than Vietnam's estimated $160 but
far less than neighboring Thailand's $600. In recent months, the drought that is
affecting much of Asia has added to food-production problems caused by what
development specialists call a badly conceived Government rice-distribution
system.

Signs that Burma's economy may be reaching a crisis came first in mid-August,
when General Ne Win, as chairman of the Socialist Program Party, suddenly
convened Government officials and announced that they must ''stop hiding the
facts'' about the nation's economic failures.

International aid experts fear that if a significant part of this year's rice
crop is lost, Burma - once one of the world's leading rice producers - could
face famine for the first time. With few roads and minimal rail and air links,
emergency relief could prove difficult.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
A Traveler From Seoul: Roh Tae Woo

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 14


The selling of a would-be president, South Korean style, has taken a new and
potentially slippery twist with the visit of Roh Tae Woo, the ruling party's
candidate, to Washington.

It is a journey intended to enhance Mr. Roh's reputation at home, and aides
expect that he will emerge from several speeches and a session today with
President Reagan looking thoughtful, energetic and statesmanlike.

At least that is their hope. But they also recognize that there is a risk of
inflaming anti-American and anti-Government sentiment among South Koreans who
view the hastily arranged Roh journey as an unseemly search for United States
approval.

These people are also certain to regard Mr. Roh's meeting today with President
Reagan as a virtual White House endorsement of Mr. Roh. No matter how often
American officials may deny that they are choosing political sides in South
Korea - and the State Department has issued comments to that effect - they will
not be fully believed here.

Warning From the Opposition

Kim Young Sam, the opposition leader and a possible presidential candidate
himself, warned that Koreans would think that ''the American Administration is
supporting the dictatorial Government.''

Still, with elections expected in three months, Mr. Roh is willing to take the
gamble. His advisers shrug off the critics as people not likely to vote for him
in any event. Meanwhile, they say, he stands to tighten his grip on the
governing Democratic Justice Party and perhaps also to assert his independence
from President Chun Doo Hwan, his old ally and the man he had helped seize power
in a military uprising.

The conversion of Roh Tae Woo from general and coup-maker to politician and
candidate has long been under way. But the image-rebuilding went into high gear
after June 29, when Mr. Roh startled his country -and the rest of the world - by
suddenly endorsing a program for democratic change, including election of the
next president by popular vote.

Running as a Democrat

Now, as he runs for an office that he had expected to inherit from Mr. Chun, he
portrays himself as the man who brought a measure of democracy to South Korea.
It is a claim that infuriates political dissidents. Mr. Roh, they point out, did
not originate his own plan so much as capitulate to their demands, and then only
after street disorders had engulfed Seoul and dozens of other cities.

Since June 29, Mr. Roh has presented himself as a born-again democrat with a
series of pronouncements on the righteousness of labor's demands for better pay
and working conditions, on the absolute need for South Korea's military to stay
out of politics, on the failings of authoritarian governments like the one he
helped create.

''The people strongly demand an end to the authoritarian system,'' he said over
the weekend before leaving for Washington. ''It has become a stark reality that
an authoritarian system can no longer maintain national unity, achieve economic
development and preserve national security.''

Different From Chun

People close to Mr. Roh (whose name is pronounced no) insist that he truly
believes what he says and is not just posturing. Within the Democratic Justice
Party, he has aligned himself with moderate forces, as chairman for two years
and, since last month, as party president.

He is quite different from Mr. Chun, party members say. Mr. Roh, they maintain,
regarded change as desirable, while Mr. Chun saw it merely as unavoidable. Mr.
Roh describes himself as having ''big ears,'' meaning he is prepared to listen
to others, unlike Mr. Chun, who dominates conversations.

The two men have been closely linked for most of their lives, going back as far
as junior high school in Taegu, in southern Kyongsang Province, where Mr. Roh
was born on Dec. 4, 1932.

A Moment of Truth

He and Mr. Chun graduated together from the Korea Military Academy in 1955,
members of the so-called 11th class, which viewed itself as a new elite because
it was the first to go through an expanded four-year program. In the 1960's the
two served together in South Vietnam.

For them, and for their country, the moment of truth came after the
assassination of President Park Chung Hee in October 1979. Seven weeks later,
then-General Chun grabbed control, his rebellion reinforced by General Roh, who
sent his Ninth Infantry Division into Seoul.

After Mr. Chun consolidated his power in May 1980, he named his old friend to
head the Defense Security Command, the military network responsible for
political surveillance. Mr. Roh left the army in 1981, and then held a
succession of senior positions, including Sports Minister, Home Affairs Minister
and chairman of the Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee.

In interviews he speaks softly, and he has a somewhat sleepy, big-bear look that
associates say belies a fundamental toughness and self-confidence.

He and his wife, Kim Ok Sook, have a daughter, So Young, and a son, Jae Heun.
Several times in recent months Mr. Roh has said that his daughter, a graduate
student at the University of Chicago, was a strong influence in persuading him
last June to accept democratic change.

By his own account he likes to play tennis, read the works of Hermann Hesse and
sing when drinking with companions.

What he is not, Mr. Roh acknowledges, is a remarkable man. Nor would he want to
be, he adds. ''I place the organization ahead of individuals,'' the former
general told a Korean magazine last year. ''I think two ordinary men are better
than one genius. I always choose teamwork rather than individual efforts.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan meeting in the Oval Office with Roh Tae Woo,
head of South Korea's ruling party (White House photo via Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Selective Service Disdains Those Who Won't Kill

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


To the Editor:

No one - certainly none of us present at the meeting Jerry D. Jennings, acting
director of the Selective Service system, had with conscientious objector groups
and to which he refers in ''Draft Registration Is Indispensable'' (Op-Ed, Aug.
25) - quarrels with his claim that he holds ''deep respect'' for the beliefs of
conscientious objectors.

But after almost eight years of correspondence - with a frequency that is
normally reserved for one's closer friends - with Selective Service and the
House Appropriations subcommittee (Housing and Urban Development and Independent
Agencies) that oversees its operations, it is our experience that the
organization led by Mr. Jennings does not share his regard for conscientious
objectors.

For many years organizations like ours, concerned with protecting the rights of
individuals subject to registration, have petitioned Selective Service to
include the opportunity for prospective conscientious objectors to indicate
their commitment and intent on the registration form itself. This was possible
in the past, most recently during the Vietnam War, and often proved helpful in
establishing the legitimacy of one's claim in draft board hearings.

The consistent refusal of the agency to make even so minor a concession as
evidence of respect for the conscientious objector position and the moral values
upon which it rests stands in sharp contrast to Mr. Jennings's professed desire
to comply with the ''spirit of the law'' with regard to conscientious objectors.

More serious evidence of this lack of respect came last July 1, when Selective
Service resubmitted proposed regulatory changes affecting conscientious
objectors that had been declared null and void by Congress only last October.
The House committee report that accompanied the original bill noted that the
proposed changes ''compromise fundamental rights of conscience and impose
unjustifiable hardship on men seeking exemptions, deferments and alternative
service.''

In a letter to Representative Edward P. Boland, chairman of the oversight
committee, I noted that these unrevised proposals made it ''difficult not to
infer that a certain sense of disdain - if not contempt -for those who sincerely
claim to be conscientious objectors continues to linger among Selective Service
System employees.'' One might go further to conclude that this same contempt
seems to be directed against Congress, which had rejected the proposals the year
before.

Mr. Jennings is correct in stating that ''as members of the same society we owe
each other something.'' Conscientious objectors, while refusing to kill another
human being at the Government's behest, willingly accept the obligation to
perform nonmilitary or alternative service. May the day soon come when Selective
Service accepts its obligation to manifest respect for the deeply held beliefs
of conscientious objectors.

MICHAEL W. HOVEY
Charlestown, Mass., Aug. 29, 1987
  The writer is executive director, Pax Christi Center on Conscience and War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DOUBTS ON AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 424 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


Reagan Administration officials who are experts on Agent Orange, the defoliant
used in the Vietnam War, say they are skeptical about a Government study
suggesting higher cancer risks for some veterans of the war.

''The numbers are small; it just doesn't add up,'' said Dr. Alvin Young, a
senior analyst with the White House Office of Science and Technology. He said
the results released this month might be no more than a ''statistical fluke.''

Congressional veterans of the war, voicing anger at alleged foot-dragging by the
Veterans Administration, scheduled a news conference for Tuesday to call for
hearings into the Government's handling of scientific studies into the effects
of the toxic defoliant. They contend the Veterans Administration tried to
suppress the latest study, a charge that was denied by officials of the agency.

''There is a lot of outrage at the way it's been handled, and a lot of
suspicion,'' Representative Lane Evans, an Illinois Democrat who is a member of
the House Veterans Affairs Committee and chairman of the 50-member Vietnam-Era
Veterans Congressional Caucus, said in an interview last week.

A study of the deaths of 50,000 Vietnam-era veterans by Veterans Administration
scientists released this month showed excessive rates of death resulting from
lung cancer and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a category of cancers of the lymph
system, among Marines who served in the war.

While the study said Agent Orange was only a suspected cause, it was viewed by
some veterans leaders as the most important United States statistical finding to
implicate the herbicide, which was sprayed by American forces in Vietnam to
destroy enemy ground cover.

''The evidence is there that something is wrong for Vietnam veterans,'' Mr.
Evans said.

The finding was puzzling, however, because it found no similar cancer risk among
Army veterans corresponding with that of the marines.

It came on the heels of a report by the Federal Centers for Disease Control in
Atlanta that said the agency was unable to proceed with a broad biological study
ordered by Congress eight years ago. The centers said a pilot test program
revealed no excess dioxin, the herbicide's toxic ingredient, in the blood of
veterans who, according to military records, may have been exposed to it.

Veterans groups want Congress and the Veterans Administration to award
compensation payments to veterans who claim that current ailments such as
cancer, skin disorders and birth defects in offspring were caused by exposure in
Vietnam to Agent Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS OF THE TIMES;
Equal Terms

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 146 words


Panhandling, practiced ever more frequently on New York City streets, becomes an
artful psychological game, these days based mostly on guilt. A young man begs
politely for a few coins to buy diapers for his child; another claims to be a
victim of eviction, mental illness and Vietnam. One has even taped a tale of
woe, allowing a portable cassette player to do the talking as he shuffles
through subway cars.

Not all New Yorkers, however, are susceptible to guilt. Consider the harried
woman who, toddler in tow, recently found herself confronted by a disheveled man
at an Eighth Avenue subway exit in Times Square. ''Please help me,'' he chanted
to every passerby. ''I'm homeless.''

With the harried woman he had, perhaps unwittingly, risen to a new level of
nerve. Instead of averting her eyes, she gave him a withering stare.

''Dammit,'' she retorted, ''so am I!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV Reviews;
'The Blessings of Liberty,' on ABC

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


''THE BLESSINGS OF LIBERTY'' is a kind of extravaganza. The whole is not as good
as its parts, but where else will we ever get three prominent television
journalists, scenes from old movies, readings by actors and 200 years of
constitutional history, all in three hours? The ABC News special, at 8 o'clock
tonight, does not always work, but with a format like this, it has to have
moments.

The three journalists, David Brinkley, Peter Jennings and Ted Koppel, are in the
rotunda of the National Archives in Washington. Constitutional history reflects
''struggle,'' Mr. Koppel says. Mr. Brinkley, picking the thought up, says, ''It
is still a struggle today.'' The journalists, in effect, play straight men for
one another.

There is more than that, however; ''The Blessings of Liberty'' looks like one of
those family films shown on weekends at the larger museums. It opens with a
flapping eagle, and then presents pictures of our past: Lyndon B. Johnson,
Richard M. Nixon, Vietnam. Then the eagle flaps again; it is flying back through
time - the Depression, Prohibition, Theodore Roosevelt, Civil War and, finally,
the Founding Fathers.

What is this about? ''The blessings of liberty,'' Mr. Jennings says. These
blessings, he says, often were ''withheld or limited, sometimes delayed for
decades.'' If there is a theme to the three hours, it is how civil liberties
were expanded.

Meanwhile, there are the actors. ABC News has set up a repertory company: F.
Murray Abraham, Ossie Davis, Louis Gossett Jr., Richard Kiley, E. G. Marshall,
Martin Sheen, Richard Thomas, Cicely Tyson, Sam Waterston and others.

Mr. Kiley is first to appear. He plays George Washington, sitting at at a desk
by candlelight, the night after the Constitution was finally drafted. He is
writing a letter to the Marquis de Lafayette.

''It is the product of four months' deliberation,'' Kiley-Washington says. ''It
is now the child of fortune, to be fostered by some and buffeted by others.''

Back then to the rotunda: ''The child of fortune,'' Mr. Brinkley says, ''had a
lot of growing up to do.'' The program illustrates this with bits and pieces of
old movies: stagecoaches roll, drinkers roister, cannons fire. In one scene, an
early printer stands by his press; the printer is Buddy Ebsen.

The three hours - directed by Roger Goodman and Consuelo Gonzalez, with Av
Westin as executive producer - are never less than imaginative, and some of the
actors stuff a good deal of passion into one-minute-or-so performances. Patrick
Henry, as played by Mr. Abraham, is beside himself with anger; Frederick
Douglass, portrayed by Mr. Gossett, seethes with bitterness. From time to time,
history really does come alive.

The program - written by Pete Simmons and Mr. Brinkley, Mr. Jennings and Mr.
Koppel - ends up back at the rotunda. Mr. Koppel suggests that the prospect of a
new constitutional convention is chilling; there's too much talk today about how
''to rein liberty in.''

Then Mr. Brinkley says that if we ever stopped fighting about the Constitution,
it would probably mean that we had a dictatorship. The Constitution, Mr.
Jennings concludes, ''is still the central sinew in American life.'' At least
dip into the program; there is a lot in three hours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

New Push in Indochina To Find U.S. Missing

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 230 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 16


A former United States Congressman arrived in Bangkok today with six relatives
of American servicemen unaccounted for in Laos or Vietnam since the 1960's. The
group plans to release 2,500 balloons Thursday with messages offering large
rewards to those who can produce a missing American.

The delegation, headed by former Representative William Hendon, a North Carolina
Republican, has raised $2.4 million to offer to citizens of Laos, Cambodia and
Vietnam to bring out any American serviceman still alive and in captivity.

''Nothing else has worked,'' Mr. Hendon said, alluding to more than a decade of
negotiations with the governments of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

In Indochina, the United States has diplomatic relations only with Laos, where
549 Americans are still listed as missing. Another 1,776 are unaccounted for in
Vietnam.

The group plans to go to northeast Thailand Thursday to inflate the balloons and
send them into Laos.


WASHINGTON, Sept. 16 (AP) - The State Department said today that a private
group's plan to float balloons in Indochina to advertise $2.4 million in rewards
for the rescue of American servicemen could hurt official efforts to account for
the missing. The National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing
in Southeast Asia, the largest group representing the relatives of the missing,
also criticized the effort.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Scientific Review Is Awaited On a Study of Agent Orange

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 387 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


The head of the Veterans Administration, which has been accused of delays in
studying the effects the herbicide Agent Orange may have had on troops who
served in Vietnam, is urging Congressional critics to await further scientific
review.

''This is a scientific issue, not a political one, and it cannot be hurried,''
Thomas K. Turnage, Administrator of the veterans agency, said Tuesday.

He responded to complaints by members of the House of Representatives who called
for Government compensation for Vietnam veterans who say they were made sick by
exposure to Agent Orange. The lawmakers also condemned the Government's handling
of scientific studies into the effects of the herbicide.

The House members accused the agency of withholding for six months a study by
its scientists showing higher cancer risks for some veterans. They also
denounced as ''unconscionable and irresponsible'' a conclusion by the Centers
for Disease Control, an Atlanta-based Federal agency, that it was unable to
proceed with a separate study of the effect of Agent Orange on Vietnam veterans.


Scientific Review Sought

Officials of the centers said this summer that they could not proceed with their
study because a pilot study proved unable to find enough veterans with clear
exposure to dioxin, a poisonous contaminant of Agent Orange.

Mr. Turnage issued a statement saying he had asked a panel of scientific experts
to review the findings of a V.A. mortality study that found elevated death rates
because of lung and lymph cancer among marines but not soldiers who served in
Vietnam. The advisory committee is to meet next month.

''I am more committed than anyone to addressing concerns about Agent Orange,''
Mr. Turnage said. ''Because our advisory committee is in the process of
completing its evaluation, it would be wrong for me to make statements that may
prejudice their recommendations. I urge all concerned to await the assessment of
our scientific advisers.''

Agent Orange was a herbicide sprayed by United States forces in Vietnam to
defoliate jungle cover used by Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops. An
ingredient, dioxin, has been linked to cancer in some animal species. Many
Vietnam veterans contend that it is the cause of current ailments, including
cancer, skin disorders and birth defects in offspring.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PLAN TO RE-EQUIP B-52'S IS PROPOSED

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept 17


The commander of the nation's long-range bombers said today that he had proposed
a $3 billion plan to modify 150 B-52 bombers to carry conventional weapons to
help defend Western Europe in the event nuclear missiles were banned.

Negotiators for the United States and the Soviet Union said tonight that they
had made great progress toward a withdrawal of medium-range nuclear missiles
from Europe. The bomber commander, Gen. John T. Chain of the Air Force, said
such an agreement would leave the conventional forces of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization inferior to those of the Warsaw Pact.

General Chain, who heads the Strategic Air Command, said his seven-year plan had
the support of military commanders in the field but needs the approval of
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger. Congressional approval is also
necessary.

Western Forces at Disadvantage

Under General Chain's plan, all the remaining model G B-52's, which are destined
for the junkyard in the 1990's, would be retained in service. The planes, which
are more than 25 years old now, would be refurbished and a new stockpile of
spare parts would be assembled.

All 90 model H B-52's would continued to carry nuclear weapons, along with the
100 B-1's that are just becoming operational and the 132 advanced ''Stealth''
bombers designed to evade radar. These are scheduled to become operational in
the early 1990's.

If the nuclear missiles are withdrawn from Europe, General Chain said, the
conventional forces of American and Western European nations would survive in
combat for only seven to 10 days before they would start to be overrun.

That would confront Western leaders with the choice of surrendering or
escalating the conflict with long-range nuclear missiles and bombers, he said.
He suggested that converting the B-52G's would allow the Western forces to hold
out longer.

Low-Altitude Flight

If General Chain's plan is approved, the B-52G's would not carry bombs as they
did in the war in Vietnam. Instead, they would be armed with weapons that could
be fired at targets from a distance of 25 to 200 miles, thus reducing the risk
to planes and pilots.

The Air Force has been developing a guidance system for such missiles to give
them the ability to hit targets with pinpoint accuracy. That would make them
more effective than bombs, which damage enemy forces as they explode over an
area.

General Chain said the bombers would be able to penetrate moderately defended
areas by flying 200 feet above the ground. They would seek to avoid detection by
radar, which sends beams up and out in a straight line, by hiding behind hills
and following valleys.

He said that training for such missions had already begun. ''I've got guys out
there flying at 200 feet - at night,'' he said. In combat, the bomber pilots
would look for targets well behind enemy lines, like railheads, supply depots
and airfields.

The B-52G, which can fly 7,300 miles without refueling at high altitudes, could
fly 1,000 miles to a target and back again at low level, General Chain said.
Low-altitude bombing missions over Europe could thus be flown from bases in
Britain or elsewhere in Europe or, with the help of aerial tankers, from the
United States itself.

Part of the $3 billion required would be used to recruit, train and sustain
additional people to maintain and fly the planes, the general said. Some of
those to be assigned to a conventional bomber force would come from present
ranks but the Air Force would need to add about 2,000 to its current strength of
606,800 men and women.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE BORK HEARINGS;
Judge Bork at Senate Hearing: In Defense of Past Statements and Opinions

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2073 words


On the third day of hearings on the confirmation of Judge Robert H. Bork as a
member of the Supreme Court, members of the Senate Judiciary Committee continued
their questioning of Judge Bork. Following are excerpts, as recorded by The New
York Times.

SENATOR JOSEPH R. BIDEN Jr., Democrat of Delaware: In '84 your letter to the
A.B.A. . . . after you started off by saying that the First Amendment applies to
more than just speech that is ''explicitly political,'' you went on to say, and
I quote, ''I have long since concluded that many other forms of discourse, such
as moral and scientific debate, are central to democratic government and deserve
protection, and continue to think that obscenity and pornography do not fit this
rationale.''

In '84 you did not decide that moral and scientific speech should be protected
for its own sake. Instead, you said it should be protected because you had
decided that it fit your rationale for protection. Do you understand what I'm
driving at here?

JUDGE ROBERT H. BORK: Sure, Senator, I do, but that is a letter to the editor in
which I decided not to try to spell out in detail my views on the First
Amendment. And I said, as you just quoted, I have decided that other - did I say
many other forms of discourse?

Q. Yeah.

A. - many other forms of discourse such as, and I mentioned moral and scientific
speech. That means that there are other categories as well. And I was not trying
to spell out a jurisprudence of the First Amendment in detail in a letter to the
editor.

Q. Well, last point . . . in June of '87, you did an interview with Worldnet
where you still focused on whether speech relates to the political process. . .
. You explained that political speech was speech about public affairs and public
officials. You went on to say that protection spread out from the core to
scientific speech into fiction, and so forth.

But then, you went back and stressed that some speech had no relationship to
politics, and you said that that speech has no protection. In your words, and I
quote, ''There comes a point at which speech no longer has any relation to these
processes.'' And there you refer to the political processes and as mentioned
above, again quoting, ''When it reaches that level, speech is really no
different from any other form of human activity which produces
self-gratification. . . .

A. Well, let me read that again, please, Mr. Chairman. Because I think I said
something that I didn't hear. Nobody, nobody I think, doubts that the core of
the First Amendement is political speech. . . . Everybody, including the Supreme
Court, starts from the political speech core, and that is the most strongly
protected.

Let me read what I did say in this thing, the German professor, they were, I
forget, in Hamburg or some place, asked me something. I said I can't tell you
much more than that there is a spectrum of, I think political speech, speech
about public affairs and public officials is the core of the amendment.
Protection is going to spread out from there, as I say, into moral speech and
the scientific speech into fiction, and so forth. That statement explicitly
contemplates protection for fiction and so forth, whatever that is.

Then I said, there comes a point, which you quoted, where it's no longer related
to these. And I think when you get to speech or print, which is purely for
sexual gratification, pornography or obscenity, I fail to see its connection to
anything.

THE WAR POWERS ACT

SENATOR EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Democrat of Massachusetts: . . .First, I'd like to
talk about the War Powers Act. When Congress passed that legislation in 1973, a
very broad bipartisan majority of the House and Senate expressed the view, in
the wake of Vietnam, that no President should ever again be able to lead the
country into an undeclared war without the approval of Congress.

Judge Bork, that was passed over President Nixon's veto by 75 to 18 in the
Senate of the United States. Isn't it true that in an article in The Wall Street
Journal in 1978, you stated that the War Powers Act was - and I quote -
''probably unconstitutional and certainly unworkable.'' Since then, have you
expressed any different view about the War Powers Act?

A. I don't know if I have, Senator, but I think I can clarify that. Not that I'm
going to take it back. . . . That was a sentence leading into a different topic,
and I never - I don't recall whether I've ever made any extensive analysis of
the War Powers Act.

But it was - there are certainly problems with workability . . . a lot of
Presidents and so forth have complained about aspects of it. I remember when
President Ford - I think it was the Mayaguez episode - and in order to notify
the Speaker of the House he had to call him where he was, in China, flying on a
Chinese airliner, to tell him he was - about a military action, which seemed a
little odd. But I don't really care about that, those are policy questions and
they're not for me.

When I said it was probably unconstitutional, there - that's a very complex act.
Let me say I think the consultation requirements probably seem constitutional to
me; the notice requirements seem constitutional. But, you know, that act, as I
recall, contains a legislative veto. I may be wrong but I think that - I think
it contains a legislative veto. Which at the time, I thought was probably
unconstitutional. And the Supreme Court in the Chadda case has since said that
it is unconstitutional, so that, I don't think, to that degree was a bad
prediction.

SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS

Q. Let's go to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which was passed in
the Congress in 1978 by 95 to 1, to correct some of the abuses by the F.B.I. and
the Central Intelligence Agency during the Nixon Administration. It requires
that a warrant be obtained from a special Federal court before electronic
surveillance can be conducted on United States citizens in the course of
national security investigation. It contained an exception for a limited number
of top-secret wiretaps by the President.

In June 1978, you testified before the House Judiciary Committee, and I quote:
''The plan to bring into judiciary a warrant requirement and a criminal
violation standard into the field of foreign intelligence is, when analyzed, a
thoroughly bad idea and almost certainly unconstitutional as well. The law is
very probably a violation of Article II and III.'' Since your testimony before
the House committee, have you expressed a different view regarding that?

A. I don't recall that I have, Senator, but let me explain that view. Every
President -we're talking now about electronic surveillance of, of people we have
good reason to believe are agents of a foreign power - every President since
Franklin Roosevelt has claimed the power to engage in electronic surveillance of
foreign agents without a court warrant. . . . In addition to that, the United
States has won two court cases at the court of appeals level.

THE ABUSES OF POWER

Q. Just to summarize, Judge Bork, the American people rely on the Congress to
protect them from abuses of the power by the executive branch.

But, Judge Bork, whenever Congress has tried to curb abuses, you always seem to
side with the President. You broke the law in Watergate, when you obeyed
President Nixon and fired Archibald Cox. And you've testified that
court-appointed special prosecutors are unconstitutional, which suggests that
you would let the Administration investigate itself when corruption is the
issue.

You oppose limits on the national security power of the President, even when the
issue is wiretapping and eavesdropping on American citizens. Those cases you
mentioned did not address the constitutionality of the act. You believe that
Congress can never use the courts to challenge the President when he abuses his
power.

You wrote that the War Powers Act was probably unconstitutional. You suggested
that Congress has no power to stop the President from taking us into a wider war
in Vietnam. And that same reasoning would apply to sending U.S. military aid to
the contras in Nicaragua, or even selling the arms to the Ayatollah in Iran.

The Constitution calls for checks and balances; you seem to feel that when it
comes to the relation between Congress and the President, instead of checks and
balances the President has a blank check and the Congress exerts no balance at
all.

You say you believe in the original intent, Mr. Bork, but the Founding Fathers
certainly didn't intend an all-powerful President.

A. Senator Kennedy, I must say I think those are most unfair characterizations
of my views. Let me start - I hardly know where to start. In your case, when you
challenged President Nixon's pocket veto, and that pocket veto was held
unconstitutional by the D.C. circuit, I did not take certorari because I thought
the D.C. circuit was correct.

When the Ford Administration began to use a combination return veto and pocket
veto, I announced that was incorrect and I would not argue their case in the
Supreme Court. I then prepared a lengthy analysis of the constitutionality of
the pocket veto and concluded, against the President, which I sent to Attorney
General Levi. He sent it to the White House with a notation that he agreed with
my analysis and that I would not argue the case if they had to go to the Supreme
Court, which would be a clear signal that the Solicitor General disagreed with
them.

I concluded in that analysis that when Congress leaves behind - when it adjourns
and leaves behind an officer to receive a return veto - which is quite different
in its consequences than a pocket veto - the President may be required to use a
return veto and not a pocket veto because that was the original understanding,
so far as I could tell, of the pocket veto clause.

So that is an example where I sided with Congress against the President when I
was in the executive branch.

Now, you've said a number of other things, that I broke the law in Watergate. I
said yesterday that I did not. . . . There is no existing court opinion that
says I did.

SENATOR CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Republican of Iowa: . . .Does the fact that the
application of the Fourth Amendment in the 20th century covers illegal
electronic surveillance or that the First Amendment covers the electronic medium
tell us that your philosophy allows the Bill of Rights to evolve?

A. Yes it does, Senator. And I point out that I wrote extensively about that in
the Ullman case and I did so because I was challenged by the dissent, about how
can these rules ever change. And I wrote extensively in that case about how
rules can evolve in order to protect the original value that the framers wanted
to protect as circumstances and technologies change around us.

FIRST AMENDMENT PROTECTION

SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY, Democrat of Vermont: Let me show you a couple of
books. I'm not really trying to plug anybody here, but the one on the right is
Speaker O'Neill's latest book. It's number 10 or something on the best seller
list. In the capsule description, The Post says the former Speaker of the House
recounts half a century of public life as a bread and butter liberal. The other
is on the nonfiction paperback best seller list, ''Fatherhood'' by Bill Cosby.
It's described in the review - says an actor on the subject of children. Now,
let's assume neither book is obscene.

BORK. I'm willing to assume that, Senator.

Q. And I have not read either one of them, but I'll assume that, too. Does it
make any difference in their First Amendment protection - I mean the fact that
one, this one, is obviously political, if the excerpts I've read are very
political? This one of Mr. Cosby's I assume is not. That doesn't make any
difference?

A. Under settled law it does not, and I accept it. It seems to me that the
settled law is now that the person writing the book does not have to prove that
it's political or in any way connected to politics. The settled law is that the
government has to prove it's obscene.

Q. So if we're dealing with, at least by the titles of it, something, a movie,
on the one hand ''The Making of the Constitution,'' and the other one, ''Revenge
of the Nerds,'' at least by the title it doesn't make any difference?

A. No, it doesn't make a difference, and I've seen so many movies about the
Constitution, I would now choose the second movie.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Senate Defeats Bid for Vote on Gulf Escort Policy

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


The Senate rejected an amendment today that would have forced Congress to vote
on the Administration's policy of providing naval escorts for re-registered
Kuwaiti oil tankers in the Persian Gulf.

The amendment, which would have invoked the War Powers Act, was rejected by a
vote of 50 to 41. Thirty-five Republicans and 15 Democrats, most of them
Southern conservatives, combined to defeat the measure.

The vote reflects indecision in the Senate, and in the Congress as a whole,
about how to respond to the Administration policy and about the role of the War
Powers Act. Members do not want to repeal it but are wary of invoking it.

It was this lack of consensus on the policy and the law that prevented the House
and the Senate from taking action when the Administration announced the decision
this summer to re-register 11 Kuwaiti ships. The escorts began July 22.

Dislike of Policy

But the 41 votes for invoking the act, including those of seven Republicans, is
a measure of dissatisfaction with the Administration's policy.

One Democrat who opposed the amendment, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, who is
chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said he did so reluctantly because it
was not clear what the Administration would do if the War Powers Act were
invoked over the re-registering of the Kuwaiti tankers. But he said he hoped the
vote would warn the Administration ''to get its policy straight.''

The War Powers Act requires the President to notify Congress within 48 hours
whenever American forces are in hostilities or in a situation ''where imminent
involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated.''

The Congress then has 60 days to vote on whether to authorize the action. The
Administration contends that American involvement in the Persian Gulf does not
meet the criteria for invoking the Act.

Hazard Bonuses for Servicemen

The amendment's sponsors, including Senators Brock Adams of Washington and Dale
Bumpers of Arkansas, both Democrats, and Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, a
Republican, said that American servicemen in the Persian Gulf are being paid an
imminent hazard bonus. This, they argued, shows that American forces are in a
situation where hostilities are possible and thus the War Powers Act should be
invoked.

They also cited the attack on an American ship in the gulf and the mine that
damaged the first Kuwaiti tanker to be escorted. The American frigate Stark was
hit by a missile fired from an Iraqi jet on May 17. The Bridgeton, a Kuwaiti
tanker that was re-registered, hit a mine on July 24 while under escort.

The War Powers Act ''was carefully crafted to be sure that we did not repeat
Vietnam ever again,'' Mr. Bumpers said. ''There is not one member of this body
that doesn't know we're courting disaster in the Persian Gulf.''

But Senator Dan Quayle, Republican of Indiana, dismissed the argument. ''Who
says we're going to war,'' he said. ''What we're doing in the Persian Gulf is an
operation to preserve peace.''

Mr. Quayle also rejected the contention about imminent hazard bonuses. He said
that American servicemen are being paid such bonuses in Colombia, El Salvador,
the Sudan and Peru.

Amendment to Pentagon Bill

The vote came on an amendment to the $303 billion military programs
authorization bill for 1988, which the Senate continued to debate into the
evening.

Most of the day was spent trying to agree on limiting debate on the 20 major
amendments that will be offered to the bill. Among them are proposals that would
challenge the President on arms control policy, including one to require
adherance to the unratified 1979 Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty. The
Administration breached the weapons limit under the treaty last year.

Mr. Nunn and the Senator majority leader, Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West
Virginia, threatened to hold a session late Friday and Saturday to get senators
to accept debate limits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MISSLE ACCORD;
The Summit Record

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 442 words



September 1959  President Eisenhower and Nikita S. Khrushchev meet at Camp
David, Md.
Results: ''The Spirit of Camp David'' - a general feeling that scientific and
cultural exchanges would be good and that disarmament was the world's main
problem - but no concrete results.

May 1960   Mr. Eisenhower and Mr. Khrushchev go to Paris, but the Russian uses
the shooting down of the American U-2 spy plane over the Soviet Union to scotch
the meeting.
Results: Increased tensions.

June 1961   Mr. Khrushchev and President Kennedy, in Vienna, have heated
exchanges.
Results: No formal agreements. A year later, the Soviet Union tries to put
missiles in Cuba; the United States forces their removal.

June 1967   President Johnson meets in Glassboro, N.J., with Aleksei N. Kosygin
to discuss Middle East, the Vietnam War and nuclear arms. Results: No results on
Vietnam; seeds sown for later arms talks.

May 1972 President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev, in Moscow, sign first treaties
setting ceilings on strategic nuclear arms and limiting anti-ballistic missile
systems.
Results: They agree to keep negotiating on arms; regional issues still divide
them.

June 1973 Mr. Nixon and Mr. Brezhnev meet in Washington. Results: Agreement to
try to complete a new arms treaty by 1974; agreements on practical issues.

June-July 1974   Mr. Nixon and Mr. Brezhnev meet in Moscow and Yalta.
Results: Treaty banning underground nuclear arms tests with yields exceeding 150
kilotons; 10-year economic pact.

November 1974   President Ford and Mr. Brezhnev, in Vladivostok, reach tentative
pact limiting missile launchers and bombers and lay base for second strategic
arms treaty. Results: Treaty not completed before President Carter takes office;
talks go back to starting point.

June 1979 Mr. Carter and Mr. Brezhnev, in Vienna, sign the second treaty
limiting strategic arms. Results: Though United States Senate never approves
treaty, both sides agree to observe limits informally.

November 1985    President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev meet in Geneva for
wide-ranging talks on arms control and other subjects. Results: Cultural
exchanges revived, air safety enhanced, but no arms control agreements achieved.


October 1986   Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev meet in Reykjavik, Iceland, to
provide momentum to arms control talks.
Results: Two sides agreed to dramatic cuts in strategic arms and medium-range
missiles, but accord fell through because of disagreements over American space
defense plans and Moscow's insistence on putting all arms control issues in one
package.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of President John F. Kennedy with Nikita S. Krushchev; Richard
nixon with Leonid I. Brezhnev

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Inflation Fears Fade Even as Jobless Rate Falls

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1836 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


A broad spectrum of economists, including advisers to President Reagan, think
the nation's unemployment rate can now decline significantly more without
precipitating the problem often associated with low unemployment: a burst of
inflation.

Many say that the jobless rate, currently at an eight-year low of 5.9 percent,
can decline to around 5 percent, a level not seen in almost two decades. In the
throes of the 1981-82 recession, unemployment exceeded 10 percent, and the
economists' new findings do not preclude such levels in future recessions.

But in their view, the Government can now let the economy grow for longer than
would have been allowed in recent years for fear of inflation. Inflation worries
many officials more than unemployment because rising inflation can force the
Government to tighten its hold on money, leading to a recession and even higher
unemployment.

The Traditional Wisdom

Since the mid-1970's economists have greeted falling unemployment warily because
as it fell, industry would compete for workers, offering higher and higher pay,
and would then cover the cost of the wages by pushing up the prices of their
products, fueling inflation throughout the economy.

Inflation has picked up a bit this year from last year's rock-bottom level of
1.1 percent, and the Federal Reserve Board this month raised interest rates a
bit, citing signs of accelerating inflation. But inflation now, at around 4
percent, mostly stems not from wages but from a rise in oil prices and the
effects of the cheaper dollar, which makes imports more expensive. And without
wages contributing to rising prices, few economists see them undermining the
trend toward lower unemployment.

Politically, the trend in employment elates Republicans gearing up for next
year's elections. ''They will claim it as a victory,'' said Ted Van Dyk, a
political consultant here. He said Democrats would not dispute the prospects of
lower unemployment but were likely to draw attention to other economic issues,
such as declining standards of living and the nation's trade deficit.

Already Below Old Flashpoint

At 5.9 percent for the last two months, the unemployment rate has already
pierced the 6 percent threshold that for a decade was judged the flashpoint of
rising inflation. At that moment, the Government often tries to cool the economy
by such means as raising taxes and cutting public spending or by raising
interest rates. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve raised rates with a
vengeance to exorcise the economy's double-digit inflation rate.

Now, because of huge changes in the economy's dynamics, notably industry's
difficult but ultimately successful absorption of postwar baby boomers and
women, economists say that unemployment is settling back toward the low levels
of two decades ago and allowing the Government more time before making it
necessary to put a damper on things.

Disagreement among economists revolves not around whether the rate is declining
but around the level at which it becomes a flashpoint of inflation and around
the importance the Government should give any precise figure in making policy.
''Our basic view is that the point is lower than 6 percent,'' said Beryl W.
Sprinkel, the departing chairman of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers. ''It's around 5-ish I think.''

Estimates as Low as 4%

Albert T. Sommers, chief economist at the Conference Board in New York, a
business-sponsored research group, says the figure appears to be 5.5 percent
now. Jeff Faux, head of a liberal research group here known as the Economic
Policy Institute, suggested 4 percent. ''But whatever you felt the rate was a
few years ago,'' Mr. Faux said, ''you've got to have a lower estimate today.''

Whatever the figure, Mr. Sommers urges that the Government not let the rate
decline to the flashpoint, even if it could be accurately determined. Such a
policy-driven momentum could inadvertently drive unemployment below that
threshold and provoke soaring inflation. Allan H. Meltzer, an economist at
Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh, warned that with the rise of
two-income families and changing attitudes toward work among young people,
making forecasts on the basis of such figures is a risky way to guide economic
policy. ''There's no doubt the rate is going down,'' he said. ''But how much
isn't very clear.''

Percentage point distinctions may seem insignificant, but few economic issues
arouse social and political passions more than jobs, and even minuscule changes
in the unemployment rate reverberate through the economy in striking ways.

A Point Equals 1.2 Million Jobs

A reduction of a single point means that 1.2 million more people are working.
Spending by those workers helps keep the economy growing, and the distribution
of incomes tends to even out because more of the poor have jobs. Moreover, even
many of the poor who are among the least skilled, usually least employable
workers - notably black teen-agers - are being absorbed. According to the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, the unemployment rate for black teen-agers has already
improved dramatically, from 52 percent five years ago to 29 percent in August -
the lowest level in at least a decade.

And according to the Congressional Budget Office, a percentage point less of
unemployment next year would save the Government $36 billion in aid to the
jobless - a boon to the drive to reduce the budget deficit. Such a reduction
''is something that I think is good news from nearly any perspective you can
imagine,'' said Edward N. Gramlich, acting director of the Congressional Budget
Office.

Such economists note one feature of the change, however, that is not so welcome.
Income gains, adjusted for inflation, have by some measures been eroding and by
others are no better than static. Among reasons for stagnant wages, economists
say, are the impact of foreign competition and workers' rising emphasis on job
security over pay hikes.

Reviving a Debate of the 1960's

Awareness that a growing economy can tolerate lower unemployment could revive a
lively issue of the low-inflation 1960's. Economists of the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations became absorbed in debating the level of an unemployment rate
that represented the optimum balance of jobs and non-inflationary growth, a
figure they called the ''full-employment unemployment rate.''

The goal the Government set then was 4 percent unemployment, which assumed about
4 percent growth. With its taxation, spending and interest rate policies, the
Government never quite realized its ideal match of jobs and growth, but it
sometimes came close.

In 1961, for example, growth was quite slow, at 2.2 percent; unemployment fairly
high, at 6.5 percent, and inflation quiescent, at 1 percent. By 1964, growth had
accelerated to 5.3 percent, unemployment had slipped to 5 percent, and inflation
was up just a bit, to 1.3 percent.

Effect of Unforeseen Factors

Later, inflation arising from the Vietnam War and from surging oil prices, and
the rush of both women and World War II baby boomers into the work force, played
havoc with the theory. The economy would grow, but often so would inflation and
unemployment.

In 1978, Congress wrote the 4 percent unemployment goal into law, but by then it
was clearly unattainable and the goal was virtually ignored. To accommodate high
systemic inflation, many economists in the late 70's determined that the full
employment rate had climbed to 6 percent, and after the recession of 1981 and
1982, members of the Reagan Administration speculated that it had reached 6.5
percent.

Since then, however, circumstances have changed markedly. The postwar babies are
adults now and have been absorbed into the labor force. The number of working
women continues to rise but at a much slower pace than in the 1970's. Both
groups inflated the unemployment rate, because it took the economy a while to
absorb them and because unemployment among women and youths usually ran higher
than for other groups.

Foreign Competition Noted

But the labor force's absorption of such bulges of job-seekers does not alone
account for the change in the full employment rate. ''In the 70's,'' Mr.
Gramlich of the budget office said, ''the rate rose by more than can be
explained by demographics, and it is falling by more than can be explained by
demographics.''

''Why?'' he asked, rhetorically. ''I think it's due to the openness of the
economy. We are much more susceptible to foreign competition, especially in
large unionized sectors such as steel and autos. It has become impossible for
them to engineer the kind of wage increases of former times.'' Thus, he said,
the economy and employment can grow with less of a threat of inflation.

With inflation again more subdued, some economists expect the debates of the
1960's to resume in earnest. ''People are going to argue over exactly what level
of unemployment is the critical level where inflation accelerates,'' said Barry
P. Bosworth, an economist at the Brookings Institution who was President
Carter's chief inflation fighter.

Some Favor Unfettered Market

Some other economists, mostly conservative, belittle the notion that the
Government can manipulate the economy to deliver a predetermined combination of
employment and inflation to help encourage growth, and they say unfettered
markets do the job better. Just attempting to anticipate a precise level of
unemployment is elusive, they say, in part because the labor force is much more
fluid than theories of full employment imply.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics, the source of employment data, defines the labor
force - 122 million of an adult population of 184 million - as people who are
working or are prepared to work.

The definition excludes the infirm, the retired, society's dropouts, volunteers
and those, such as mothers of young children, who elect not to take wage-paying
jobs. But in a booming economy, some of these people trickle back into the labor
force, making precise calculations about optimum unemployment difficult. They
include the least employable hard-core job-seekers, such as unskilled youths
without high school diplomas and those who are handicapped but willing to work.

The Rock-Bottom Rate

No one, in any event, assumes unemployment can fall to zero. For a while during
the 1940's, when the nation strained to support the war effort, the rate fell -
to 1.5 percent in 1944 -while the economy boomed and inflation soared.

The 1.5 percent was what economists call ''frictional'' unemployment, the
statistical joblessness that accounts mostly for members of the labor force who
are in transit between jobs, according to Thomas J. Plewes, an associate
commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Many of the economists who espouse such theories say frictional unemployment,
and thus the rock-bottom rate, is now around 2 percent. The debate concerns how
close to that level unemployment can fall without igniting faster inflation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Officials in Vietnam on Emigre Program

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 660 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 18


For the first time since Americans fled the fall of Saigon a dozen years ago,
United States officials are working in Vietnam. They are consular and
immigration officials who have resumed screening Vietnamese applicants for
American resettlement.

The screening, which began last week after a long freeze, was resumed after the
United States agreed in August to discuss Vietnam's postwar humanitarian needs
and the Vietnamese pledged to speed up the resolution of cases of Americans
missing in action. Diplomats here said the American move indicated that
relations between the two countries could improve substantially under Hanoi's
new party leader, Nguyen Van Linh. #1,000 Interviewed Disagreements among local
and national Communist Party leaders over whether to proceed with legal
emigration under the Orderly Departure Program were thought to have been the
cause of a freeze in the screening from January 1986 until now. The freeze also
affected resettlement programs of other nations, including Australia and Canada.
More than 1,000 Vietnamese were interviewed last week by the Americans, said
Bruce Beardsley, who directs Indochinese refugee programs from the United States
Embassy in Bangkok and who was part of the American team in Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon. Only nine applicants were rejected, with about 100 cases
awaiting more documentation.

The next round of screening in Ho Chi Minh City is tentatively scheduled for
October, when interviewing of children of American and Vietnamese couples is
also expected to resume.

Eighty-one of an estimated 10,000 such young people - known as Amerasians - and
their families qualify for American citizenship, United States officials said.
They said Hanoi has never explained why these people, now teenagers or in their
20's, have not been allowed to emigrate.

About 670,000 Vietnamese are seeking resettlement in the United States, Mr.
Beardsley told reporters today. American officials have issued letters of
introduction to 95,000 of them, signifiying that they apparently are eligible
for American visas. The 95,000 include some inmates of political prisons.

Prisoner Resettlement Ruled Out

The Vietnamese authorities, who reserve the right to decide which applicants
will be given exit permits, are limiting interviews to family reunion cases for
the moment. They rule out the release of any prisoners for resettlement abroad,
saying they remain a political issue that would have to be discussed at a higher
level.

But Western and Vietnamese diplomats say a number of officials of former South
Vietnamese regimes who would qualify for American resettlement on humanitarian
grounds were among more than 6,000 prisoners ordered released by Hanoi last
week.

The most prominent of the prisoners freed was Lieut. Gen. Nguyen Huu Co, a
former South Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister.

The participation of Mr. Beardsley in last week's interviews in Ho Chi Minh
City, along with a United States consular officer and a member of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, raised the American involvement to a
diplomatic level for the first time. However, no formal relations exist between
Hanoi and Washington.

Vietnamese officials said they had been pressing for this change over the last
few months. Since the Orderly Departure Program began in 1979 interviewing for
the United States had been done by the International Catholic Migration Agency.
Other nations with diplomatic representation in Vietnam conduct their
resettlement interviews through consular officials.

The procedure used by the Americans delayed the departure process, the
Vietnamese said. Interviewers in Vietnam had to relay details on cases to
Americans in Bangkok who then made decisions on the applicants.

The United States has resisted establishing any diplomatic presence in Vietnam
until all Americans missing in action are accounted for and Hanoi withdraws its
troops from Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A BROKEN COUNTRY

BYLINE: By Henry Kamm; Henry Kamm, chief of The Times's bureau in Budapest, has
reported from Southeast Asia since the 1960's.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 96, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3894 words


I OWE MY INITIATION INTO THE complexities of Indochina to Prince Norodom
Sihanouk of Cambodia. Struck, perhaps, by the innocence of my questions at a
press luncheon in Paris in 1964, the ebullient prince - then chief of state of
his still peaceful and neutral country - called me to his table as the hall
emptied.

He proceeded to give me a magisterial lecture on a subject that was then in the
incipient stage of tormenting Americans. His verbal brilliance was impressive.
Only later, when I found myself reporting from his part of the world, did I
realize that he was more than just a guileful persuader. The prince had been
lucid and prescient on a topic that almost everyone else - from participants in
an ever-widening war to prejudiced witnesses - was doing his best to muddle.

''My dear friend,'' he said to a perfect stranger, ''to understand what I'm
trying to achieve, just remember this: All of Southeast Asia is destined to
become Communist. All that I'm trying to do is this: When it happens in
Cambodia, I want it to happen without breakage.''

I have thought of the prince's words many times since -in Cambodia, under his
rule and under that of his American-backed successor, Lon Nol, who overthrew him
in 1970; in Thailand, as I interviewed refugees from Cambodia under the
subsequent regime, that of Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge, and on my three visits
to Cambodia since it was occupied by Vietnam in 1979. I have thought of them
also during visits to the camps along the Thai border in which the three
components of the coalition government-in-exile, dominated by the Khmer Rouge,
control ''their'' refugee populations.

Prince Sihanouk's analysis and prediction have stood the test of time. The three
nations of Indochina - Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos - have become Communist. (The
prince even today calls his country Cambodia when speaking in English, or
Cambodge in French. Like all Cambodians living where they can speak freely, he
considers arbitrary nonsense the Communist insistence that it be called
Kampuchea. This terminology is based on the absurd notion that the customary
English or French transliteration of the Khmer word is a colonialist imposition.
The new name was, in fact, imposed on the world by the ultrachauvinist Khmer
Rouge regime and is rejected as kowtowing to their views by Cambodians not
living under Communist rule.) What stands out most in my mind is Prince
Sihanouk's premonition that ''breakage'' was the alternative to his diplomatic
tightrope act. He had hoped to keep the Vietnam War from engulfing Cambodia as
it had Laos.

Today, eight years after Cambodia was liberated from Pol Pot's appalling regime
by Vietnam, the least disinterested of liberators, it remains a broken country.
Its wounds are not those that bled the country during the savage Indochinese war
and the murderous folly of the Pol Pot regime. They are the longer-lasting, open
wounds of despondency and dependence.

On a nine-day visit this summer, I did not find the starvation and illness that
were rampant in 1980, when I last toured the country. Cambodia is alive in the
sense that people are not dropping like flies - at least in the regions
accessible to foreigners. Human life has regained the value that it always had
in this deeply Buddhist country. Cambodia is no longer a vast forced-labor camp,
in which a helpless majority toiled and starved under the guns of mindless
martinets. Families live again as families, not as labor gangs separated by sex
and age. Children go to school once more, after years of enforced illiteracy.

But in 1980, before the flush of liberation had worn off, Cambodia was a place
of hope. Despite starvation, illness and foreign occupation, a kind of normality
was reconstituting itself; people dared hope that, with the worst over,
something good might follow. Peace would return, the occupying troops would go
home and the strong Cambodian traditions would coexist even with a Communist
Government.

The good has not come. Cambodians must continue to find solace in the meager
thought that what prevails is better than what preceded, but it no longer seems
enough.

Aided by a heavy-handed agitprop machine, the Government of President Heng
Samrin and Prime Minister Hun Sen - which is there by the grace of Hanoi -
continues to keep alive the specter of the nightmare years. It is as if this
Government recognized that only in comparison with the evil that came before can
it find legitimacy in the eyes of a people it rules with a stern hand. However,
even Cambodia's overseers admit that the constant reference to Pol Pot is not
providing the necessary impetus to make a dispirited nation of seven million
rise again to its feet.


VIETNAM'S CIVIL AND MILITARY presence, though more discreet than in 1980, is
still dominant. The bulk of the 140,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia is
concentrated along the border with Thailand, where the insurgent forces have
their bases. Except for inconspicuous army encampments, few Vietnamese
installations are seen in Phnom Penh, and the Vietnamese ''advisers'' in the
capital take pains to run the country without being seen to be running it.
Disingenuously or not, they profess that for the eight years of their presence
they have been hoping in vain for a leadership class to emerge. Such a class,
they say, would transform numbing fear into creative energy to help Cambodia
fend off, by itself, the threat of a return of the hated Khmer Rouge.

Opinion is divided among Southeast Asian and Western analysts on whether Vietnam
really wants to propel Cambodia from inertia to self-reliance. Many suspect that
in sustaining an ineffective regime by means of a large corps of ''advisers,''
Hanoi will keep in subjugation a neighboring but ethnically and culturally
distinct nation.

Conversations among members of Phnom Penh's foreign community inevitably center
on the lack of qualified Cambodian personnel in all fields. The bureaucracy that
does exist not only is unable to meet the basic needs of the population but is
obstructive, suspicious and foot-dragging as well. And among Cambodians there is
an all-too-great, fatalistic readiness to accept a greatly diminished life.

In a large drugstore, once the best supplied in the capital, a pharmacist
standing before empty shelves asks if I'm looking for anything in particular.
''I've just come to look at what is available,'' I reply. ''Nothing,'' she says,
smiling in indifference.

''And the pity is that whatever there is is concentrated in Phnom Penh,'' notes
a diplomat. (Only Soviet-bloc countries and India have embassies in Phnom Penh.)
''All the 'wealth' is concentrated here. The moment you go out of town,
everything is in pathetic condition.

''There are not many people in the age group of active work,'' he adds, ''even
in provincial capitals. The administration in the provinces sometimes exists
only on paper. It's like a ship where the line to the rudder is broken.''

Today's Cambodia is paying the price of the reckless human waste of its recent
past. It suffers from human depletion on a scale that I have never seen anywhere
before -not among the Armenians or the Jews after genocidal attempts against
them, nor in Europe after World War II, nor in Africa after its many famines. Of
course, some competent people remain in Cambodia, but clearly there are not
enough of those who provide the yeast to lift the Cambodian people out of their
predicament.

The lack of qualified people is the despair of those helping the Government
rebuild the country. ''The basic problem is that there is no reliable
information and no one to talk to honestly and seriously,'' says a Western
European. ''Whoever says there is is not telling the truth. The structure of the
Government is there, except in the remote regions, but there is no one to man
it. . . . They change their opinions between morning and evening. The result is
total lethargy and inefficiency. They don't know where they are going.''

A Western technician who has been working with Cambodians on a small-scale rural
development project for nearly a year speaks dejectedly about his lack of
success because of what he calls impossibly low standards of work. The main task
for the Government, he says, ''is to keep people happy despite everything, so
there is no discipline.''

A measure of the depletion of vital skills and knowledge is the virtual
disappearance of spoken French. Having known peace and independence for only 17
years - from 1953 till 1970 - Cambodia lacked the time to nationalize fully its
school system and so education beyond the elementary grades had always been
conducted in French. During my two-week stay in 1980, many Cambodians fluent in
French - survivors of Pol Pot's selective slaughter of the urban educated -
could still be encountered throughout the country. This summer, when I asked
their whereabouts, a Vietnamese official replied tersely, ''They're across the
border.''


SINCE CAMBODIA'S accomplished rice growers have not suffered the same degree of
decimation as have its mechanics, physicians and economists, the only area where
Cambodia has approached its prewar level of productivity is agriculture. Some of
the country's rice and rubber go, respectively, to Vietnam and the Soviet Union,
its principal allies -in fractional payment for the much larger quantity of
goods that it receives from them. And the vegetable markets, at least those of
the nation's capital, are well stocked.

The problem is that most of Phnom Penh's residents cannot afford to buy the
produce. Cabbage and other greens sell for 15 riels a pound; the standard
monthly wage of a Government worker is 200 riels, which is less than $7 at the
official rate of exchange or less than $2 on the black market. (Their meager pay
explains why Government officials ask foreigners for ''tips'' for services
performed in the line of duty.) According to United Nations estimates,
Cambodia's per capita gross domestic product stands at a rock-bottom $80 a year.
There is almost no industrial production, although some pre-1970 plants have
returned to working at a low level of output. For example, the tire factory
outside Phnom Penh, built by Czechoslovakia and opened in 1966, is functioning
again. However, says Sao Yonn, deputy manager in charge of administration, 85
percent of its equipment is unusable for lack of spare parts.

Nonetheless, the factory employs 444 workers, compared with 380 when it was in
full operation. They produce 36,000 tires a year, says Sao Yonn, who has been
working at the plant since it opened. Until the Vietnam War closed the plant, he
recalls, yearly production by the smaller work force was about 160,000 tires.

The factory, when I visited at the height of the working day this summer, was a
still and nearly empty place, with more workers standing about than at their
machines. From an office near Sao Yonn's a typewriter was heard clacking at a
learner's pace.

Despite this uneconomic productivity, the tire-plant workers' salary - 250 riels
a month - is 25 percent higher than that of the average Government worker. As
further incentives to higher productivity, their benefits are also more
attractive, such as larger allotments of low-cost rice, free clothing and
significant reductions in the prices of many basic commodities. They also get
free garden plots, with whose crops they supplement their income.

In view of Cambodia's almost total absence of official export trade, its
currency is meaningless in relation to foreign currencies. With almost all
Cambodians living at the subsistence level -scrounging and bartering, living off
the land even while residing in the capital city -it is impossible to assign
anything but an artificial exchange value to the country's currency.

Officially, a tire-plant worker's salary of 250 riels, for example, is
equivalent to about $8; on the free market it would be about $2. Rather than
resolve the discrepancy, the Government recently closed the restaurant at the
formerly splendid Hotel le Royal, renamed Sammaki (Solidarity). The now
threadbare hotel is permanently full of long-term foreign guests
-representatives of United Nations aid agencies, national and international Red
Cross missions and private or religious relief groups - ready to spend
currencies the Government badly needs.

''The dollar at the official rate is too expensive,'' said a hotel manager,
explaining why the restaurant remained closed, ''and here the official rate has
to be applied. So the guests go into town, where they pay at the other rate.''

Many of Phnom Penh's foreign residents, including Communists stationed there,
agree that Cambodia can ill afford this kind of obdurance and wastefulness or
the misuse of the little energy the Government succeeds in mustering among the
people.

From the earliest days of the present regime, says a relief organization
official, absolute priority has been given to only two matters. One is national
defense. The other is a dogged effort to make an unpolitical, tradition-minded
and religious people believe in Communism. Public health, nutrition,
reconstruction and development therefore take a back seat - as is painfully
evident in the capital and more so in the less well served outlying regions.

''Attending political courses seems to be the first requirement for all
workers,'' notes the relief official. Doctors are not exempt, and may even be
summoned from the operating room to attend such meetings. A European physician
working at a provincial hospital has observed Cambodian colleagues holding
frequent lectures on Marxism-Leninism for the staff without appearing to believe
a word they were saying. ''One came out of the lecture room,'' he recalls, ''and
the first thing he said to me after finishing his speech in there was 'Can you
lend me your copy of Newsweek?' ''


PHNOM PENH -once a beautiful city and among the best tended in Southeast Asia -
is today a vast slum. Families camp on the sidewalks, in parks and in what used
to be private gardens. Streets and backyards are littered with indescribable
filth, some no doubt dating to the terrible period 12 years ago when, having
driven the population into the countryside, the soldiers of Pol Pot celebrated a
carnival of wanton destructiveness in the empty city, throwing from the windows
anything that smacked of the decadent West. The sewage system has so
deteriorated that parts of the city along the banks of the Mekong River are
routinely flooded during the monsoon season. Farm animals, privately owned,
wander about the nation's capital as though it were a huge village: Cows seek
shade under the splendid trees lining once busy boulevards, pigs scavenge
through the garbage and hens peck over whatever is left. Worse, rats and flies
are breeding as never before, adding to critical sanitation and hygiene
problems.

Most of Phnom Penh's population of about 600,000 is new not only to the city but
also to urban life. ''The people who lived here were mainly killed by Pol Pot,''
says Deputy Health Minister Chhey Kanha. She concedes that the Government's
attempts to teach city living to a population made up largely of country folk,
with women and children greatly outnumbering men, have met with little success;
the people, for example, refuse to boil their drinking water. What she seems not
to take into account is the poverty of the people and the cost of firewood or
charcoal needed to boil water. In the countryside, after all, firewood was not
only plentiful but free.

Similarly, foreign medical and sanitation specialists say that the severe
malnutrition of children - a result of imbalanced diets of rice without
vegetables and fruits - is due to the mothers' lack of education. But the
200-riel standard monthly wage would barely fill a shopping basket.

Rural people flocked to Phnom Penh after the Vietnamese conquest because most of
the relief food the Government was receiving during that period of famine was
sent to the capital for distribution. Furthermore, such limited medical care as
was available after Pol Pot's forces had murdered most doctors could only be
found in the capital.

Ironically, while villagers have fled to the city for survival, city living has
caused an alarming decline in their health. Once scrupulously clean people now
go about unwashed and in soiled clothes. Since water from village wells and
streams was plentiful, people used to bathe and wash their clothes morning and
evening. In post-liberation Phnom Penh, not only is there a shortage of water,
but the new city dwellers do not have private places in which to bathe. And
their drinking water and food are largely contaminated; Western relief agencies
estimate that only 1 percent of the population of the country drinks clean
water.

My sense of the decline of Phnom Penh is deepened by the prevalence of amputees,
young men who hobble about the city on crutches. Victims of land mines -
probably laid by the Khmer Rouge when they were in power, to prevent people from
fleeing to Thailand - they can often be seen in the markets, collecting
contributions from tradespeople insistently enough to make it appear that they
are demanding protection money.

Young men are being rounded up throughout the country for three to six months of
service to put up fences, ditches, earth walls and booby traps (made of pointed
bamboo sticks) and to lay new mines. Foreign physicians and nurses report that
up to 80 percent of these men return from the inhos-pitable border zone with
malaria.


KONG SOM OL, AN American-educated minister in the Prime Minister's office, nods
in agreement as I describe the dejection, hopelessness and disorientation I find
among Cambodians, a mood very different from that found during the days
immediately following the liberation from Pol Pot.

By way of explanation, Kong Som Ol, who served as an agricultural official in
the Lon Nol regime, cites the disruption of Cambodian society during Lon Nol's
war against the alliance of Communist Vietnam and the Khmer Rouge, and the total
rending of the social fabric under Pol Pot. ''Pol Pot taught mothers to steal
from their children, husbands from their wives,'' he continues. ''This is the
result. It is very difficult for us. We must help them, not punish them; teach
them, guide them. We must re-educate them, again, again and again.

''The people in the city, except those who work for the Government, have nothing
to do,'' he admits. ''They are getting old and producing nothing. The houses
belong to someone else. But if we have peace all over the country, these people
will go back to their land.''

Kong Som Ol is bitter about the isolation that the West imposes on his country,
and his voice reflects the pain of a man who lost his wife and four children
under the Khmer Rouge. ''You impose embargoes on us because we have the
Vietnamese here,'' he says angrily. ''Why? Because you help Pol Pot. We need our
friends here to help us. Do you want us to give seven million people back to Pol
Pot?''

No Cambodian or foreigner with whom I spoke deviated from the consensus that as
long as Pol Pot and his troops remain in the field, Vietnam will face no
significant opposition. As long as the Western world can be depicted by the
regime as supporting Pol Pot by voting for the coalition government-in-exile as
the legitimate tenant of Cambodia's United Nations seat, Cambodians will believe
that even those whom they consider their friends fail to understand their
dilemma.

The Government rejected my request for a military and security briefing. But,
according to a senior Communist diplomat familiar with the Vietnamese assessment
of their military position, the Khmer Rouge leave the Phnom Penh regime and its
Vietnamese ally no respite. Until a 1985 Vietnamese offensive, says the
diplomat, the three guerrilla forces headed respectively by Pol Pot, Prince
Sihanouk and former Prime Minister Son Sann maintained their bases on the Thai
border. Since then, he adds, the border area has been sufficiently secure for
the Vietnamese army to have entrusted most of its defense to the new Cambodian
army that it is creating. ''Except, of course, for four or five hot spots,'' he
says patronizingly, as foreigners of many nations and political persuasions have
spoken of Cambodians for many years.

The 1985 offensive, says the diplomat, drove most of the Pol Pot forces into the
interior and transformed the border war into a traditional guerrilla struggle to
capture the hearts and minds of villagers, to recruit soldiers among youths and
to buy or steal food. (Analysts discount the military significance of the
non-Communist guerrillas.) These guerrillas create periods of insecurity on most
of the country's roads. China, the diplomat adds, continues to send materiel to
the Khmer Rouge troops, with full Thai cooperation, across the western and
northern borders.


IN 1980, WHEN THE level of warfare was higher, I was allowed to travel by road
over most of the country. This summer, I was restricted to two short road trips
from Phnom Penh. I was allowed to travel to Angkor only by air, and instead of
being free to visit many temples, as on my earlier visit, I was limited to the
main temple of Angkor Wat. ''We don't have enough army to protect foreigners
there,'' said a young armed policeman who accompanied me after I requested that
we go to see others of the splendid ruins.

Cambodia has had four national flags since 1970. Each has featured a stylized
representation of Angkor Wat's three towers. Spokesmen for each of these regimes
have spoken to me of the temple as the soul and symbol of the Khmer nation. I
fear they are right.

Angkor looks battered now, neglected and vandalized, isolated from those who
admire its magnificence. I visited it in the company of a delegation of Laotian
Communist Party officials. It left them visibly uninterested. Their curiosity
was aroused only when, after seeing the temples, they were conducted to a
crocodile farm where the Khmer Rouge were said to have thrown children to the
reptiles. The delegates from the allied power yawned at Angkor but laughed at
the crocodiles.

An Indian archeological team has taken over some of the conservation and
restoration work carried out in the past by the French, who rediscovered the
wondrous royal capital (abandoned to the jungle in the 15th century) in 1861 and
returned it to Cambodia and the world -minus a considerable amount of statuary
now in French museums. But the Indians' program of work is piecemeal, limited to
Angkor Wat and spread over six years. Destruction and vandalism are advancing at
a faster pace.

''The only way to defend the monuments would be to conserve them in cans,'' Pich
Keo, the first curator of Angkor since the liberation from the Khmer Rouge, said
in 1980. He was awed by the magnitude of his job and the puny means and manpower
at his disposal. Since then, Pich Keo, the only Cambodian archeologist to have
survived the Khmer Rouge, has been dismissed for ''political reasons.''

On my recent visit, only Peat Krem, 68 years old and a conservation handyman for
40 years, was working to maintain Angkor. The Indian team will return in
January. Until then, it will be Peat Krem's broom against nature and the host of
human foes that threaten the survival of the ancient symbol of Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Peat Krem at Angkor Wat (NYT/Henry Kamm); a scene at the
Phnom Penh market (pg. 98); Angkor Wat (pg. 108); street scene in Phnom Penh
(Alain Keler/Sygma) (110)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEY WILL HEAR SILVIO AYALA

BYLINE: By LEIGH HAFREY; Leigh Hafrey is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words



IMAGINING ARGENTINA
By Lawrence Thornton. 214 pp. New York: Doubleday & Company. $16.95.

LATE in Lawrence Thornton's powerful first novel, one of the characters
speculates that ''memory is not the journalist's friend, or even the
witnesses'.'' Cecilia is both a journalist and a witness: the author of an
editorial protesting the disappearance of 15 students from a rural school bus,
she herself has become one of Argentina's disappeared, another victim of the
''dirty war'' Argentine juntas waged on their citizens from 1976 to 1983. Her
teen-age daughter is being held a few doors down the hall in a ranch somewhere
on the pampas. Like her mother for months before her, Teresa is being subjected
almost daily to rape, beatings, electric shock and the many other degradations
we now know about, thanks to the press, the testimony of survivors,
investigations by human rights groups and the Argentine Government itself.

The one member of the family who has escaped imprisonment is Cecilia's husband,
Carlos Rueda, the chief playwright of the Argentine National Children's Theater.
It is Carlos's creative faculty, sustained by the accounts of those who have
lost relatives and friends, that provides the substance of ''Imagining
Argentina.'' For quite by accident Carlos finds he has the gift of imagining
what has happened to Argentina's disappeared. The novel consists of their
stories, and of Carlos's own - all of them recorded by a journalist friend of
the Rueda family, Martin Benn. The time is 1976. The father of one of Carlos's
child actors disappears, and Carlos suddenly knows what has happened to the man
and what his future, in this case happy, will be. His consoling words to the boy
are confirmed shortly thereafter, and Carlos, stunned and at first frightened by
his own gift, soon puts it at the service of his fellow citizens and sufferers.
He joins the mothers of the disappeared who march in protest on Buenos Aires's
Plaza de Mayo and, at weekly sessions held in the garden of his home, tells his
listeners the fate of their relatives and friends, always brutal in the short
term, too often deadly in the end.

Carlos's own story is bittersweet. His daughter, Teresa, disappears forever into
the night on the pampas. But his wife does come back, in the midst of the
carnival and as the generals flag in their determination to stamp out all
opposition. In this, Mr. Thornton's novel has the advantage of historical
hindsight. The dirty war did end, and a measure of justice was achieved in the
trials that followed the Falklands debacle and the return to civilian
government. For narrative purposes, the historical outcome lends itself to a
happy ending, and one of the real strengths of ''Imagining Argentina'' is that,
despite the pain and horror it evokes, it builds from the beginning, and with
great intensity, toward the triumphant vision of romance. There is, in the
playwright's defense of the variety and color of life against the rulers, who
would have ''their Argentina . . . a pure, clear place as sparkling as a block
of ice,'' a touch of Shakespeare's ''Tempest.''

But ''Imagining Argentina'' is also a book about bearing witness and the ways of
history itself, and the poignancy of what befalls the Ruedas and those whom
Carlos imagines is magnified by the historical context. The journalist narrator,
Martin Benn, was disenchanted by his experience covering Vietnam in the late
60's; for him, ''the Americans and Vietnamese, concentration camps and gulags,
Afrikaners and Argentines seemed to utter the same obscenities, the spittle from
one gaping mouth burning into people everywhere.'' MARTIN can quote Hannah
Arendt on the ''banality of evil'' epitomized by the Nazi Adolf Eichmann, whose
trial he attended; he knows that Eichmann's colleagues, Josef Mengele among
them, live on behind the scenes in Latin America, if not physically, then quite
certainly in the generals' imagination; and he knows that people forget. The
generals want them to forget: ''All over the city you could almost hear the
generals shouting 'Nothing happened! Nothing happened!' Even the lampposts had
voices, the manhole covers, the telephone poles, all shouting 'Nothing
happened!' to the human rights people converging on the city who, as they came
in from the airport, saw crews of workers cleaning the streets.''

And those who suffered forget in the sense that, as Cecilia puts it in her
further skeptical musings: ''Everyone would remember the same thing and her
desire was to record more than what was happening close up. . . . She wanted one
day to present it all with a passion equaling that of the men who imprisoned
her. Only that would be sufficient.'' Having taken as his theme the power of the
imagination and as his subject the fate of the disappeared, Mr. Thornton thus
offers both the embodiment of and a manifesto for the memorializing power of
literature, the moral force of the imagination transcribed.

A professor of English at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and the
author of a critical study, ''Unbodied Hope: Narcissism and the Modern Novel,''
Mr. Thornton has never been to Argentina, a fact perhaps betrayed by the
movie-lot quality of many of his scenes, overflowing with flowers and populated
by a myriad of tropical birds the plot only marginally justifies. But he
commands a tentative suspension of disbelief by borrowing heavily in his prose
style from the magic realism of the Latin American novelists, many of whom have
testified to the same pattern of events in their individual countries in recent
years.

And what the art fails to achieve is more than compensated for by the urgency of
his message - bearing witness matters because it rights the balance of power. We
have lived for decades now with Kafka's absurdist parables about the guilty
interplay of solipsism and submission. Here, in what reads like a deliberate
evocation and revision of key moments in ''The Trial,'' one of Mr. Thornton's
characters, imagined by Carlos, goes to his death because, though he has ''no
political ideas, no roots on any side,'' he has supported the playwright in open
defiance of the generals: ''He will cough blood. His guards will think they are
hearing a death rattle, and one will make a joke about it. That is when they
will hear Silvio, when one of them bends until his ear just about touches
Silvio's mouth. 'I am Silvio Ayala,' he will say. 'An Argentine. We are legion.'
'' Events in this century suggest we are all vulnerable to the trial, not just a
chosen few, and the law still wants fixing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Company As Target

BYLINE: By Ronnie Dugger: Ronnie Dugger, the publisher of The Texas Observer, is
writing a book on the ethical implications of nuclear weapons.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3113 words


ON A BRISK, BLUE MORNING LAST spring in Minneapolis, 1,100 men, women and
children, holding hands and singing peace songs, formed a double-strand human
chain around the headquarters of Honeywell Inc., the triangular, dark-red-brick
complex they call ''the death factory.''

In another time, the mostly middle-class demonstrators might have been marching
on Washington, calling for an end to the Vietnam War or for a nuclear freeze.
Now, they are part of a fast-growing national protest movement directed at a new
target: the companies that manufacture nuclear weapons systems. The movement's
members charge that nuclear weapons are instruments of mass murder and that
those who produce them are therefore potential mass murderers. The national
campaign of demonstrations, shareholder resolutions and boycotts is directed
against such corporate giants as General Dynamics, General Electric, Morton
Thiokol and Westinghouse.

On that morning last April, Honeywell's security guards were lined up behind
temporary, eight-foot-high wire-mesh fences, expecting the demonstrators to
clamber over on their wooden ladders as they had so many times before. This
time, the plan was different. Just before 9 o'clock, 14 members of the Honeywell
Project ducked underneath police sawhorses and sat down shoulder-to-shoulder,
blocking the glass doors of the building's south annex.

Slowly and gravely, the police arrested them, one by one, leading or carrying
them away to nearby police vans, frisking and handcuffing them and loading them
aboard. As each group was arrested, others moved in to block the doors.
Supporters on the legal side of the police barricades whooped, hollered, banged
drums and blew whistles. A chant went up: ''Stop the war machine.'' Towering 20
feet above the scene was a stick puppet of Uncle Sam as a skeleton, holding the
planet Earth - with a bite taken out of it - in his bony grasp.

By 11:30, a total of 177 citizens had been hauled away, including nurses and
poets, teachers and social workers, and Erica Bouza, the wife of the chief of
police. ''Now more than ever we have to pressure the government,'' she said as
she waited to be frisked. This was her fourth arrest for trespassing in protest
at Honeywell. ''My poor husband,'' she said. ''I hate making a spectacle of
myself.''

The 1,820 arrests at Honeywell since the antinuclear demonstrations began six
years ago have divided the community and swamped its court system. Erica Bouza
had already served 10 days in jail, five of them in solitary confinement after
anonymous threats had been made on her life. For this day's trespass she would
serve another 10 days.

The company's annual meeting that afternoon was a comparatively sedate affair.
The police confined about 100 demonstrators to a nearby park, far enough away
that their shouts could not be heard or their signs read by shareholders
entering the hall. Nevertheless, dissenting shareholders provided some
fireworks.

Sister Mary Ann McGivern, of the Sisters of Loretto in St. Louis, accused the
company of doing research on the Strategic Defense Initiative in ''the hope for
profit,'' which she said ''is fueling the arms race.'' This provoked the
chairman and chief executive officer, Edson W. Spencer, to reply from the stage:
''As a capable, competent defense supplier, we are proud to be able to respond
to the needs of our country.''

NUCLEAR WARHEADS and bombs are designed, manufactured and tested in Federal
facilities spread over 13 states. In fiscal year 1987, the cost was $7.5
billion, up from $3 billion in 1980. Thousands of private companies make the
systems for transporting, aiming and launching the weapons. For the systems
armed exclusively with nuclear weapons, the annual cost is estimated at $35
billion; when systems that can be armed with nuclear or conventional weapons are
counted in, the figure more than doubles. According to Nuclear Free America, an
antinuclear organization based in Baltimore, in 1986 the top 10 companies with
prime Government contracts for nuclear and/or dual-capable systems were, in
order of size of contract, General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell
International, Lockheed, General Electric, Westinghouse, Boeing, Eaton, Litton
Industries and United Technologies.

For four decades, the involvement of private companies in the nuclear-weapons
business aroused little notice and almost no public protest, and the companies
do not welcome any change in that situation. When television networks aired a
Government film clip four years ago showing an MX missile with the Westinghouse
logo on its tip, a company spokesman said, ''I could shoot the guy who painted
our logo on that warhead. Every time I see it, I wince.''

The movement against the nuclear-weapons companies takes a variety of forms.
This year, 55 church-related agencies and individuals have filed shareholder
resolutions asking 13 major American corporations to stop work on nuclear and
space weapons. Leading the effort is the Interfaith Center on Corporate
Responsibility, a New York-based group of 237 church and religious institutional
investors that spearheaded the campaign for disinvestment in South Africa.

A boycott against General Electric has been initiated by Infact, the
organization whose seven-year boycott against Nestle ultimately led that company
to reduce and modify its marketing of infant formula in third-world countries.
By last July, in its new action against G.E., Infact had collected 140,000
signed pledges from consumers promising not to buy G.E. products until the
company stops making nuclear weapons. Meanwhile, Nuclear Free America is
publishing pamphlets that list the consumer products of the top 50
nuclear-weapons contractors and has organized a boycott of Morton salt, the only
consumer product of Morton Thiokol.

Aided by books and reports that pinpoint nuclear-weapons production sites by
company, locality and even diocese, demonstrators have protested at dozens of
companies in recent years. According to The Nuclear Resister, a newsletter
published in Tucson, more than 3,000 antinuclear activists have been arrested
annually since 1983. These figures are expected to increase because of the
efforts of the Weapons Facilities Network, a newly organized combination of some
350 peace organizations brought together by National Mobilization for Survival.
The network has targeted seven nuclear-weapons companies and Federal
installations for national demonstrations next month.

The protesters hold corporate executives personally responsible for making the
means of ending life on earth and see them as ''psychically numb'' to the
implications of what they are doing.

With some exceptions, top executives of the nuclear-weapons industry refuse to
debate the issues with demonstrators or to discuss the subject with reporters.
Says William B. Pedace, director of communications for Electric Boat, a division
of the General Dynamics Corporation in Groton, Conn., where Trident submarines
are made: ''A number of years ago, it was decided that the best course for the
company and its employees was to avoid any confrontation whatsoever with
protesters, on the basis that we were probably on opposite sides of the fence
and neither one is going to change.''

Corporate strategies for dealing with the activists have developed willy-nilly.
G.E. is among the companies that have obtained court injunctions against
demonstrations, but G.E. officials have also written mollifying letters to
consumers who have threatened to boycott company products. Burlington Northern
Inc. has yielded to shareholder requests for written reports on its involvement
in the rail transportation of weapons materiel. The Monsanto Company agreed to
board-level reviews of new weapons contracts over $5 million.

For a year and a half, middle-level officials of the Westinghouse Electric
Corporation in Pittsburgh participated in a series of private and sometimes
harrowing meetings with activists who had been conducting vigils against the
company because of its nuclear-weapons work. But Westinghouse rebuffed the
protesters' proposal that the company establish an ethical-review process on
defense contracts, and the activists have continued passing out their leaflets
at the company's headquarters.

MINNEAPOLIS, SEPARATED from its sister city, St. Paul, by the Mississippi River,
is a green and clean community graced with lakes and parks. Many of its 365,000
people are descended from Scandinavian and German settlers. The work ethic is
strong there - lots of people get to the office by 7 A.M. Honeywell, which
employs 18,000 people in the area, has been a good corporate citizen for many
years, supporting youth development and special-education programs and giving
more than $1 million for the renovation of houses in the low-income neighborhood
where its home office is located. Honeywell also produces guidance-system
components for B-52 bombers and Trident and MX missiles.

When Sue Ann Martinson, a poet and Honeywell Project activist, asserts that the
Government gives money to the company ''to plan for the mass murder and
destruction of the world,'' the charge angers not only thousands of Minnesotans
whose lives have been touched for the better by Honeywell over the years, but
also many older people who still identify proudly with the World War II image of
the Honeywell worker as ''the man behind the man behind the gun.''

The company had its first encounters with public protest beginning in 1969
because it was manufacturing components for cluster bombs that were killing
civilians in Vietnam. The bitterness between the company and the members
climaxed in 1977 with the filing of a lawsuit charging that the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, working with Honeywell, had infiltrated the protest group.
(Two years ago, the Federal Government and Honeywell agreed to pay $35,000 each
in settlement of the suit.) After almost a decade of demonstrations, the
Honeywell Project fell into quiescence. Then, in 1981, an activist of the
Plowshares movement passed through the city and goaded some of the members into
tak-ing the company on again because of its nuclear work.

Plowshares - whose leaders have included Daniel and Philip Berrigan - is the
most audacious of the antinuclear protest groups. In more than 20 actions since
1980, Plowshares activists have invaded Government and corporate nuclear-weapons
facilities and damaged nuclear missiles, submarines and airplanes with hammers;
they have also poured human blood on weapons and blueprints. Some have been
sentenced to as many as 18 years in prison. While their tactics have alienated
elements of the broader peace movement, their influence has been critical. Says
Marv Davidov, a leader of the Honeywell Project, ''They move all the rest of
us.''

Spurred by the visitor from Plowshares, the Honeywell Project launched its first
mass protests on the nuclear issue in 1982. Within a year, more than 1,000
people were turning out for the demonstrations. Honeywell closed its plaza to
the demonstrators; they trespassed. The company took out full-page
advertisements in local newspapers to present its side of the issue, arguing,
for example, that ''voters, not companies, have the responsibility to determine
defense decisions.''

At first, according to Anthony Bouza, the police chief, Honeywell told police,
''You're not arresting them fast enough.'' Bouza says he tried ''to strike a
balance in a tortured path.'' By the end of 1986, the court system was so
clogged that small groups of trespassers were being tried as ''representatives''
of larger groups.

ONE EVENING A FEW YEARS ago, Edson Spencer, Honeywell's C.E.O., was talking with
Harlan Cleveland, then dean of the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public
Affairs at the University of Minnesota. ''Tell me,'' Spencer said, ''why do the
demonstrators at the gates think that because we make the weapons, we're dying
to have them used?'' As Cleveland recalls, he replied, ''It could be because
nobody thinks of Honeywell as invested in thinking about arms control, or seeing
to it that they don't get used.''

Out of that conversation grew a program called ''Prospects for Peacemaking,''
notably, four public forums in Minneapolis on national defense issues, sponsored
by the Humphrey Institute and underwritten by Honeywell and other organizations.
The institute has also helped organize several other such symposiums around the
country.

Members of the Honeywell Project were invited to participate in the forums, but
they refused. ''We would have been co-opted,'' says Marv Davidov. ''Being one
person on a 12-man panel settles matters in advance.''

DAVIDOV STATES HIS BASIC position frequently on many public platforms. ''It's
totally immoral,'' he says, ''to possess nuclear weapons or to threaten their
use.'' The anti-Honeywell activists do not couch their positions in a spirit of
compromise.

Mark Paquette, a young engineer who quit his job at Honeywell after directing
the company's testing on Pershing II missile components, repudiates the work he
did, citing the principle developed at the Nuremberg trials that ''the
responsibility for one's actions lies with one's self, no matter who gives the
orders.'' Paquette now says that what he did for Honeywell ''was nothing less,
and probably more, than the designing of the Nazi gas chambers.''

Edson Spencer rejects all comparisons of the present day with conditions in
Germany during the Third Reich. ''There was no way that those people could
change the policies of their government,'' he says. When pressed, in stockholder
meetings and in other public forums, Spencer urges those with a grievance about
nuclear weapons to take it to elected public officials. As for the ethics of his
company's building nuclear weapons components, he says, ''The defense of the
United States is the highest ethical consideration.''

Top officials of other corporations have taken similar positions. Rockwell
International's directors say that their company has a duty to work for the
military. Theodore F. Brophy, chairman and chief executive officer of the GTE
Corporation, says that his company is guided by the decisions of Congress.

Officials of GTE and Westinghouse have made the additional point that if their
companies did not do the work, others would. Notes Donald C. Burnham, a former
Westinghouse C.E.O., ''Economics is by far the primary consideration in making
decisions in industry. Will it earn a suitable profit?'' Railroad companies that
transport nuclear weapons contend that as common carriers they cannot refuse
Federal cargoes. The former chairman of the United Technologies Corporation,
Harry J. Gray, told his shareholders that when the company participates in the
building of a space vehicle, the Government, not the company, decides whether
''it has a warhead on it.''

THUS FAR, PROTESTERS HAVE not halted the manufacture of a single nuclear weapon,
and they do not seem to expect the companies to drop the work, so what is the
idea? The real objective, says Bruce Cronin, an activist with National
Mobilization for Survival, is ''to cause so much disruption around
nuclear-weapons facilities that the leaders of the Government will conclude that
they had better start negotiating with the Soviet Union to obtain meaningful
arms control agreements.''

Meanwhile, activists stand behind ironing boards in suburban malls, signing up
consumers against G.E., and Nancy Cole, executive director of Infact, says that
the organization's boycott will continue ''as long as it takes to stop G.E.
nuclear-weapons production - 8, 10, 15 years.'' John O. Mongoven, a consultant
who advised Nestle during the Infact boycott, says, ''It would be a big mistake
to underestimate these people.'' By ignoring the boycott, he says, Nestle ''let
it build up momentum.''

Valerie Heinonen of the Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility feels that
companies are taking shareholder resolutions against nuclear-weapons contracts
more seriously. ''We are more often and more consistently in an ongoing dialogue
with them,'' she says.

But so far, the big teachers' funds and university investors have not joined in.
''We don't have the critical mass we had in South Africa,'' says Timothy H.
Smith, the center's executive director, ''but it's moving in that direction.''

One morning recently, a retired vice president of Honeywell, musing in the
comfortable parlor of his home in Minneapolis, commented about his company's
involvement with nuclear weapons. ''You do feel a nagging worry,'' he said.
''But you let it pass.'' The new movement intends to make it even harder for
corporate leaders to let the matter pass. For the weekend of Oct. 24th - chosen
because it is the 25th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis - National
Mobilization for Survival and the Weapons Facilities Network are planning
coordinated national actions against Electric Boat in Groton, Conn.; the Federal
testing site at Cape Canaveral, Fla.; General Electric at Valley Forge, Pa.;
Kirtland Air Force Base in Albuquerque, N.M.; Lockheed at Sunnyvale and Santa
Cruz, Calif., and the Hanford nuclear reservation near Richland, Wash. The
network also plans a major action on Oct. 2 -Mahatma Gandhi's birthday - against
Honeywell in Minneapolis.

NUCLEAR-FREE ZONES

Antinuclear activists, in addition to their efforts directed specifically
against corporations making nuclear weapons systems, have also been urging
communities to declare themselves off-limits. Since 1982, more than 135 counties
and municipalities have voted to become nuclear-free zones. Last year, for
example, Chicago's City Council banned the design, production, deployment,
launching, maintenance or storage of nuclear weapons or systems within city
limits.

Moreover, according to Albert Donnay, director of Nuclear Free America, a
Baltimore-based organization, there are now eight cities and counties that
prohibit purchases from or investments in companies that manufacture nuclear
weapons systems. The list includes Jersey City and Hoboken, N.J., and Berkeley
and Marin County, both in California. The mayor of Takoma Park, Md., has written
to the heads of the top 50 nuclear weapons companies to tell them that the city
will not buy from them as long as they stay in that business. Some of the local
ordinances call for fines and jail terms for violations.

Many proposals for nuclear-free zones, however, have failed. Oregon voters last
year defeated a plan to require the phasing out of all nuclear-weapons-related
contracts by 1990. Cambridge, Mass., and Sonoma County, Calif., have also turned
down nuclear-free initiatives. - R.D.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of anti-nuclear demonstrators (Eli Reed/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER JOURNAL;
READING BANNED BOOKS

BYLINE: By Betsy Brown

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 3, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


Selections from books that were removed from school libraries around the country
in the last year will be read aloud in front of the Chappaqua Public Library
Saturday, beginning at noon. The event is part of Banned Books Week, an
observance sponsored by the American Library Association, the American
Booksellers Association, the Association of American Publishers, the American
Society of Journalists and Authors and the National Association of College
Stores.

A list of banned books is compiled each year by the American Library
Association. This year it includes 125 new titles - some banned completely, some
restricted or kept in locked cabinets by librarians, and others that were
challenged by school boards or parents but kept in circulation. All but three of
the titles became an issue at school libraries.

The books that were subjected to restrictions in public libraries were ''Show
Me,'' by Will McBride and Helga Fleischauer-Hardt, which was placed on
restrictive shelves in Alameda County, Calif., and challenged in Elmira, N.Y.;
''A Kid's First Book About Sex'' by Joani Blank, which was challenged in
Hammond, Ind.; and ''Talking With Your Child About Sex: Questions and Answers
for Children From Birth to Puberty,'' by Mary S. Calderone and James W. Ramey,
which was banned to young readers at the Gainesville, Ga., Public Library.

The books that stirred opposition in school libraries included classics, popular
works, books used in sex education and books on current events, religion and
ethics. Among them were Arthur Miller's ''Crucible'' and ''Death of a
Salesman''; Judy Blume's ''Blubber,'' challenged in Wisconsin ''because the
characters curse''; ''One Hundred Years of Solitude'' by Gabriel Garcia-Marquez,
winner of the 1982 Nobel Prize for Literature, purged from a book list in Wasco,
Calif., as ''garbage passed off as literature''; and ''Bloods: An Oral History
of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans'' by Terry Wallace, banned in Florida
because of ''harsh language and a moral danger to students.''

Shiela Zelermyer, art director at the Chappaqua Library and the organizer of the
event, said the librarians probably would not read the portions that led to
objections. ''We're not trying to appeal to the prurient,'' she said. ''A lot of
people think dirty books and banned books are the same. We're trying to show
that that's not so.''

A large number of the banned books will be on display in the library from Sept.
19 through 26.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Hue Massacre of 1968 Goes Beyond Hearsay

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 281 words


To the Editor:

An Aug. 26 story from Hue, Vietnam, where some of the fiercest fighting of the
Vietnam War took place in the 1968 Tet offensive, states, ''Hundreds, possibly
thousands, of people were reportedly killed by Communist forces during the Tet
offensive because they refused to cooperate, or had been singled out earlier as
potential obstructions. Officials here deny the charge, or refuse to discuss it,
as do ordinary Vietnamese, who say only: 'The people know what happened.' ''

This is like a story from Auschwitz saying that ''thousands, possibly millions,
of Jews were reportedly killed by the Nazis during the war.''

The massacre of thousands of civilians by the Communists during the 25 days they
occupied Hue in February 1968 is well established. By the mid-1970's, 2,810
bodies had been found in mass graves in the vicinity of Hue, and 1,946 people
were still missing.

According to Douglas Pike, who investigated the massacre for the United States
Embassy, those killed included officials and ''natural leaders'' whose names
were on the Communist blacklist, students and intellectuals who were considered
a threat to the new order and those who had been arrested for indoctrination.

The victims were buried secretly in mass graves, most of which have been
discovered. But the lack of knowledge of what happened shows that the Communists
have been successful in keeping the Hue massacre a secret. The discovery of the
graves received minimal attention in our media, and it was not until 1985 that
footage of the bodies being exhumed was shown on any of our television networks.


REED IRVINE
Chairman, Accuracy in Media
  Washington, Sept. 2, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 23, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Democrats in Senate to Seek Limit on Gulf Involvement

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


Democratic leaders in the Senate announced tonight that they were drafting new
legislation that would place significant limits on the American military
presence in the Persian Gulf.

Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the majority leader, said the new
measure was not yet in its final form. But a spokesman for the Democratic
leadership said the measure, if enacted, would probably set up a mechanism under
which Congress would review early next year the Reagan Administration's policy
of having Navy vessels escort oil tankers in the gulf beyond the next six
months.

The measure is likely to be offered as an amendment to the military
authorization bill, perhaps as early as Wednesday.

Democratic leaders are convinced that any legislative effort directing President
Reagan to invoke the War Powers Act in the Persian Gulf would probably fail.
Last Friday, the Senate defeated such a measure by a vote of 50 to 41.

'Legislation That Can Pass'

''The driving force'' behind the new measure, the spokesman said, ''was to find
legislation that can pass.''

The new effort on Capitol Hill was prompted by President Reagan's assertion
earlier in the day that the latest shooting incident in the gulf would not cause
him to invoke the War Powers Act.

That act requires a President to inform Congress within 48 hours when he
introduces troops into a situation of ''imminent hostilities.'' The troops must
be withdrawn within 60 days unless Congress specifically authorizes their
continued presence. The 60-day period can be extended an additional 30 days at
the President's request.

A number of lawmakers from both parties said today that the incident in the gulf
Monday, in which the Administration said an American helicopter fired on an
Iranian ship that was laying mines, clearly falls within the War Powers Act.

'Vietnam All Over Again'

Senator Ernest F. Hollings, a South Carolina Democrat, said, ''This is just
exactly what the War Powers Act had in mind.''

Senator Brock Adams, a Washington Democrat, added, ''This is Vietnam all over
again.''

But Democratic strategists said that opposition to invoking the act was probably
too difficult to overcome. Many lawmakers, including some who oppose the
Administration's Persian Gulf policy, are concerned about the rigid timetable in
the act, and about appearing to rebuff the Administration at a time when
American military men are in action in the gulf.

''There's a reluctance to vote for something that opens you to an attack that
you're cutting and running,'' said Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, a senior
Democrat on the Armed Services Committee. ''You don't want to be accused of
undoing the policy.''

No Shift in U.S. Policy

The Administration has insisted that the War Powers Act does not cover the
Persian Gulf situation. Today, President Reagan was asked if Monday's incident
had changed his mind. The President answered that it had not.

Marlin Fitzwater, the President's spokesman, explained afterward: ''We don't
feel there's any change in our policy with regard to the war powers resolution.
This was a defensive act on the part of the United States forces, and therefore
we don't feel that there needs to be any change.''

An argument cited by those who oppose invoking the War Powers Act is that
setting a 60-day limit on the American presence in the gulf would undermine the
President's ability to exert influence in the region.

''The message would be one of weakness rather than strength,'' said Senator Dan
Quayle of Indiana, a senior Republican on the Armed Services Committee.

To meet criticisms of this sort, the bill being drafted tonight would place a
much longer limit on an American presence, probably six months. In that way,
Congress would still be able to exert some influence over gulf policy while
allowing the Administration more flexibility in the region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Iranian Says Arms Affair Guides U.S. Actions

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 539 words


Hojatolislam Ali Khamenei, the President of Iran, asserted yesterday that the
United States was deliberately ''dragging the Persian Gulf to war'' in response
to domestic political pressures, including President Reagan's need ''to project
himself as a powerful and decisive person'' after the Iran-contra affair.

The Iranian leader, on the last day of a three-day visit to New York for the
opening of the United Nations General Assembly, vehemently rejected the charge
by the United States that his country sowed mines in international waters in the
gulf.

American naval units Monday night shot and severely damaged an Iranian vessel
that the United States said had been observed placing mines in the gulf.

Hojatolislam Khamenei also said his country was not afraid of any economic or
military sanctions that might be brought if it fails to observe a call for a
cease-fire in the gulf. The United States has proposed sanctions, including an
international arms embargo, that would be imposed through the United Nations
Security Council.

Arms-Making Capability

He said Iran manufactured ''much of the weapons we want at home, and there are
many sellers'' on the international black market for arms.

Independent observers have said that Iran produces as much as 65 percent to 75
percent of its arms.

The Iranian leader spoke at several meetings with journalists on the last day of
his visit. The meetings, including a breakfast and a news conference, were part
of a campaign by Iran to counter efforts to impose such sanctions and to portray
itself as the victim in the Persian Gulf war. But these efforts were quickly
overshadowed by the mine-laying episode in the gulf.

''This incident in the Persian gulf will no doubt monopolize part of our
discussions here,'' the Iranian President said in acknowledgement.

Threat of Revenge

Hojatolislam Khamenei also tried to draw parallels between the presence of the
United States in the gulf and its long involvement in Vietnam.

In repeating threats that Iran will take its ''revenge'' for Iranian sailors
killed in the American attack, he told the audience of American journalists:
''Today, it is us who receive the dead bodies of our sons, but if God forbid the
day comes when you will receive the dead bodies of your sons, people will say,
'Why didn't you stop it?' ''

The Iranian official described as categorically false American accusations that
Iran was sowing mines in the gulf, but he added that even if the Iranian vessel
had been laying mines, the United States Navy ''did not have to fire.''

He said the ship ''could have been surrounded, seized and taken,'' and he asked,
''What does the U.S. say to defend the killing of people on an unarmed ship?''

Relations With Neighbors

Hojatolislam Khamenei vehemently attacked Saudi Arabia for the Mecca riots in
which more than 400 men and women died, including 324 Iranians, saying the
deaths marked a very bloody and ''decisive'' point in Iranian-Saudi relations.
He said Teheran wanted to maintain friendly relations with other Arab states.

He also repeated that Iran cannot be assured of lasting peace with Iraq until
the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, and his Baathist regime are removed from
power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hojatolislam Ali Khamenei (NYT/Bonnie Geller)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Traces of Dioxin Found in Range Of Paper Goods

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1427 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


Traces of the toxic chemical dioxin have been found in a wide range of paper
products, industry officials said today.

Although minute dioxin contamination of paper could be pervasive, the industry
studies said, they specifically mentioned food packaging, disposable diapers,
tampons and paper tissue as tainted. Studies of these and other paper products
are continuing.

Any product made from pulp contaminated with dioxin would likely contain it,
industry spokesmen said. They said it had not yet been determined how many of
the nation's paper mills produced the contaminated paper.

Debating the Risk

Experts disagree over whether the traces of dioxin pose a threat to human
health. The industry spokesmen said the data collected so far indicated that the
dioxins posed little or no danger to public health because their levels were low
and the movement of the chemical from the products to the human body was
minimal.

The Environmental Protection Agency disclosed today that a Congressionally
mandated study of dioxin contamination across the country had found less
contamination than officials had expected in land and water. But data on water
pollution from paper mills, gathered in the course of this broader study, led
industry and Government researchers to focus on the possibility of paper
contamination.

Federal environmental officials said today that the contamination of paper
products with dioxin needed further study and that it remained to be seen
whether there was a public health problem that required regulation.

''If it is at the low levels described by the industry, it is not something to
be ignored but it is not something to break out in a cold sweat about either,''
Dr. John A. Moore, Assistant Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency for Pesticides and Toxic Substances, said in a telephone interview.

Environmentalists contended that the presence of dioxin in products that come in
contact with food or with sensitive parts of the body, where the chemical might
be absorbed, presented a possibly serious health threat.

Privately sponsored research on possible health hazards from the contamination,
in cooperation with the Environmental Protection Agency, is continuing, trade
spokesmen said.

Dioxin, an unwanted byproduct of many chemical processes, has been found to
cause cancer, damage to the immune system and birth defects when administered to
some species of animals, even in extremely low doses. Based on the animal tests,
the Federal environmental agency classifies dioxin as a ''probable human
carcinogen.''

Human Danger Questioned

However, studies of humans exposed to dioxin have not shown a similar reaction
and there is considerable debate in the scientific community over how dangerous
dioxin is to humans. The only health problem universally conceded to be caused
by dioxin is an acute form of acne.

Studies have attempted to determine whether soldiers exposed in Vietnam to
dioxin, a contaminant of the herbicide Agent Orange, have suffered health
effects. These studies have been mired in controversy and most experts say they
have been inconclusive so far.

Dr. Moore of the E.P.A. said the disclosure that dioxins are found in consumer
paper products may help explain why traces are being found in the body tissue of
virtually everybody.

He said his agency had recently completed a major study on dioxin contamination
around the country. The presence of the chemical in paper products had not been
suspected before the study, Dr. Moore and industry spokesmen said.

A major surprise from the study, which had been scheduled for release next week,
was that fish in streams near paper mills had high levels of dioxin that made
them dangerous for human consumption, Dr. Moore said.

More Study Set

As a result, the E.P.A. will now look at some 90 paper mills around the country
to determine to what extent each mill's paper is contaminated by dioxin and to
''find out how we can reduce the levels.'' He said that in light of the new
study, the Food and Drug Administration would take a ''hard look'' at the
contamination of consumer paper products to determine if regulatory action is
needed.

The paper industry began its study after learning of the results of the broader
E.P.A. study. The industry has not yet determined the magnitude of the
contamination of paper products because the amount of dioxin in the pulp appears
to vary widely from mill to mill, according to Red Cavaney, President of the
American Paper Institute, the industry's trade association.

Michael C. Farrar, vice president of the association in charge of its
environmental and health program, said the dioxin contamination occurs when
paper is bleached with chlorinated compounds in a practice that industry experts
say has been common for decades. The breakdown of these compounds forms dioxin.

The spokesmen were responding to questions about internal industry documents
showing that industry executives were concerned about public response when the
contamination of paper products became known.

Contaminated Office Paper

Mr. Cavaney said ''trace levels'' of dioxin are being found in ''personal care''
products such as tissues, paper towels, diapers and sanitary napkins, and on
various kinds of paper used in offices. He said newsprint had not been examined.

The spokesmen said the industry was now studying ways that dioxins might
''migrate'' from paper into the body. They said most food packaging was coated
by wax or plastic, which would probably reduce or eliminate the movement of
dioxin, but they added that they did not have full evidence.

''Using everything that can be measured currently, there is no hazard to human
health,'' Mr. Cavaney said.

'No Apparent Solution''

He added that if it proves necessary, the industry would take steps to reduce
the levels of dioxin produced in the papermaking process. But he added, ''there
is no readily apparent solution to the problem.''

Dr. Ellen K. Silbergeld, a toxicologist for the Environmental Defense Fund, a
private environmental group that has long been concerned about the health
hazards of low exposures to dioxin, noted that the E.P.A. study had found
2,3,7,8 TCDD, the most toxic form of dioxin, in paper pulp at levels ranging up
to 350 parts per trillion. She pointed out that the agency required chemical
makers to report the presence of dioxin in their products at levels of 100 parts
per trillion. Therefore the amount found in paper pulp, which is formed into
paper products, is not negligible, she said.

Dr. Silbergeld said that because these products are used to package food or come
in contact with sensitive parts of the body, ''people clearly are getting
exposed to and absorbing dioxin.'' She said that in the past the E.P.A. had
argued that because dioxin tended to remain fixed in soil or sediments of
streams, it did not generally find its way into the human body. Now, she said,
an obvious pathway into the body has been established.

She also said that while there may be a continuing debate on whether dioxin is a
cause of cancer in humans, the weight of evidence shows that it has effects on
the human immune system and causes birth defects and damage to fetuses.

''I think we are facing a national health problem,'' she said.

The two-year E.P.A. study of dioxin contamination, included thousands of
inspections of sites suspected of being contaminated. It found serious
contamination largely limited to sites that had produced such pesticides as
silvex, which produced dioxin as a byproduct, and at some 79 waste disposal
sites. The widespread dispersal of materials contaminated with dioxin of the
kind that occurred in Missouri when it was sprayed on roads and other areas in
waste oil, was not found in other areas the report said.

Rare in Rural Areas

Contamination by 2,3,7,8 TCDD, the form of dioxin on which the study
concentrated, ''was found infrequently in urban and rarely in rural background
soils,'' even in the parts per trillion level, the report stated.

The agency did find, however, fish contaminated with dioxin in a number of
areas, particularly the Great Lakes and in such major river systems as the
Mississippi and Ohio Rivers.

The report noted that earlier studies had found dioxins emitted from waste
incinerators and from smelters.

E.P.A. officials said that the results of this report indicated that the
nation's dioxin contamination problems could be handled through the existing
toxic waste cleanup program because it is not that ubiquitous a contaminant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAPTIVE IRANIANS SAID TO HELP U.S. FIND MINES IN GULF

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1453 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger said today that captured Iranian Navy
sailors had provided information allowing the United States to recover at least
three mines the Iranians had laid in the Persian Gulf.

On the eve of his departure on a trip to the gulf region, Mr. Weinberger said
the 22 unwounded Iranian crew members who have been detained aboard American
warships in the gulf had provided information aiding in the mine recovery. He
said he expected more mines to be found.

Iranian officials have asserted that the ship attacked late Monday night by
American helicopters was not laying mines. But Mr. Weinberger showed pictures of
mines aboard the captured Iranian ship. Moves in the U.N.  At the United Nations
today, Britain announced it had closed an Iranian arms-purchasing office after
an Iranian attack Monday on an empty British tanker in the gulf. Britain called
for sanctions against Iran for its refusal to honor a Security Council
cease-fire resolution, but China, the Soviet Union and France expressed
ambivalence about such a step. [Page A13.] President Reagan, facing an effort in
Congress to set a cutoff date for the United States Navy escorts in the gulf,
said today that such a move would be ''a great mistake.''

White House officials asserted today that the forceful American action against
the Iranian mine-laying operation had helped renew confidence in the United
States among its allies in the region - confidence that had been weakened by the
Iran-contra affair. They expressed concern that any Congressional move to
curtail the American naval presence in the region could undermine that
confidence.

Senate Considering Curb

The Senate is considering a proposal by the Democratic leadership that would end
financing for the American presence in the gulf after 90 days, unless Mr. Reagan
certified halfway through that period that it was still required. The measure,
in an amendment to a defense authorization bill, is scheduled to be debated
Thursday and may come to a vote Thursday night.

In a speech to the United Nations General Assembly on Monday, Mr. Reagan said
the American naval forces would be withdrawn only ''when the tension
diminishes.''

Speaking briefly to reporters in the Oval Office today, the President said
setting a withdrawal date ''would simply be an encouragement for others to
wait'' for the United States to leave before resuming attacks on oil tankers
flying the American flag. He was apparently referring to Iran.

Mr. Weinberger, describing what the American forces had learned after their
clash with the Iranian vessel on Monday, said that the mines being laid were
''standard World War II-type mines of very recent manufacture'' and that they
had probably been made in Iran. Iranian officials have said they had the ability
to produce large numbers of such mines.

''It was a regular navy ship,'' Mr. Weinberger said of the Iranian vessel. ''It
was a landing craft, and it was stuffed with mines. The idea that it was a
merchant ship carrying foodstuffs is about as nonsensical as most of the other
Iranian statements over the past few years.''

Of the Iranian sailors, Mr. Weinberger said, ''They have volunteered a great
many statements to us about the fact of the mining, the number of mines they put
down, and essentially where they put them, although we were pretty well aware of
that.''

The Iranian ship was reported to be under tow by the American vessels, which
were proceeding toward Bahrain. On Tuesday, American ships fired warning shots
at an Iranian naval Hovercraft approaching the stricken vessel.

Administration officials have justified the attack by saying the mines were
being laid in an anchorage northeast of Bahrain used by American warships and
commercial ships of other nations.

''We've located, I think, three of the six specifically now,'' Mr. Weinberger
said, ''and will continue to clear the waters of the very lethal weapons.''

Film shot by an authorized television crew aboard the American flagship in the
area, the LaSalle, showed 10 mines, mounted on wheeled canisters, aboard the
Iranian vessel, the Iran Ajr. The canisters would act as anchors after a
water-soluble seal dissolved, allowing the mines to float upward on cables.

Captured Sailors Shown

The footage also showed captured Iranian sailors lined up on stretchers, their
wrists bound by plastic handcuffs and wearing outsized American Navy-issue
bell-bottom blue jeans and white undershirts saying ''U.S.S. LaSalle.'' They
were guarded by American sailors wearing flak jackets over dungaree work
uniforms and carrying shotguns and rifles.

Mr. Weinberger said the sailors aboard the Iranian ship - three of them were
killed in the attack, four were wounded, and two were listed as missing - were
from the regular Iranian Navy. A press pool dispatch from the scene quoted Navy
officers as saying the same thing, but leaving open the possibility that some
crewmen were members of the Revolutionary Guards, who had earlier been reported
laying mines on the other side of the gulf.

The Defense Secretary, who said his trip to the gulf, Saudi Arabia and Egypt had
been planned some time ago, said the Iranian prisoners would be repatriated soon
through the Red Crescent, an organization similar to the Red Cross.

Mr. Weinberger said the transfer would take place in Oman, the Arab nation just
across the Strait of Hormuz from Iran at the mouth of the Persian Gulf. United
States military aircraft have access to bases there, as do warships
occasionally.

Press reports from the region said a convoy centered on the Kuwaiti tanker Gas
Prince, which has been re-registered as an American vessel, had left Kuwait
bound for the Strait of Hormuz. Mr. Weinberger denied that, but Administration
officials suggested that such a convoy would be under way shortly.

Army Helicopters Used

Mr. Weinberger confirmed for the first time officially that the helicopters that
carried out the attack shortly before midnight Monday, Persian Gulf time, were
from the Army. Previously, Pentagon officials had declined to identify the
attackers.

The Secretary, however, would not confirm that the helicopters had come from a
secretive unit known as Task Force 160, which is based at Fort Campbell, Ky.,
and is trained to operate behind enemy lines.

The action in Congress to limit the stay of the American naval forces in the
gulf was put forward as an alternative to invoking the War Powers Act, which
would narrow the President's options even more.

In interviews today and Tuesday night, Mr. Weinberger vigorously asserted that
the War Powers Act was unconstitutional. Many members of Congress, primarily
Democrats, have demanded that the President invoke it to cover American forces
in the Persian Gulf.

The act, adopted by Congress after the war in Vietnam, requires the President to
notify Congress of American forces engaged in hostilities within 48 hours of the
action. It further requires the President to withdraw those forces from hostile
areas within 60 days unless Congress approves an extension.

''We have always felt it was unconstitutional,'' Mr. Weinberger said, ''an
infringement by the Congress on the constitutional authority of the President to
conduct foreign policy and to be the commander in chief of the forces.''

Bid for Court Test Denied

Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, echoed that thinking in a news
briefing, but denied the Administration was trying to provoke a test in Federal
courts. If a court challenge was mounted, it would almost certainly lead to a
decision by the Supreme Court.

Mr. Fitzwater also said today that the United States ''will begin immediately to
consult with other members of the Security Council about a second resolution
that would place an arms embargo against Iran.''

''In the face of certain evidence that Iran has been laying mines in
international waters,'' Mr. Fitzwater said today, ''we think the prospects for
passage of sanctions are good.''

He held firmly to the White House position that the naval presence in the gulf
does not require the Administration to invoke the War Powers Act, under which
the President must inform Congress within 48 hours after he places American
forces in a situation facing ''imminent hostilities.'' With that official
notification, the forces must be withdrawn in 60 days unless Congress authorizes
their continued presence.

Even though an American helicopter fired on an Iranian ship, killing three
Iranian sailors, Mr. Fitzwater said, the situation still did not warrant
invoking the act because ''we took a defensive action against the laying of
mines in the gulf, but the general condition of hostilities has not changed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawings; photo of crewmen aboard the LaSalle (Reuters) (page A12);
photo of Iranian crewman aboard the LaSalle (page A12); photo of U.S. helicopter
hoovering over Iranian vessel (page A12); graph of poll results on attitudes
toward U.S. attack in Persian Gulf

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEW;
'TOUR OF DUTY,' IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


WITH the Korean War as a backdrop, ''M*A*S*H'' managed to bring to CBS a
long-running, enormously successful weekly series. Now the network is obviously
searching for more of the same in ''Tour of Duty,'' the new series getting under
way at 8 o'clock tonight.

The problem is that the backdrop this time is the Vietnam War, a conflict that
doesn't conform easily to esablished gather-round-the-flag patterns. The war
itself left much of this country shattered by widespread protests and open
resistance to military service. Riddled with scandals about drugs, ''fragging''
and massacres, it was a war the United States eventually lost. We are still
recovering from the trauma, only recently attending to neglected veterans.

The painful subject of the Vietnam experience has been explored in a series of
thoughtful and provocative films, from ''Apocalypse Now'' to ''Platoon'' to
''Full Metal Jacket.'' The success of ''Platoon,'' in particular, seems to have
prompted CBS to conclude that prime-time television entertainment is ready to
tackle the Vietnam experience. Executives have conceded, of course, that certain
realities would have to be toned down or eliminated. Foul language is still
frowned upon at the commercial networks. And with an anti-drug campaign being
widely publicized, it just wouldn't do to show soldiers strenuously smoking
marijuana. Hurdles, perhaps, but not insurmountable.

But ''Tour of Duty,'' made in Hawaii with Zev Braun and Bill L. Norton as the
executive producers, goes further. The network has stated that it is interested
in ''not the fatigue, not the sweat, not the atrocities, not all that,'' but
rather, ''it's the brotherhood, the kinship.'' One executive summed it up: ''We
aren't going to wallow in grimness and negativity.'' In short, Vietnam is going
to be processed through the same uncomplicated-heroism mills that John Wayne and
Victor McLaglen made popular in World War II, when there was no doubt about
commitment and issues of right and wrong.

The result is television revisionism of the worst, most pandering sort. With
grimness and negativity out, buddy stories and inspiration are in, generally
with a thud. Following a platoon on a 12-month tour of duty, the show is
determined to transform Vietnam into an experience of uplifting tolerance and
reconciliation. With a deep bow to ''M*A*S*H,'' the opening credits feature
helicopters appearing over the top of a hill. The year is 1967 and, as more and
more North Vietnamese soldiers are spotted in combat, the Americans are
beginning to realize that they are in ''a whole new war.''

The titular head of Company B is Capt. Rusty Wallace (Kevin Conroy), but the
driving force is a tough sergeant named Zeke Anderson (Terence Knox). Ten
minutes into this first hour, Zeke goes through enough battle heroics to earn
any ordinary soldier at least a Medal of Honor and a couple of Silver Stars.
''By the way,'' his commander says the next day, ''you did a good job last
night.'' ''Hell,'' replies Zeke, ''I'm alive and you can't do better than
that.'' Then Zeke sets about recruiting some new ''grunts'' for his platoon,
pointedly warning that ''I don't want any dopers.''

As luck would have it, Zeke winds up with a cross section of America: a black
from the Motown area of Detroit, a Puerto Rican from the Bronx, a blond surfer
from California, a gung-ho volunteer from Iowa and so on, right down to the
unit's medic, a Japanese-American from Santa Monica. Complicating matters
slightly is the presence of Private Horn (Joshua Maurer), an antiwar college
dropout from Chicago. Why would Zeke choose a war protester for his platoon?
Well, it seems Zeke is just crazy about blues music and Private Horn plays a
mean blues harmonica. ''Paul Butterfield is a friend of mine,'' the private
tells an astonished Zeke.

By the first episode's end, Private Horn, who has refused to carry a rifle into
battle, is saving Zeke's life by stabbing a ''gook'' sniper. ''I killed him,''
says the shaken private. ''No, what you did was save our lives,'' Zeke assures
him. ''This war is wrong,'' insists the private. ''Maybe, but that's not the
point,'' says Zeke.

In trying to be all things to all people, if possible without offending anybody,
''Tour of Duty'' winds up firmly on the side of saying nothing and distorting
everything. In search of feelings, it succeeds only in being pointless and even
offensive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from ''Tour of Duty''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 26, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Gephardt Mistake Is Conceded

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 36, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 278 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla., Sept. 25


A fund-raising letter by Representative Richard A. Gephardt saying that more
Vietnam veterans have died by suicide than were killed in the Vietnam War was a
mistake, but Mr. Gephardt is not planning a retraction, his aides said.

The statement in a July mailing ''slipped through'' the checking system of the
Missouri Congressman's campaign for the Democratic nomination for President,
said Don Foley, Mr. Gephardt's press secretary.

In the mailing, Mr. Gephardt wrote, ''The Reagan Administration has cut aid to
veterans while more Vietnam veterans have committed suicide than were killed in
the war.''

''It is not true,'' Mr. Foley told The Tampa Tribune Thursday. ''We regret the
error and we certainly will not repeat it and will do what we can to see that it
does not get further play.'' Of the three million American soldiers who served
in Vietnam between 1961 and 1975, 58,000 died there.

Mr. Foley said that despite the error, first pointed out by a representative of
the Vietnam Veterans of America: ''We do not have plans to send letters back to
the people we initially wrote to, but we are freely pointing out our error and
acknowledge that it was an error we also repeated.''

Barry Kasinitz, a spokesman for the Vietnam Veterans of America, said the
assertion about suicide was ''a very old and unfortunate statement that got
circulated'' and continues to emerge.

The statement was meant to criticize President Reagan's proposed budgets, not
actual Federal spending, Mr. Foley said. The sentence at issue was supposed to
demonstrate that ''the Administration's intention was to cut'' the budget ''at
the same time problems were growing,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TAX EXEMPTIONS BENEFIT VETERANS

BYLINE: By HAROLD FABER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 55, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 401 words

DATELINE: ALBANY


New partial property tax exemptions were granted to 197,000 veterans in 1985,
the first year a new state law granted the benefit, the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment said recently.

As a result, the veterans - most from the Vietnam War - collectively saved $18.3
million in county, city or town taxes in 1985 - an average of less than $100 a
year for each veteran, the board said in its first report on the law's impact.

The law was passed to make it easier for Vietnam War veterans and some Korean
War veterans to obtain the tax exemptions. Most of these veterans had not
received many of the cash benefits, available to veterans of earlier wars, that
had been the basis for partial tax exemptions, such as mustering-out pay and
some insurance payments.

The board called the $18.3 million figure a ''significant change.'' In 1984,
veterans' tax exemptions amounted to $76.2 million, the board said in port.

Expected Rise in Applicants

The new exemptions removed $1.6 billion of property value from being taxed for
general municipal purposes, shifting the burden for those taxes to non-exempt
property owners. The exemptions did not, however, affect school taxes paid by
the veterans.

With the new additions to the exempt roll, the number of veterans who are now
partially exempt from property taxes - mostly World War II veterans - stands at
655,000, the report said.

The largest number of the veterans are in New York City, with 92,706. Nassau
County has 92,025, Suffolk County 85,258, and Westchester 24,834.

The number of exemptions is likely to rise this year as more veterans become
aware they can apply for the tax benefit, said Joseph T. Pierson, a spokesman
for the board. #3 New Categories ''In its first year of operation, the numbers
show that the intent of the Legislature is working,'' Mr. Pierson said. ''The
law is now treating Korean and Vietnam veterans as well as the World War II
veterans.''

Under the new law, three categories of veterans exemptions were created: a 15
percent exemption, with a maximum of $12,000, for those on active duty during a
period of war; an additional $10,000 of exemption for those who served in a
combat zone, and an exemption, not to exceed $40,000, for those who sustained
disability.

The wartime and combat zone exemptions are limited to a period of 10 years.
There is no time limit on the duration of the disability exemption.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM;
MATTHEW MODINE PLOTS THE COURSE TO CHARACTER

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1403 words


MATTHEW MODINE CAN walk New York streets and blend into the crowd, thanks to an
odd coincidence: in his most-admired screen roles he has a shaved head. ''People
don't recognize me,'' he says, just half a block from a theater where he is
starring in Stanley Kubrick's ''Full Metal Jacket.'' Only later, when Mr. Modine
pulls out a pink bandanna and ties his longish, sandy hair off his forehead,
does he reveal the facial features - poised right on the line between sharp and
sensitive - of his characters: the title role in ''Birdy'' as a gentle, troubled
youth who escapes to an imaginary world; Private Joker, the philosophical marine
who wears a peace symbol into battle in Vietnam in ''Full Metal Jacket.''

Mr. Modine has the same skinhead look in ''Orphans,'' but this time it's goodbye
Mr. Sensitive. As Treat, the small-time thief so full of misguided love that he
imprisons his brother in their crumbling house, Matthew Modine gets to pull a
knife and, in a thick ''New Yawk'' accent, threaten to cut a man's heart out.

In real life, Mr. Modine, who was born in California and raised mostly in Utah,
has a slangy Northwestern casualness to his speech, and a mischievous glint in
his eye that livens up his all-American looks. He always seems to be figuring
things out, like where to hold a morning interview. The house where he lives
with his wife and 2-year-old child is being renovated, he says; coffee shops are
too loud for tape recording, so Mr. Modine suggests a drive in his new pick-up
truck to sit by the Hudson River. As it turns out, the tiny parking lot he had
in mind is full, the best spot he can find is surrounded by noisy construction.
The quirky plan was not self-important or silly; it was just Matthew Modine
trying to figure things out.

For someone as thoughtful as Mr. Modine, doing ''Full Metal Jacket'' and
''Orphans'' back to back was a feast of challenges, which gave him two wildly
different acting experiences. Mr. Kubrick's movie took nearly a year to film in
London, while Alan Pakula made ''Orphans'' in just nine weeks - including
rehearsals - in New York.

Coming to ''Orphans'' right after finishing ''Full Metal Jacket,'' Mr. Modine
says, was ''great for me because the work in London was so stretched out and
methodical. In London we were making a souffle: Don't anybody clap his hands
because it'll drop. Doing 'Orphans' was like going into this pressure cooker,
with steam and the whistle going, where things are going to get done - Wham! It
was like home cooking, when your Mom's gotta do something quick and make
something great.'' Joker is Mr. Modine's third soldier - after Birdy and a
recruit in Robert Altman's ''Streamers'' - and the most complex. ''This is the
kind of role you spend your lifetime preparing for,'' he says. Now 27 years old,
he was a child during the Vietnam years, but three of his four older brothers
were in the war. ''I was certainly old enough to understand what was going on.
It was very abstract, like listening to baseball scores. We killed 10 of theirs,
they killed 10 of ours. I was probably interested in the role from having grown
up with it.''

Especially in the movie's first half, an excruciatingly effective black-comedy
view of boot camp, Mr. Modine says, ''you try not to color it with your opinions
because boot camp isn't about characterization or personality, it's about
selflessness. You're taught your whole life not to hurt other people, not to
kill other people; but when you go into a system like the Marines, those rules
suddenly don't apply anymore.'' As he tries to describe the film, Mr. Modine is
as far as he can be from a glib, interview-weary star. He thinks out loud,
gropes for precise words, comes up with examples and comparisons and then still
worries that he hasn't explained the role quite right.

Joker, he says, ''doesn't have a name in the film. He's Private Joker from the
get-go; he could be any soldier in any war. He has so many contradictions.
That's what I think is great about the film. When you watch it, you don't know
who to cheer for. You want to live in a world of peace, but if you scrape the
veneer a little bit and get into man's psyche, he becomes an animal; there's a
beast just beneath this thin facade of peace.''

Joker refers to this idea as ''the duality of man''; Treat is the other side of
sensitive, a man whose civilized veneer was scraped away long ago. So when Mr.
Modine read the ''Orphans'' script in England, he assumed he was being thought
of as the helpless younger brother, but he did not want to play another
innocent. Alan Pakula says he always thought Mr. Modine was Treat's age, not
Phillip's, but ''I'd say there was a one in 20 chance of his playing the role.''
Mr. Pakula says that when Mr. Modine came to his London hotel to discuss the
film, the actor ''had a shaved head and is very tall, so he looked intimidating.
We talked and he made me laugh a lot. I saw colors that were not in the roles
he'd done.''

Mr. Pakula went on to see many other actors, he said, but ''kept being haunted
by Matthew. He was a risky choice. I don't think I've ever cast anyone before
and had less idea of what he was going to do with the role. But I've always had
one rule: When in doubt go with the talent.'' Mr. Pakula cast Mr. Modine and
thought, ''Let's keep our fingers crossed and pray a lot.''

During early rehearsals, the crossed fingers didn't seem to help. Mr. Modine's
look came easily enough. Because he was still a skinhead from ''Full Metal
Jacket,'' he put on a wig. It softened his features too much, and Mr. Pakula
remembered that Mr. Modine without hair looked more threatening. The accent came
more slowly. Mr. Modine says, ''I was speaking the way I speak, and none of the
jokes were working. We started to wonder if it was all a mistake.'' One day he
and his co-stars, Albert Finney and Kevin Anderson, were playing around with
''white trash, urban guerrilla'' accents, joking about what they called ''the
New York school of acting, because for a period it seems that's all New York
actors did.'' He demonstrates, and it sounds like Robert De Niro, circa ''Mean
Streets.'' ''I started doing Treat that way and suddenly everything fell into
place. It was so obvious, we all felt really stupid we hadn't noticed it sooner.
Honestly, it was two or three days before we started filming.''

Treat is a lot simpler to describe than Joker, but Mr. Modine pulls out another
quirky example. He remembers an experiment in which baby monkeys, taken from
their mothers and denied any nurturing, became crazy. The orphaned Treat is
''like that unloved monkey''; he kept his brother locked away because ''he got
scared he was going to lose the one thing he did have.''

That feeling worked off-camera as well. Because Mr. Anderson and Mr. Finney
co-starred in ''Orphans'' on the London stage, Mr. Modine was the odd man out -
like Treat, who feels emotionally shut out as a bond grows between Phillip and
the strange man who takes over their lives. ''Kevin and Albert were very good
friends in London and continued their friendship,'' Mr. Modine says. ''They had
a really good repertoire of shtick they would do, which alienated me because I
wasn't in on the joke. Treat has the same alienation. It was in Alan's interest
to encourage that kind of separation, and it worked. I'd never been subjected to
that kind of psychological preparation in acting before.''

Mr. Pakula said, ''I knew that was usable. That sense of wanting to rage comes
out of insecurity in Treat. That Matthew was off-guard and not quite sure of his
relationship helped bring a lot of that out in his acting. He's very in touch
with his feelings, a very intuitive actor.''

In his earliest acting days, though, Mr. Modine realized talent and intuition
wouldn't be enough. He recalls how he decided to take acting lessons after
coming to New York in 1978 and getting a job in a restaurant. He was an
aspiring-actor chef surrounded by aspiring-actor waiters. ''I was just real
quiet working in the kitchen, listening to the rap of the waiters. They'd come
back and say: Ibsen and Strindberg and Shaw and 'Streetcar' and Tennessee. 'You
know what Tennessee was trying to say?' All that stuff, and I didn't have a clue
as to what they were talking about. I'd say 'I think I saw that film.' I
realized back there cooking that there was a great deal I didn't know and that I
needed to find out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Matthew Modine (Outline/George Lang)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
AN ACTOR'S LONG ROAD FROM SITCOMS TO ELSINORE

BYLINE: By LAURIE WINER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2054 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD


RICHARD THOMAS IS REHEARS-ing Hamlet's advice to the players - in this case a
grumpy bunch of thespians who appear to take the Prince of Denmark's directorial
suggestions as a personal affront to their talent. ''This is that horrible
moment when the director is telling them what to do and they're all thinking,
'He's just wrong,' '' calls out Mark Lamos, who is directing this modern-dress
''Hamlet,'' which begins performances next Saturday at the Hartford Stage
Company.

Mr. Thomas responds instinctively to the comic possibilities of the situation.
He puts his arm tightly around the Player King (Ted van Griethuysen), walks him
slowly forward, and says, in the restrained manner of a playwright struggling to
be polite to the Philistine who is mangling his work, ''Speak the speech, I pray
you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue.''

At the end of the first week of rehearsal, Mr. Thomas's Hamlet is already
emerging as a personality distinct from the dozens of Hamlets he has seen, heard
on records and read about. ''I devour everything on the subject when I am
preparing for a role,'' he says, while polishing off a turkey sandwich and apple
juice during his one-hour lunch break. ''I have no fear of exploring other great
performances. Because the minute you enter the role, you're surrounded by the
ghosts of everyone who's played it, and the only way to do it is to look them in
the eye and say, 'O.K., guys. Show me what you did. Lead me there.' It would be
ridiculous to deny the heritage there, because as an actor it's my heritage, and
if you're lucky enough to be offered the role and to feel that you've gotten to
the point where you can attempt it - then it's one of your luckier days.''

From his first appearance on Broadway in 1958 at the age of 7 - as John
Roosevelt in ''Sunrise at Campobello'' - Mr. Thomas worked steadily on the New
York stage until he was 17. Then came a series of juvenile leads in movies such
as ''Red Sky at Morning'' before Mr. Thomas was cast, at 20, as John-Boy Walton
in a television movie about a Depression-era family living in the Blue Ridge
Mountains. The next year ''The Waltons'' was launched as a weekly television
series and - in the last years of the the Vietnam War and its bitter aftermath -
Mr. Thomas's devoted, resolutely principled character became a symbol of
American decency and honor. When John-Boy left Walton's Mountain in 1977 to
pursue a writing career in New York, Mr. Thomas, between starring roles in
television movies, began building a serious theatrical repertory. He played in
Shaw, Chekhov and Williams at stages around the country. Now, at 36, Mr. Thomas
is tackling his first major Shakespearean role.

In this early rehearsal, 30 or so actors watch appreciatively as Mr. Thomas and
Mr. Lamos bounce ideas off one another with a giddy alacrity. As he has done
with several other Shakespearean productions in his seven years as artistic
director of the Hartford Stage, Mr. Lamos feels free to rummage through all of
history while exploring the infinite possibilities of staging, in this case, Act
III, Scene 2. He wonders aloud if he should put Rosencrantz and Guildenstern in
powder-blue tuxedos with red piping, while simultaneously his star tries to
solve the blocking problem of how Hamlet will move a tape recorder from one end
of the stage to the other. Mr. Thomas scoops up the machine and perches it
confidently on his shoulder the way he might carry a huge portable radio. ''Yes,
keep that,'' says Mr. Lamos, looking up for a second and then pausing to add, as
in a note to himself, ''for now.''

In rehearsal, Mr. Thomas is a slightly deferential co-creator. But when he is at
rest and considering his Hamlet from the inside, it is clear that his journey
into the character is a deeply personal one. ''I don't have a conception of the
role as much as I have an interpretation of the text,'' he explains. ''At this
point, I'm simply letting the verse be my guide. I'm listening to the clues that
are in the language. For instance, in 'To be, or not to be,' Hamlet's words are
very specific, very clear and simple. The language is emotionally charged but it
is not melodramatic, which leads me to believe that he is putting forth a coolly
considered argument. On the other hand, 'O what a rogue and peasant slave am I,'
is much more violent. There he uses multisyllabic words and he takes tortuous
syntactical turns. It's a kind of verbal self-laceration.

''Really, my desire now is to forget the idea of being the Hamlet or being
Richard Thomas's Hamlet or to worry about my place in the history of 'Hamlet.'
None of that is important. What I want to do is to make the audience feel as
deeply about the play as I feel about it, and the best way for me to do that is
to study the text.''

Mr. Thomas now wears a full beard that does much to counter the boyishness of
the John-Boy Walton image, an image that he says limits him only in the way that
''people with little imagination look at me as an actor.'' His mature face still
betrays an innate gentleness - which in his current role helps transform him
into an accessible Prince Hamlet with a judicious, democratic bearing. In fact,
the actor finds evidence of Hamlet's egalitarian nature in the very first scene
of the play. ''It's Marcellus, one of the guards in the battlements, who knows
where to reach Hamlet,'' observes Mr. Thomas, who memorized his part in its
entirety before beginning rehearsals. ''This tells you right away this is not
your ordinary prince. He takes such pleasure in the company of the players that
it's easy for them to forget that they are with a prince - because he's not
always reminding them of it. Hamlet is unmistakably aristocratic, but part of
his nobility is a self-effacing quality. He treats men according to their merits
as people.''

Mr. Lamos, who himself played the role in an acclaimed production at San Diego's
Old Globe Theater a decade ago, says that ''Richard's Hamlet is the man we all
wish we had as the father figure of our political life. He's the man we always
yearn for as our leader but will never have, because he's an intellectual in a
world of nonesthetic and nonphilosophical activities.''

Indeed, Mr. Thomas - who speaks four languages and has published three volumes
of poetry - has prepared for Hamlet by playing a succession of writers and
highly literate characters. From the aspiring author John-Boy, the role that won
him an Emmy in 1972, he went on to play Kenneth Talley, an embittered Vietnam
veteran and English teacher in Lanford Wilson's ''Fifth of July'' on Broadway,
the playwright Treplev in the Circle Repertory Company production of ''The
Seagull,'' Hildy Johnson, the Chicago Examiner's star reporter, in the Lincoln
Center production of ''The Front Page,'' and the title role in the Philadelphia
Company-Kennedy Center production of ''Citizen Tom Paine.''

Born to Barbara Sallis and Richard Thomas - who were both dancers (she a
principal, he a soloist and character dancer) in the Alicia Alonso Company, and
later with the New York City Ballet - Mr. Thomas grew up in the theaters his
parents played. He was eager to get back to the stage almost as soon as he
landed a steady job in television. ''At the end of my first year in 'The
Waltons' I thought, 'Wait a minute. There's something missing here,' '' says Mr.
Thomas.

He began appearing in West Coast productions during his vacation time, starting
with the part of the Dauphin in a 1974 production of Shaw's ''Saint Joan'' at
the Ahmanson Theater in Los Angeles. ''I began to do more and more roles because
I knew that when the time came for something like ''Fifth of July'' it would be
very, very important to be ready, and when it came I was anxious to make it
happen: What a gift that play was!''

Mr. Thomas took over the role of Kenneth Talley in April 1981, 13 years after he
had left the New York stage and five months after the play had opened on
Broadway. He received enthusiastic notices while contradicting the stereotype
that the theater holds for actors who have made their fame on television. Frank
Rich, in a review in these pages of Mr. Thomas's performance, wrote: ''Thanks to
a major casting change. . .the full beauty of the comedy has finally been
uncorked. And how much beauty there is!. . . Mr. Thomas not only gives a
performance that gracefully builds to shattering dimensions, but he has also
sparked the rest of the company to follow suit.''

If the stage gave a joyous welcome back to Mr. Thomas, Mr. Thomas has been
remarkably faithful to the stage, turning down television offers for the last
year and a half. ''Working on the stage makes me feel strong and it makes me
feel powerful,'' he says. ''The type of energy involved in building a stage
performance is a strengthening energy - physically speaking. It makes you
vocally strong and it makes you a strong communicator; it forces you to respond
to all of the people out there in front of you. You can never get that immense
feeling of power in front of a camera.''

Still, there is relatively little money to be made on America's regional stages,
and, as viewers of Minute Maid orange juice commercials can attest, Mr. Thomas
has a large family to support. His wife, Alma, 10-year-old son Richard Francisco
and identical triplet girls - Barbara, Gwyneth and Pilar, who are 6 years old
now -were featured in that advertisement a few years back.

Fortunately, Mr. Thomas is not cynical about television; he will return to it,
he says, when the right project presents itself. ''I can't go into a job
thinking, 'This is a pile of junk and I'm going to take the money and go,'
because it seems to me -and I could eat my words next year if I'm in need of
work - that if I take that attitude it will somehow seep its way through to
everything in life.'' He's recently formed a production company through which he
would like to develop a quality family television program - an area he feels
television has neglected since ''The Waltons'' went off the air in 1981. ''I
hope to remedy that situation in about a year or so,'' he says. ''I've avoided
going back to television for a long time but now the prospect doesn't make me
quite as nervous anymore.''

But for now, Mr. Thomas remains dedicated to theater, in a time when more and
more actors find the lucrative worlds of television and film irresistible. ''An
actor friend of mine came to see me at the Pasadena Playhouse in 'Arms and the
Man,' '' Mr. Thomas recalls, ''and he said to me, 'I envy you for getting to do
this! If only I could find the time.' And all that I can say is - make the time.
And then it gets easier to make the time again. You have to start. And then you
remember that there are 12 months in a year, and you really don't have to be the
richest actor in the graveyard.''

 HOLDING AN AUDIENCE

''Hamlet'' opens the 25th anniversary season of the Hartford Stage Company, a
theater whose history has been marked by directorial innovation and a
roller-coaster subscription rate that is a lesson in the vicissitudes of
marketing plays to subscribers. In the 1976-77 season, Edward Albee directed two
of his own one-acts there, with Angela Lansbury starring. And the next year -
when the theater moved into its present quarters, a newly built 489-seat
auditorium -annual subscriptions reached a high of 17,000. The present artistic
director, Mark Lamos, was hired in 1980, bringing with him an eclectic series of
new plays and a fresh approach to the classics. He attracted national press
attention, received good reviews and lured to Hartford such actors as John
Cullum, Keith Baxter and Amanda Plummer.

Meanwhile, the theater was using zippy slogans like ''Hartford's hottest
ticket,'' to sell classics such as ''Antony and Cleopatra.'' ''The theater was
setting up expectations it had no intention of meeting,'' says David Hawkanson,
the current managing director. By 1985-86 the number of yearly subscribers had
dwindled to 8,900. A new administrative team was brought aboard. ''Never
predictable, often provocative,'' became one selling theme. ''We decided the
only way was to promote our own unpredictability,'' says Mr. Hawkanson. The
results were salubrious. This season there are 12,500 subscribers, and the
number is expected to reach 14,000 by December.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Thomas (T. Charles Erickson)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

America's Army of Non-Workers

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3328 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


BY all the rules of economics, Donna Van Name should be back in the work force.
In prospering Boston, jobs go begging, particularly the sort of clerical work
that Ms. Van Name did for the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company until
her second son, Michael, was born in 1985.

But going back to work means costly child care, and that would consume most of
the $6 or $7 an hour that Ms. Van Name could earn as a clerk or clerk-typist.
Even if she could afford the child care, ''a lot of centers won't take children
under 3 years old,'' she said. Her third child, Kaitlin, was born last fall.

Stuck at home, the 30-year-old mother tried to organize a day-care center in her
cramped and dilapidated south Boston apartment. There were plenty of potential
clients among neighborhood mothers. But Ms. Van Name would have had to spend
hundreds of dollars on repairs to qualify for a state license. That was beyond
the means of a family living precariously on welfare, food stamps and the
$200-a-week paycheck of the children's father, David Francis.

Ms. Van Name wants a job. But the obstacles to her re-entry into the world of
work - her child care needs, the low wage she would earn and the rundown slum
housing - help to explain a curious phenomenon in the United States. At a time
of declining unemployment and a growing economy, millions of Americans in their
prime working years are remaining outside the work force. By Labor Department
standards, they are not even counted as among the unemployed because they are
not actively seeking a job.

This is a sharp departure from previous periods. The Depression, for example,
created a huge corps of ''unemployables'' - people considered too unskilled, too
destitute or too discouraged to enter the work force. But World War II brought
them in anyway. And those on the sidelines in the early 1950's and late 1960's
eventually went to work in significant numbers, when the unemployment rate
dipped sharply and companies found themselves short of workers.

But this time around, with civilian unemployment having fallen steadily to 6
percent, the lowest level in 13 years, the magnet of unfilled jobs is failing to
exert its usual pull. Even in Massachusetts, where a 3 percent rate means that
nearly everyone actively seeking a job has one, those outside the work force are
staying out.

Indeed, across the nation, a new hard core of non-working Americans has come
into existence. They total between 10 million and 20 million people, even after
excluding all the millions - housewives, students, the ill and disabled, the
retired - who remain out of jobs for traditionally acceptable reasons.


THESE non-workers are a diverse group. They include 6 million people who want to
work, but are not looking. Some of them, like Ms. Van Name, are among the 3.1
million mostly unmarried mothers who receive Aid to Families with Dependent
Children, the principal form of welfare. Others are classified by the Labor
Department as discouraged workers. They have given up the job search because
they don't believe they can find work. Among them are laid-off factory hands
reluctant to take lower-salaried jobs.

In place of regular jobs, many of these people enter the underground economy as,
say, house painters or general handymen. Or they get by on the wages of other
family members.

But the biggest contingent of non-workers is, ironically, buried in the labor
force itself, among the 17.9 million people that the Federal Bureau of Labor
Statistics listed as working less than half the year in 1986, for annual incomes
of less than $10,000.

This group represented 15.4 percent of the 115.8 million who held jobs at the
end of 1986. An unknown number of them, well into the millions, quit because of
low pay, economists say, and did not look for new jobs for long periods, thus
not even qualifying for enrollment among the unemployed.

''When they do not work they float,'' said Harley Shaiken, a labor economist at
the University of California at San Diego. ''They are the millions of
statistically invisible people too discouraged by low wages to be more than
marginally attached to the job market.''

Added Paul Rascavage, a Census Bureau economist: ''Someone holding a low-paying
job, often part-time and with few benefits, has at best a weak tie to the labor
force.''


MARIA NIEVES, a Puerto Rican woman who barely speaks English, is one of those
who float. For the past six weeks, she has been operating a sewing machine at $6
an hour at Fidelity Sportswear in Boston.

But this is Mrs. Nieves's first job since 1985 and she does not expect it to
last long because she says she is not turning out enough clothing to continue to
qualify for the $6 wage. Although Mrs. Nieves, who is 42, has a high school
equivalency certificate, her weak English limits her job opportunities, and she
is unwilling to seek a low-wage restaurant job.

''That is work for kids, not for an older woman with responsibilities,'' she
declares. So Mrs. Nieves will stay out of the job hunt, and out of the Labor
Department's unemployment statistics, getting by on her husband's wages (he
earns $8.50 an hour fixing sewing machines at Fidelity) and on help from three
grown children.

Helen Thompson (not her real last name; she asked that it not be used) also
drifts in and out of jobs - as a $7-an-hour post office employee during the
Christmas season, as a traffic supervisor for $60 a week, as a teacher's aide at
$3.50 an hour.

''These are things you do only for the moment; to get enough to get by and pay
the landlord,'' she said. Mrs. Thompson's last permanent job was in the years
after high school graduation, as an assembler for Polaroid. But she is in her
30's now, with three children and a husband working part-time. Needing a job but
unwilling to take one for less than $14,000 a year, she signed up for an
accounting course with Action for Boston Community Development, a social service
agency that sponsors skills training.

Susan Purser, an agency official, says that Mrs. Thompson is the best student in
the class. ''I think I can place her easily,'' she said, adding that Mrs.
Thompson would be likely to make a good impression on personnel managers.
''She's thin, she looks good and she does not have the street language that
often goes against blacks,'' Ms. Purser said.

If Helen Thompson gets a $14,000-a-year job, she and her family will be
comfortably above the poverty line.

Millions of non-workers and marginal workers are among the more than 20 million
Americans living in poverty. One condition feeds on the other, with overcrowded
housing, poor health, lack of child care and isolation in city slums all serving
as barriers to work.

''When you have a part of the society that has been pauperized, then you have
also made them unemployable,'' said Barry Bluestone, an economics professor at
Northeastern University.

Some economists argue that the unemployment rate is simply not low enough yet to
dissolve the hard core of non-workers. But the Massachusetts situation undercuts
the argument. For more than 30 months, the rate in the state has been below 4
percent - just as it was for the nation as a whole in the early 50's and late
60's. That sustained low level brought many Americans into the work force then;
but in Massachusetts today, the number of people outside the labor market has
risen slightly since 1984, not declined, according to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.

In the 50's and 60's, of course, an abundance of well-paying factory jobs and
the demands of the Korean and Vietnam Wars gave employment a big boost. In the
absence of these factors, labor experts are not sure what it might take to lure
back men and women who have stopped trying to find jobs. ''We haven't begun to
see the prosperity that will shake them out,'' said Thomas Plewes, an associate
commissioner of the B.L.S.

Higher wages might help. In fact, E. T. Choice, a federally funded job-training
program in Boston, aims at placing its clients, mostly single mothers on
welfare, in jobs paying above $6.50 an hour, or $13,500 a year. ''These women
want to work, but at lower pay than this, recidivism is high,'' said Thomas
Glynn, a deputy commissioner of the Massachusetts Public Welfare Department, who
runs the program.

A wage of $13,500 a year, however, is not often possible. Job growth in the
American economy, dominated as it is by service industries, is greatest among
retail, restaurant and food industry workers, maintenance people, cashiers,
clerks and hospital attendants, and that trend will continue until the year
2000, according to a Bureau of Labor Statistics study.


THESE are the jobs most available to the new hard core of non-workers, and they
are decidedly low-income jobs. Their impact on the labor force is reflected in
the fact that about 40 percent of the 118 million Americans holding jobs today
earn less than $11,000 a year. ''As long as employers are not offering salaries
substantially above the dole, you will not see much job hunting,'' said Juliet
Schor, a Harvard economist.

Nevertheless, business executives and many economists argue that no matter how
discouraging the wage levels might be, they cannot go higher. One reason is that
worker productivity in the service sector is barely rising. Stiff competition,
which holds down prices, is another obstacle to wage increases, and so is the
possibility of a recession soon.


PAY is certainly an issue at the Star Market Company, a supermarket chain here
that is scrambling to fill 1,950 jobs - fully one-third of its work force. Two
years ago, there were few openings, but now Star advertises an abundance of
part-time positions for cashiers, baggers and produce clerks. The pay averages
just under $6 an hour.

That is not much of a draw in a state with nearly full employment where hundreds
of companies are trying to fill entry-level jobs at similar wages. Still, Star
is sticking to its pay scale. The company argues that higher pay would eliminate
the 1 percent profit margin typical of supermarkets - or force the chain into
higher, uncompetitive prices. ''We can survive for a while with 1,800
openings,'' said Richard MacDonald, vice president for human resources.

To get by, the chain is hiring 14- and 15-year-olds for the first time, about
600 so far to work after school. And a few blacks are appearing in stores
outside black neighborhoods, another new practice. Trying to attract school
dropouts and immigrants, Mr. MacDonald makes the point that many jobs can be
done by illiterates, as long as they can recognize food labels.

But applications only trickle in, and the low wage is only one of the reasons.
Star has a nucleus of 1,500 full-time employees, a sort of elite, that earns a
respectable $17,000 a year to start, plus overtime. But part-timers can't
advance to these posts, no matter how good they are, unless they own a car to
commute to assignments in different stores, as the full-timers must do. Only
recently has management altered that rule, hoping to attract more part-timers.
Now workers have a year from the day of promotion to acquire the car.

Clearly, the rising tide of the five-year-old economic recovery is not
sufficient to raise all boats, and Government officials and business executives
are beginning to recognize the dangers posed by a huge number of people more or
less outside the work force.


CONGRESS is considering bills that would change the welfare system to make job
training or getting a job a requirement for assistance. And numerous proposals
are afoot to improve secondary school education, so that young people leave
school literate and job-ready.

Inadequate education, in fact, is getting most of the attention as the root
cause for the rise of the long-term non-worker. Millions of adults whose meager
schooling would not have barred them from well-paying factory jobs 20 years ago
are considered unqualified today for service jobs that pay above $7 an hour.
Rather than accept a lower wage ''for what they consider dead-end work, these
people are adjusting to a life that does not include regular employment,'' said
William Spring, a vice president of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank.

But apart from the education and pay issues, employers resist dealing with
people long out of jobs. ''The big problem is that no one is knocking on the
doors of these hard-core people and saying here is opportunity,'' said Mr.
Glynn, whose program places 600 women a month, often providing medical insurance
and paying child-care costs for the first year on the job.

The employer resistance takes several forms. A number of personnel executives
are reluctant to hire anyone without a high school diploma or previous job
experience, both considered basic indicators of an applicant's ability to show
up regularly and to work well with others. And only a handful of companies, even
in Boston, train people to qualify for entry-level jobs, or to advance in them.

Cost is the chief obstacle. Dr. Jerome Grossman, chairman of the New England
Medical Center, which has 200 openings among 2,800 jobs, offers a typical
explanation. ''The amounts that we can charge patients are capped and so with
limited training money, we are forced to make trade-offs,'' he said. ''One of
the trade-offs is the entry-level worker.'' These are the hospital's
housekeepers, dietary aides, maintenance personnel and file clerks.


THE New England Telephone Company, with headquarters in Boston, also does not
train people to qualify for entry-level jobs. But it is not short of workers,
and the reasons are illuminating.

Out of 26,000 positions, there are only 500 openings, mostly for operators and
clerks. But these low-level jobs start at $13,338 annually and rise over three
years to $23,530, or $11.30 an hour. At that salary range, there is no shortage
of applicants. New England Telephone does not turn away people who have no high
school diploma, said William Carney, director of employment. Nevertheless, most
applicants are graduates and actively looking for work, which puts them inside
the labor force.

The hurdles that keep so many non-workers from trying to re-enter the labor
force at New England Telephone are twofold: a 45-minute interview at which
discussion of prior job experience counts for a lot, and a math and English test
that many applicants find quite tough.

New York Telephone, which gives the same examination, recently reported that 84
percent of 90,000 applicants failed the test this year - a statistic widely
publicized as an indication of the inadequacies of public schooling. At New
England Telephone, the failure rate has been above 50 percent, according to Mr.
Carney, but he acknowledges that the exam tests for skills beyond those required
for an operator's or clerk's job. People who have been out of school for a while
have trouble remembering the math, Mr. Carney said.

The test, in effect, serves as a screening device. ''We have found it a good
measure of general success on the job, and it is less expensive than entry-level
training,'' he said.

In a service economy, there are other requirements, too. Even the lowest-paid,
least-skilled employee must deal with customers, and management often insists on
what Dr. Grossman and Mr. MacDonald of Star Market describe as ''a basic
standard of appearance.''

''You have to look good, be able to spell, not be too fat, have all your teeth -
and all that for $5 an hour,'' said Ms. Purser, the social service agency
official. Added Mr. Bluestone: ''A bank teller needs to be a person with a
certain demeanor, someone who at least conveys to customers the idea of middle
class. Even a fast-food restaurant wants someone who not only can dish up the
soup, but can smile and talk.''

Such people also have to be available for work, and that is a huge issue among
the nation's growing number of single mothers, who worry that salaries won't be
high enough to offset the loss of welfare payments and the outlay for child
care.

In Massachusetts and New York, for example, a mother with two children making
$750 a month - about $4.35 an hour - could see her cash grant cut to $120 a
month, from $550, and eliminated entirely after four months. Medicaid, however,
continues for an additional five months in every state, and in some up to 11
months.

All this adds up to mothers who are fearful of trading welfare benefits for
low-wage jobs that won't get them out of poverty, says Barbara Sard, a lawyer
for Greater Boston Legal Services and a lecturer on welfare law at Harvard Law
School. ''The loss of Medicaid especially is a big deterrent,'' she said. The
system also fails to meet the needs of mothers who have to drop out of jobs
because their children become ill, or who want to rear their children themselves
and work part-time.

''What we need is a fluid system that allows for work, part or full-time, with
sufficient income supplementation,'' Mrs. Sard said.

That potentially more costly approach is not the thrust of the welfare bills now
in Congress. None make noticeable changes in the payments formulas. The
best-known is legislation written by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat
of New York. His proposal would require welfare mothers to take jobs even though
they lose welfare benefits as their private incomes rise. What Mr. Moynihan adds
to the welfare pot, for the first time, is what he envisions as an unlimited
flow of funds for job training. The Congressional Budget Office estimates the
cost of the training at $2.3 billion over five years.

''The condition of welfare mothers now is such a nightmare of poverty that work
can only be an improvement,'' Senator Moynihan said. ''And if they do it, in
time their lot will improve, particularly with the job training provision.''


MR. MOYNIHAN'S approach assumes that a sufficiently funded job training program
will, in fact, bring down the barriers that keep welfare mothers from moving en
masse into the labor market and up the income scale.

Thus far, most of the publicly funded job training has been channeled not
through the welfare system but through such programs as the Job Corps, the
Private Industry Councils, E. T. Choice in Boston and various other social
service agencies such as those grouped in Boston's Community Jobs Collaborative.

The training is primarily in basic skills, such as reading and math, to prepare
people for jobs beyond the sort of counter work available in a fast-food
restaurant at $4 or $5 an hour. But so far very few people have been helped and
some employment experts question whether job training, no matter how well
funded, is going to make much of a dent in the growing welfare rolls.

One problem is that the programs fail to give enough importance to the fact that
most Americans, at any level, get jobs through networks of friends, relatives,
school contacts and former job colleagues, says Lee Bowes. She is president of
Transitional Employment Enterprises, a Boston organization financed by public
and corporate funds that tries to play this networking role for the
disadvantaged. ''To assume that education and training are the keys to getting a
job misses the point,'' she said. ''Without the connecting links, without the
who-you-know, you don't get jobs, and people in urban ghettos don't have those
links.''

Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, the B.L.S. regional commissioner in New York, raises a more
basic issue. In New York City, a decade of growth has created 400,000 new jobs
and reduced the unemployment rate to 5.1 percent, the lowest in years. But the
number of people outside the work force is well above the national average.

The problem is single mothers in poverty, Mr. Ehrenhalt said. ''The
circumstances under which these mothers would enter the labor market seem very
remote,'' he said. ''Implicit in the numbers is the existence of a large,
culturally deprived group long out of work that seems to be impervious to
economic growth.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Donna Van Name (NYT/Joe Wrinn); graph of unemployme nt,
1983-87, breakdown by sex, race and age of 6 million people not s eeking work,
1987, full- and part-time occasional workers (Source: U. S. Dept. of Labor
Bureau of Labor Statistics) (pg. 1); Maria and Agus to Nieves (pg. 6); help
wanted sign (NYT) (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUDDEN GUSTS;
REAGAN FACES A NEW DIPLOMATIC CLIMATE

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1564 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y.


RIGID patterns in international politics are suddenly giving way, heightening
the risks of war in one place, the chances for peace in another.

This new fluidity has presented the Reagan Administration with an array of
opportunities and dangers in several critical areas.

The war in the Persian Gulf has entangled the United States, both militarily and
diplomatically. Nicaragua and other Central American countries have embarked on
a plan calling for peace and democratization that challenges Washington's
strategy in the region and its old assumptions about the Sandinista Government.
The Soviet-American relationship, while still testy, seems to be entering a new
period of dialogue and accord.

Moscow has also intensified its search for a face-saving way to withdraw from
Afghanistan, which would help improve Soviet relations with both Iran and China.
The frigid relations between Vietnam and the United States have shown the first
signs of a thaw. And the gradual evolution of some Arabs' attitudes toward an
acceptance of Israel continues to stimulate quiet efforts to find a formula for
Arab-Israeli peace.

The Reagan Administration - weakened by the Iran-contra scandal and hampered by
a Democratic majority in Congress - must overcome its intellectual fatigue and
muster the creativity needed to adjust to the new opportunities and avoid the
dangers. But President Reagan gave little indication that the Administration was
acquiring the necessary agility when he addressed the United Nations General
Assembly last week.

Fresh from a triumph the previous week in agreeing with the Soviet Union to
eliminate medium- and shorter-range missiles, the President might have basked in
the light of the accomplishment, hailing the more cooperative mood of
Soviet-American relations that seems to have taken hold. Instead, he gave a
speech whose major themes could have been written five years ago. He bashed the
Russians for their continuing war in Afghanistan, the Berlin wall, their
violations of human rights. He taunted the foreign representatives with boasts
about the virtues of democracy and free enterprise.

''I recognize that some governments represented in this hall have other ideas,''
he said. ''Some do not believe in democracy or in political, economic or
religious freedom. Some believe in dictatorship - whether by one man, one party,
one class, one race, or one vanguard.''

This approach, reflecting the evangelical streak in American foreign policy, was
a taste of what Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, might well get as Mr.
Reagan shows him the benefits of freedom during his expected visit to the United
States later this year. In more pragmatic terms, the President's antagonistic
approach was probably aimed at helping him mend some fences with conservatives
who worry that he is rushing into an arms treaty with the Russians just for the
sake of his place in history. His words prompted a rebuke from Soviet Foreign
Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, speaking before the General Assembly two days
later.

''This rostrum is not a pulpit for preaching 'free enterprise,' '' Mr.
Shevardnadze said. ''This hall is not a school room or a university auditorium
in which one can teach lessons of rhetoric or lecture the international
community on the manners of 'good political behavior.'''

In a sense, however, Mr. Shevardnadze did almost the same thing, quoting Lenin,
hailing the ''the Great October Socialist Revolution'' and preaching the virtues
of socialism. ''We are not imposing it on anyone,'' he said in an apparent
effort to avoid echoing Mr. Reagan.

Anxiety in Washington

It was a timely reminder that the superpowers' ideological competition
transcends whatever tactical arms control agreements they sign. Yet the Russians
have also sought - at least rhetorically - to keep the Soviet-American rivalry
out of the Persian Gulf, the most volatile testing ground for Administration
policy. Washington's anxiety over possible Soviet encroachment there played a
major role in the Administration's decision to provide 11 Kuwaiti oil tankers
with American flags and naval escorts. Speaking of the outbreak of fighting
between Iran and Iraq in 1980, Gennadi I. Gerasimov, the Soviet Foreign Ministry
spokesman, said, ''This was not the result of Soviet-American rivalry at all. It
was a local conflict with local roots, and I think it is unfortunate to drag
into this conflict Soviet-American rivalry.''

There was even Soviet-American cooperation last July on a Security Council
resolution calling for a cease-fire. But the Russians, as well as the Chinese,
refused last week to go along with an American proposal to move quickly to an
arms embargo on Iran. Instead, the five permanent members of the Security
Council urged continued efforts to persuade Iran to accept a cease-fire and held
out the possibility of unspecified sanctions. The diplomatic efforts came after
an American helicopter fired on an Iranian mine-laying vessel, killing three
Iranian seamen. The Iranian ship, said by the Pentagon to have sown seven mines
in the gulf, was captured with 26 sailors. Iran's President, Ali Khamenei,
denounced the ''Great Satan'' before the General Assembly.

'Cosmetic Gestures'

The situation in Central America has become equally complex for the Reagan
Administration, but somewhat more hopeful. President Oscar Arias Sanchez of
Costa Rica, who negotiated the peace plan, told Congress last week that the plan
could work if military aid to insurgencies is suspended.

The peace agreement, to take effect Nov. 7, has prompted Nicaragua to take some
steps toward democratization, as the plan requires. The moves, including the
reopening of the Roman Catholic radio station and an opposition newspaper, La
Prensa, threaten to undermine the Reagan Administration's portrayal of the
Sandinista Government as ruthlessly totalitarian. This image is essential to the
Administration's case in Congress for continued aid to the rebels known as
contras. Hence, the State Department last week dismissed Nicaragua's steps as
''cosmetic gestures.''

American officials have also reacted unenthusiastically to the peace plan's call
for a cease-fire. The Administration appears to be setting the stage for a
declaration Nov. 7 that the Arias plan has failed.

The tentative improvements in relations with Vietnam have also presented the
Administration with an opportunity it seems hesitant to exploit. Washington
agreed last month to encourage private American organizations to send
humanitarian aid - especially artificial limbs -for those wounded in the war. It
was an important gesture from the Vietnamese viewpoint, representing the first
official American acknowledgment that Vietnam, too, had suffered.

In exchange, Hanoi is expected to cooperate more in the return of the remains of
American servicemen, and Washington agreed to step up processing of Vietnamese
who wish to emigrate to the United States. But the State Department emphatically
played down the significance of the steps, reasserting its opposition to
anything resembling diplomatic recognition until Vietnam pulls its troops out of
Cambodia. Beneath that formal position lie the deeper wounds of the war, a
trauma from which America has not yet recovered.

In the Middle East, Jordan has agreed to negotiate with Israel under the rubric
of an international conference, and Moscow is inching toward formal relations
with Israel. But the Israeli Government is divided on the conference idea, the
question of Palestinian representation has not been solved and the Reagan
Administration has been unwilling to assign high officials to the sort of
intensive effort that such problems require.

The fluidity in all these areas may not last long enough to give the next
Administration in Washington a chance. The question is whether President Reagan
and his foreign policy aides can move quickly and skillfully enough in their
remaining time in office.

 ON THE TABLE

A FLURRY OF ACTIVITY FOR 2 PEACE PLANS
 THERE rrxhwere renewed diplomatic efforts last week on peace plans for two
troubled areas of the world, the Persian Gulf and Central America. Here are
details of the plans.
Central America: The peace plan drafted by President Oscar Arias Sanchez of
Costa Rica, to take effect Nov. 7, calls for cease-fires, amnesties and
immediate talks between the governments and armed opposition groups and movement
toward the restoration of democratic rights. Neighboring countries are to refuse
to allow insurgents to use their territories for bases; third countries, such as
the United States, are to suspend military aid to insurgents.

President Arias spoke in favor of his plan in appearances in Congress and at the
White House on Tuesday. But President Reagan characterized changes promised by
the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua as ''mere show'' and ''Potemkin
reforms,'' and reiterated that aid for the contra rebels fighting to overthrow
it ''must continue.''
The Persian Gulf: The United States favors United Nations Security Council
Resolution 598, which calls for Iran and Iraq to ''observe an immediate
cease-fire'' and withdraw from occupied territories. Iraq has said it would
agree; Iran wants Iraq blamed for starting the war. On Friday, the Russians and
the Chinese blocked an American proposal to move quickly on an arms embargo
against Iran.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Candidates' Transgressions Loom Large on Home Screen

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHATEVER else it may or may not prove, the withdrawal of Senator Joseph R. Biden
Jr. from the contest for the Democratic Presidential nomination demonstrates how
much the 1988 campaign differs from its predecessors. Never before have
candidates' alleged character flaws emerged so early or proved so lethal.

The 44-year-old Delaware legislator, who pulled out last Wednesday, was the
second victim of the character issue in a contest for the White House that still
has more than 13 months to run. Former Senator Gary Hart of Colorado was the
first, leaving the race last May after allegations that he had spent the night
with a Miami model.

Mr. Biden, who had raised $3.7 million for his campaign, was done in by a series
of transgressions that, taken alone, might have been overlooked - borrowing from
the speeches of other politicians, living and dead, American and British; an
instance of plagiarism when he was a freshman in law school, and exaggerations
while campaigning in New Hampshire of his academic accomplishments. Taken
together, they were too much; their ''exaggerated shadow,'' he said, had begun
to ''obscure the essence'' of the candidate and his candidacy.

Politicians and those who watch them will be debating the reasons for the
emphasis on character for months, if not longer, but some clues are already
evident.

Most of the candidates, to begin with, are little known to the broad voting
public, so they have at best a tenuous hold on the affections of their
supporters. In the early stages of a courtship, transgressions can be fatal, but
in a well-rooted marriage, they may be quickly forgiven; so it is in politics.
Almost the first things many voters learned about Mr. Biden, aside from his good
looks and articulateness, was that he had done things that most people consider
a bit questionable at best.

In addition, the candidates have not, for the most part, managed to project very
many significant differences on the issues, although such distinctions may
emerge later. It is almost inevitable in such a situation that ''personality'' -
a homier word for character - will count for more. The candidates tend to try to
capitalize on small things that set them apart, which is why Senator Paul Simon,
the Illinois Democrat, talks so much about his down-to-earth bow ties and
horned-rim glasses. When things go wrong, the short cut of image-building
becomes the short cut of image-wrecking.

The 1988 campaign takes place against a background of disillusionment that may
well heighten voters' suspicions. Lyndon B. Johnson and Vietnam, Richard M.
Nixon and Watergate, Jimmy Carter and the hostages in Iran, Ronald Reagan and
the Iran contra-controversy -for more than two decades, the electorate has
watched Presidents become involved in activities that have raised grave
questions about their judgment, competence and even their rectitude.

To the average voter, recent history seems to show - in a phrase that political
reporters hear again and again - that ''you can't trust any of them.'' In the
academy, doubts about the sorts of people who were gaining the Presidency gave
rise to the theories of James David Barber of Duke University, who argued in his
book ''The Presidential Character'' that ''a President's personality is an
important shaper'' of his overall performance.

Confirming Suspicions

A New York Times/CBS News poll taken in early May showed that more than a third
of those interviewed thought that any one of six problems would be enough to
persuade them to vote against a candidate. One who used cocaine, for example,
would lose 91 percent of the public, according to the poll; one who had cheated
on his income tax would lose 65 percent; one who was guilty of drunk driving
would lose 39 percent.

In the cases of Mr. Hart and Mr. Biden, their problems were perhaps made more
serious by the fact that they seemed to confirm suspicions that had been the
common coin of gossip among political activists for months - that Mr. Hart had
been a philanderer and that Mr. Biden lacked substance and was merely a vehicle
for the ideas of the polltaker Patrick Caddell.

Both candidates were also victimized, in different ways, by the changing
patterns of political journalism. With the breakdown of the party system, in
which party elders played a mediating role, certifying the worthiness of
Presidential hopefuls, news organizations - sometimes gladly, sometimes
reluctantly - have assumed parts of this function. They evaluate the
plausibility of candidacies, thus affecting fund-raising and endorsements; they
sponsor debates, thus helping the candidates transmit their messages in an age
when local party organizations no longer do, and they dig deeper into private
lives.

Two decades ago, Mr. Hart's indiscretions might well have been ignored by the
press and television. A decade ago, Mr. Biden's misrepresentations could not
have been dramatized as they were. It was not so much the original newspaper
articles that cost him dear; it was television, the tapes pulled from vast
libraries showing him aping Neil Kinnock, the leader of the Labor Party in
Britain, without credit, and making misstatements about his educational
accomplishments in an exchange in a New Hampshire living room. The Big Eye is
everywhere.

It could even be argued that once flaws are revealed, they are distributed most
efficiently, and decline is most rapdily accelerated, by the television
comedians. In Joe Biden's week of agony, he was the favorite topic of Johnny
Carson and David Letterman. Once he becomes the butt of a hundred jokes heard in
a million bedrooms - Senator Biden tried to cheer up his staff, said Mr. Carson;
he told them they had nothing to fear but fear itself - it is hard for any mere
politician to survive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GHOST SHIPS ON THE HUDSON

BYLINE: By BEMJAMIN DEMOTT; Benjamin DeMott's book about the study of
literature, ''Close Imagining,'' will appear this winter. He teaches English
literature at Amherst College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2547 words


WORLD'S END
By T. Coraghessan Boyle. 456 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.

IN the beginning the world of ''World's End,'' T. Coraghessan Boyle's third
novel, seems deja vu.

A workday peters out. An unpromising 22-year-old named Walter Van Brunt is
discovered sharing joints and beer in a bar called the Throbbing Elbow. His
companions are Hector Mantequilla (''ragged wild hair'') and Mardi, who's
wearing a hand-dyed paper miniskirt with matching panties -a dress ''so short as
to expose the nether curve of her buttocks.'' ''I got something for you, man -
something special,'' says Hector, taking Walter's arm. ''In the men's room, you
know?''

Certainly we know, or at least we assume that we know. Following Hector will
admit us to the confines of a familiar school of contemporary fiction (c.
1965-85). In this quarter weed and literary allusion proliferate, narrators and
characters alike speak sardonically, plot is minimal and the backward reach of
time stops at the Vietnam War. Lead on, Hector, we think without zest. Explore
the drug culture. Meet the need for views of whacked-out layabouts ''doing
lines'' in the men's room.

But within moments we're turned around -surprised and genuinely engaged.
Widening his angle of vision, the writer shows us that drink, dope and sex are
merely incidental influ-ences on the party night in progress. Walter and his
mates are in Peterskill, N.Y., an hour up the Taconic from Manhattan, not on the
Coast or Mexico-bound. When midnight deviltry dumps them into the Hudson,
swimming for the moorings of a fleet of mothballed merchantmen, the sounds of
their roistering commingle with eerie murmurs. On the deck of the U.S.S. Anima,
a rusted hulk, Walter Van Brunt catches sight of the ghost of a vanished elder
amidst a crowd of ''ragged, red-eyed, drooling'' bums. ('' 'America for
Americans!' Walter's father shouted, and the phantom crowd took it up with a
gibber and wheeze that wound down finally to a crazed muttering in the dark.'')
A minute later, the novelist directs our attention away from the roisterers,
sending us back three centuries to a ''five-morgen farm'' close to a Hudson
River trading post, the turf on which Walter's ancestors (a father, a mother,
three children) began their American life. Hollanders indentured ''for all their
days on earth,'' the family is obligated to pay the patroon, within six months
of their landing, ''five hundred guilders in rent, two fathoms of firewood
(split, delivered and reverently stacked in the cavernous woodshed at the upper
manor house), two bushels of wheat, two pair of fowl, and twenty-five pounds of
butter.''

DURING the first 30 pages of ''World's End'' we watch these settlers thrive and
endure catastrophe. In the same stretch of writing we also see a battle in a
modern-day Peterskill kitchen between Walter's father and those he charges with
kidnapping his son; we leave the Throbbing Elbow for good and listen to a
Kitchawank medicine woman chanting against pukwidjinnies - ghost spirits and
devils; we witness loss of limb by gangrene (1663) and by motorcycle crash
(1968); we hear a patroon's agent coldly evict a helpless child (the only
survivor of the indentured family) for defaulting ''the conditions of your
agreement''; we learn how a portion of the ancient Mohawk and Kitchawank tribal
cultures entered the blood of Walter Van Brunt; we come to know a descendant of
the original patroon - an ancestor-obsessed, mid-20th-century factory owner
named Depeyster Van Wart, father of the miniskirted Mardi (in time he will
become Walter's employer and surrogate-father).

The narrator who speaks to us of these matters seems concerned not alone with
registering the hum and buzz of another age - the terror of Lowlanders
transported to a ''barbaric new world'' teeming with trees, demons, savages,
strange animals - but with such problems as that of rendering correctly the
thunder, in our own day, of revved-up Norton Commando motorbikes. His apparent
assumptions are that it's still feasible for a fiction writer to shape helpful
historical and social perspectives on more or less contemporary lives, and that
there are continuities within change.

And his world has scale, levels, density. In these pages fathers struggle for
their sons' respect, lose it, and live to see their sons caught in the same
cycle. Farm girls gather eggs at peaceful dawns, tomahawks are hurled in fury,
people quarrel at checkout counters. Oppressors oppress. Guests drink and dance
at weddings (the drinks are '' 'Sopus ale, cider and Hollands out of a stone
jug,'' and the music comes from penny whistles, overturned kettles and ''a
bombas that made use of a pig's bladder for a sound box''). Fearful punishments
are meted out to the unlucky - from a week in the stocks to solitary at Sing
Sing (originally Sint Sinks); fearful political frustration explodes on the
right and left. As light fails and the grave beckons - the book's title is
derived from the name of a nautical graveyard in the upper Hudson - characters
remember (as real people in that neighborhood might be expected to do) good
times on the water: ''They were out on the river in his father's boat . . . He'd
spread a blanket for her in the bow, there was that peculiar sick-sweet smell of
exhaust, the sun was high, the wind had fallen to nothing. What's that, she
asked, over there? That point across the river? He sat at the tiller, grinning.
Kidd's Point, he said, after the pirate. . . . She felt the water swell beneath
her. She looked up the river to where the mountains fell away in continents of
shadow and seagulls hung in oceans of filtered light. Above that, and around the
bend, he told her, it's a clear channel up to West Point. Then we hit Martyr's
Reach. He knew an island there, in the middle of the river, beautiful spot,
Storm King on the one side, Breakneck on the other. He was thinking maybe they'd
land and have lunch there.''

Yesterday the label ''wit writer'' seemed apt for the creator of this world. In
four works of fiction published between 1979 and 1985 T. Coraghessan Boyle
showed himself to be lively and language-intoxicated - but determinedly
disengaged. There were two volumes of short stories that were long on black
comedy and included a number of pieces that originated seemingly as funny bits
or turns - games of which the grandmasters are S. J. Perelman and Terry
Southern. (The premise of one story: What if a scientist doing language research
with primates fell in love with a chimp?) There was a novel - ''Budding
Prospects'' (1984) - on marijuana farming in California's Mendocino County; its
self-teasing began with the title and subtitle (''A Pastoral''), the dedication
(''This book is for my horticultural friends''), and the epigraph (Ben Franklin:
''Plough deep, while Sluggards sleep, and you shall have Corn to sell and to
keep''), and continued to the closing page. There was a picaresque lark -
''Water Music'' (1981) - a retelling of the African adventures of the
18th-century explorer Mungo Park that was packed with comic conceits. (Example:
shoe-blacked herring and frogs' eggs peddled as caviar under the trade name
Chichikov's Choice.) Writers of stature - Robert Coover and William Gass among
them - praised Mr. Boyle's work. Here and there a story that began as a comic
bit would seem to grow restive, as though assailed momentarily by a hunger for
seriousness. (One such story - ''Caviar'' -was awarded a Pushcart Press prize in
1977.) But caprice and mugging were the norms, and the career seemed to point in
the direction of superior literary horseplay, not heft.

''World's End'' totally transforms that outlook. It isn't a pontificating work,
and the wit writer hasn't disappeared. He has, however, powerfully challenged
his own disengagement - the constraints of automatic knowingness and habitual
irony. And this movement of mind creates space for moral and emotional as well
as esthetic reality, producing a narrative in which passion, need and belief
breathe with striking force and freedom.

The book's pivotal 20th-century events - one actual, the other imaginary - are
the Peekskill riots of 1949, wherein locals attacked ''kikes and niggers'' up
from the city to hear a Paul Robeson concert, and a late-60's act of sabotage
against the Arcadia, an invented countercultural peace and ecology ship moored
in the Hudson. Key roles in each event are played by representatives of the Van
Brunts and Van Warts, Dutch immigrants whose ambitions first became entangled
when the doomed, indentured Van Brunts commenced scratching a living for their
almighty patroon. A major concern throughout is power and its mutations, and a
behavioral phenomenon under frequent scrutiny is treachery.

Links exist, as I said, between this book and the author's earlier work. Black
comedy and literary allusion erupt occasionally in the presentation of Van
Brunt, who in 1968 is an accident-prone college dropout with a 4-F deferment.
(Walter's first collision with history - he bangs into a historical marker while
cavorting on his Norton - costs him half a leg; we're told often that his avowed
hero is Meursault, Camus's famous nihilist.) Traces of the ungenerosity toward
bottom dog dreamers and others that blemishes some of the author's shorter
fiction also surface in ''World's End.'' (The mockery, in Mr. Boyle's story
''Greasy Lake,'' of those for whom Bruce Springsteen became a spokesman enters
this novel in an account of a rock concert at Vassar College.) But belief in
human range and possibility is stronger here than in any of Mr. Boyle's previous
books, and it generates a dozen or more characters - Indians, merchants, hippie
idealists, others -sufficiently various to experience complex reactions and
stimulate them in readers. Even young Walter himself - undisciplined,
half-educated -has a grainy nature. He can distinguish ''mindless,
brick-throwing racist[s]'' from people mildly infected with Bircherism, and he
possesses, in addition, a strong imagination of guilt. He's tormented by the
version of his father as traitor that's come down to him, through his mother and
other relatives - partisans of the Socialist Left who are convinced that his
father colluded with the moneyed Van Warts to set them at the mercy of the
anti-Communist mob during the riots. (A substantial portion of the narrative
follows Walter's struggle to find his father and to penetrate the mystery of his
behavior.) It's not primarily the sense of character, though, that lies at the
root of this book's distinction; it's the ceaseless reaching for broader
contexts, more comprehensive views - the push for a vision of
interrelationships, the obvious impatience with self-preoccupation. As ''World's
End'' interweaves, fugally, the lives of long-gone peasants, slaves, landholders
and displaced Indians with those of last season's activists, wantons, rentiers
and factory hands, we're conscious of recurrences and echoes. Past and present,
sharply separated by the chapter structure, are fused in motifs and unstressed
parallels. The themes that emerge aren't riveting when stated abstractly. We
knew before ''World's End'' that, in many ages, the powerful have done poorly at
conjoining power with remorse, have been incapable either of seeing their
opposition as other than rude, crude and lawless or of remembering the rude,
crude, lawless acts by which their own ascendancy was gained. Neither is it news
that, in many ages, the powerless, blinded by rage and uneducated into the
complexity of things, have settled for stereotypes of their masters, asked
impossible heroism of themselves and failed their best hopes.

BUT themes like these are deepened and freshened when they are developed in a
narrative that shuttles between epochs usually understood as discontinuous. We
grasp in new terms their connection with the American social and political
experiment. We see their pertinence to the succession of conflicts involving
flimflammed Indians, manorial lords, spies, patriots, Stalinist provocateurs,
enemies of ''the Communist-inspired, anti-American, long-haired hippie
outrage.'' The continual summons is toward unaccustomed speculation - thoughts
about permanence and change, forces and processes that seem independent of
persons. The ultimate effect is to move us beyond ourselves.

And it is, of course, history - that ''peculiar call of the spirit,'' as G. M.
Trevelyan termed it -that holds the key to the accomplishment. When religious
commitments collapse, science deflates itself, and political illusions are
universally seen through, history may well be the only call anybody's spirit can
heed, the only resource left for slaking our hunger for seriousness. But what an
immense resource! This is what one feels, engrossed in Mr. Boyle's evocations of
riot, insurrection and the days between. ''World's End'' is a smashing good
book, the peak achievement thus far in a career that seems now to have no clear
limits. GROWING UP A PAMPERED PUNK

T. Coraghessan Boyle has been down the same path taken by Benedict Arnold so
many years ago. It happened in the early 1970's, when, on a summer break from
the Iowa Writers Workshop, he visited a friend in upstate New York. ''Each
morning I would take a little dirt path and walk down to the Hudson River, which
was maybe half a mile away,'' he recalled in a telephone interview from his home
in Los Angeles. ''One day I noticed a historical marker there - I'd been by it a
thousand times - and I stopped to read it. In fact, that was the trail that
Benedict Arnold had taken to escape to the British.''

In ''World's End,'' his third novel, Mr. Boyle explores themes that emerge from
that simple incident: betrayal, continuity within change, escape, encounters
with history, the Hudson River.

The book, which he said ''evolved organically'' from plotless origins, draws on
other personal experiences as well. For example, the story is set in and around
Peterskill, a fictional Hudson Valley town closely resembling Peekskill, N.Y.,
Mr. Boyle's birthplace. And the ecology ship Arcadia, which enters the saga near
its conclusion, is modeled after the sloop Clearwater, on which Mr. Boyle crewed
for a week in 1984. The names were changed, he said, to create a sense of
''hyper-reality,'' a reminder to the reader that the book is a work of fiction,
not ''replicated history.'' ''I wanted to re-invent history; to use it as a
point of departure for a meditation on what my life has been, where I came from,
what my antecedents and the antecedents of the region I grew up in were.''

As a result, the novel contains many autobiographical details. Mr. Boyle's
memories of a tumultuous adolescence in the late 1960's, for instance, are
reflected in the character of Walter Van Brunt. ''I too grew up as a sort of
pampered punk,'' he said. ''I didn't really care about history or the human race
or anything else.''

Although hints of his rebellious youth remain (most noticeably in his wild
wardrobe), Mr. Boyle, who is 38 years old, said he has put down roots in Los
Angeles. He teaches writing twice a week at the University of Southern
California, where he is a professor of English. Currently he is researching his
next novel - ''about a Japanese in Georgia.''

MICHAEL FREITAG

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of T. Coraghessan Boyle (Pablo Campos; Bart Bartholomew) (pgs. 1
& 53)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COMRADES AT ODDS

BYLINE: By GUS TYLER; Gus Tyler is assistant president of the International
Ladies Garment Workers Union and author of ''The Political Imperative,''
''Organized Crime in America'' and ''The Labor Revolution.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words



IF I HAD A HAMMER . . .
The Death of the Old Left and the Birth of the New Left. By Maurice Isserman.
259 pp. New York: Basic Books. $18.95.

FOR American radicals, the decade of the 1950's was a time of torpor, the great
Ike Age. It was suddenly followed by the seething 60's, boiling over in racial,
campus and political riots. The startling contrast of the decades suggests a
discontinuity that Maurice Isserman, who teaches history at Smith College, finds
unhistoric. The theme of his latest book, ''If I Had a Hammer . . .'' - the
second of two on American radicalism (the first was ''Which Side Were You On?:
The American Communist Party During the Second World War'') - is that there was
more going on among radicals in the 50's than was apparent, and that the
explosions of the 60's were less sudden than they seemed to the under-30
generation of leftists who believed that history began with their entrance on
the political scene.

To prove his point, Mr. Isserman takes us through the tangled jungles of leftist
politics in the 50's and 60's. For veterans of those days of rage, his diligent
narrative will evoke nostalgia and nausea, a glad-sad remembrance of scenes on
the barricades with dear old comrades intertwined with the ritual rape of
innocents by sectarian ''saints.'' To those who missed the moment, the story
provides an informative text about a complex political subculture whose historic
role is a necessary, although neglected, tile in the mosaic of our times.

The prologue to the period was, as the title of Mr. Isserman's first chapter
puts it, ''The Collapse of the Communist Party,'' with the erstwhile
revolutionary vanguard battered externally by the Smith Act and Senator Joseph
McCarthy's witch hunt and shattered internally by Nikita Khrushchev's
revelations that the affable ''Uncle Joe'' Stalin was a man-eating monster. Who
would now fill the vacuum at the left? The contenders, according to Mr.
Isserman, were Max Schachtman, Irving Howe and A. J. Muste - as personifications
of movements, and as central characters in three of the book's five chapters.
''Max Schachtman, a Sectarian's Progress'' relates the tortuous tale of a true
Trotskyist's trek from left to right in search of a mass following; ''Dissent,
Journal of Tired Heroism'' is the odyssey of a little magazine whose mainstay
was (is) Irving Howe, a onetime Schachtmanite in search of a future in a
critical and introspective re-examination of the past; and ''Radical Pacifism,
the Americanization of Gandhi'' tells the saga of a peace movement whose guru
was A. J. Muste, a seer in search of good souls in search of a leader who could
show them what an octogenarian had learned as labor agitator, religious preacher
and radical omnipresence.

Along the way, the reader encounters many other groups and grouplets: the Daily
Worker faction that broke from the Communist Party after Soviet suppression of
the 1956 Hungarian uprising; the various socialist spinoffs - the left-leaning
Socialist Party, the right-leaning Social-Democrat Federation, the Student
League for Industrial Democracy (from which sprang the hell-raising, heaven-bent
Students for a Democratic Society); the movements on the campuses; the civil
rights movement, including the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s Southern Christian
Leadership Conference and the militantly pacifist Student Non-Violent
Coordinating Committee; the peaceniks - oldies such as the Quakers' American
Friends Service Committee and the younger Student Peace Union, National
Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy and Non-Violent Action Against Nuclear
Weapons.

Finally, the ''Trots'': the Communist League of America (Opposition), begat by
the Trotskyists out of the Communist Party, wed with the likes of Muste and
James Burnham to beget the American Workers Party that lay with the Socialist
Party briefly to depart for the Fourth International and beget the Socialist
Workers Party, from which Schachtman separated to beget the Workers Party that
changed its name to the Independent Socialist League that begat a youth movement
- the Young Socialist League -that mated with the Young People's Socialist
League to beget the Socialist Youth League, with a national membership of 83.
These and others passionately shared the same vision of a world blessed with
''peace, plenty and freedom'' while engaging in endless internecine warfare
waged in institutional poverty amid enthralling dogma.

From this messianic mess, the New Left acquired ''a distaste for ideological
hairsplitting and rigidly centralized organizations,'' an attitude that, Mr.
Isserman notes, ''made it particularly well suited to take advantage of the
opportunities presented both by the idealism generated by the civil rights
movement and the disenchantment generated by the Vietnam War.'' The New Left
opened its nonsectarian doors to all those inspired by the Old Left's vision of,
in the words of the ''Internationale,'' ''a better world in birth.''

A sequel to ''If I Had a Hammer . . .'' dealing with the 60's and 70's is likely
to reveal that the New Left, like the Old, did not escape sectarianism, the
occupational disease of those with a monopoly on The Truth, whether in politics,
religion or academia. Righteous souls are prone to become self-righteous
scourges, flailing away first at other sects and then at one another. Sure of
the ''truths'' that inspire them, they attribute all failure to the cupidity or
stupidity of others, usually their spiritual next of kin, and fratricide becomes
the path to purity.

Unwittingly, Mr. Isserman contributes to this sort of solipsistic logic with his
repeated appraisals of ''failures'' by both the Old and New Left: they did the
wrong thing. The implication is that if they had successfully completed a course
on ''How to Make a Revolution'' and had applied the lessons learned from a
proper professor, the Old Left would never have had to yield to the New and the
New, properly instructed, would now be a mighty movement.

This is a notion Mr. Isserman may wish to rethink. The New Left was, after all,
not purely an American phenomenon: it had its violent counterparts among the
young rebels and terrorists in England, France and Germany; in China's Red
Guard; in the militant students who forced Japan to shut down its universities.
What were the social roots of this global paroxysm? Could it be that the
political turmoil of that decade was basically an intergenerational struggle, a
massive Oedipal outburst?

SURELY the time was propitious. The generation that was coming to maturity in
the 60's was bigger than life-size, the bumper crop of the postwar baby boom.
Under the best of circumstances, socializing so massive a horde of teen-agers
and young adults would have been a staggering challenge. To make matters worse,
these youngsters of in-between age were growing up in an in-between age. Without
inner or outer direction, this understandably bewildered generation vented its
inner frustrations in acts of external fury.

It would be useful if, in a subsequent book, Mr. Isserman were to dig more
deeply into the 60's to find clues, not simply out of idle academic curiosity,
but also to alert us for an unsettling future when the grown-up babies of the
onetime baby-boomers are let loose - in great numbers - on an uncertain world in
the Age of Aquarius.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Max Schachtman, leader of the Workers Party, in 1945.
(Tamiment Institute Library, New York University)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam

SECTION: Section 10; Page 22, Column 6; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


To the Editor: American travelers to Vietnam should not assume that the United
States Government or any foreign embassy located in Vietnam can provide consular
services or protection during their stay. ''Vietnam for Visitors'' (Travel,
Sept. 13) correctly notes that the United States does not maintain diplomatic
ties with Vietnam and that usual consular services are not available. The author
suggests, however, that embassies of ''friendly'' governments in Hanoi, such as
Britain, France and Australia, can help in an emergency. To imply that services
not available in Vietnam from the United States Government may be obtained from
other embassies there encourages travelers to assume too much.

Although there are no restrictions on the use of United States passports for
travel to Vietnam, the State Department discourages travel to Vietnam.

Consular assistance to Americans by foreign embassies is governed by formal
agreement. No agreement between the United States and any other government
exists with respect to the protection of United States citizens in Vietnam.
Although there have been instances where foreign embassies have been of
assistance to our citizens in times of emergency, it would be ill advised for
American travelers to embark upon a trip to any foreign country with the
expectation that the embassies of other governments would be in a position to
assist them if they encounter difficulties.

T. A .D. THARP
Deputy Assistant Secretary
For Overseas Citizens Services
United States Department of State
  Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OF COMMITMENT AND IRREVOCABILITY

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 30, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


With all due respect for his commendable tour of duty in Vietnam, R. L.
Crossland seems to advocate a problematic modus operandus in ''Going for Broke:
When a Decision Is Final'' [Sept. 6, Opinion page].

He seems to advocate the irrevocability of a decision as a means to an end, when
in fact it is our ability as humans to alter our decisions, change our minds, as
more information surfaces that sets us apart from other animals in our genus.

Progress is a function of change, and change is a function of our visions, and
the means by which we augment our perception of situations, facing each new
circumstance with the knowledge previously acquired.

If in wartime, which is so vividly described through the author, we did not
question our judgment through the course of battle, would the bloodshed of any
war ever end?

If the child with his hand on the checkers did not stop to evaluate his next
move, would he ever grow by gaining from each previous experience?

Would a doctor be able to heal the ill, if he could not continuously re-evaluate
the progress of his patient?

What must be made crystal clear is that there is a sharp difference between
commitment and irrevocability.

Commitment to our beliefs and endeavors is crucial, but so is the ability to
restructure, regroup and alter our view.

For in life, the only irrevocability is death.

ARNOLD BONK
   Fairfield

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN COUGAR MELLENCAMP;
REBEL WITH A CAUSE

BYLINE: By Timothy White; Timothy White, who is completing a social history of
Southern California, writes frequently about popular music.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 41, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3790 words


EVERYWHERE HE LOOKS, HE SEES THE high and haughty giving short shrift to the
humble American, and John Cougar Mellencamp is in a slow burn.

Within the space of two weeks, the rock singer has shuttled from the stifling
hearing rooms of the United States Senate to a simmering back alley in the
poorest black neighborhood in Savannah, Ga., and the things he has seen have
inflamed his notorious Hoosier ire. (It is not without reason that the
35-year-old singer and songwriter has awarded himself the sobriquet of ''Little
Bastard.'') ''This street, one of the last unpaved places in this thriving town,
is a sad comment on the local government,'' he states flatly, surveying the
dust-strewn shanty site for the video of ''Paper in Fire,'' the ferocious first
single from his new album, ''The Lonesome Jubilee,'' which has risen promptly to
the top 10. ''Do you know a film crew came through this area . . . and dressed a
block of this lane to look like a shambled Vietnamese village! Talk about
lending insult to injury.''

For his part, Mellencamp arrived the day before at this hoveled tract between
Price and Broad Streets, asking door-to-door permission of the locals to depict
in the video their neighborhood and its inhabitants exactly as he found them.
They could participate in any manner they cared to, he explained, and would be
paid generously for their time and contributions.

Suspicious and frightened at first, but drawn to the rough-hewn warmth of the
singer, they discussed the offer among themselves for several hours and
ultimately - and enthusiastically - agreed.

So it is that on a cloudy and sultry day, filming is about to commence. All
told, there are perhaps 40 citizens, crew and band personnel gathered around
Mellencamp's small microphone stand. ''O.K., everybody settle down and listen
in!'' hollers the puggish Mellencamp. ''There's no script,'' he assures with a
beguiling grin, ''so just be yourselves, enjoy each other's company and have
some damned fun.''

''I ain't left this ol' street for 40 years,'' remarks one elderly gentleman,
looking on in amusement as the music commences, ''and this is the first pleasant
surprise I seen on it in that whole time.''


MEET THE NEW JOHN COUGAR MELLENCAMP - the former enfant terrible of heartland
rock. This is the man who once stormed out of a CBS ''Nightwatch'' interview
because of what he considered baiting questioning. This is the same man who, in
1982, threw an equipment-clearing tantrum onstage in Ontario, Canada, when
technical problems became disruptive (he later gave a free concert by way of
apology).

He did all this, however, when he was known as John Cougar - a name foisted on
him by his first manager. Today's Mellencamp (he restored his Dutch-German
surname in 1983) has retained his wildcat moniker. ''I was well-known as a
failure,'' he explains, ''so I figured I'd fight to fix, rather than deny, my
sorry reputation.'' It is a fight that the singer appears to have won. Late last
year, Billboard magazine, the music-trade bible, announced the three top pop
artists of the year: glamorous Whitney Houston, sexy siren Madonna - and
craggy-faced John Cougar Mellencamp.

Last June 18, it was the new Mellencamp who appeared before the Senate
Subcommittee on Agricultural Production and Stabilization of Prices. The singer
is a member of Farm Aid, a movement based in Cambridge, Mass., to help alleviate
the economic crisis facing small family farms throughout the nation. Once a
year, since 1985, he and the country singer Willie Nelson have headlined a Farm
Aid benefit concert. It was as representatives of Farm Aid that the two singers
were testifying in support of the Family Farm bill, sponsored by Senator Tom
Harkin, a Democrat of Iowa.

''I am an entertainer playing rock music,'' Mellencamp told the committee in his
intense, raspy drawl, ''and Willie asked me to be involved in Farm Aid about two
or three years ago. In Seymour, Ind., the town I grew up in, there used to be a
John Deere dealership - it is no longer there. . . . When I am out on tour and I
am talking to people, they are afraid. Their vision of the future is: What is
going to happen to my children in 20 years when, all of a sudden, three farmers
are farming the State of Indiana and they also own all the food-processing
plants!''

''It seems funny and peculiar,'' he continued, ''that, after my shows and after
Willie's shows, people come up to us for advice. It is because they have got
nobody to turn to.''

As Mellencamp spoke, there was a steady exodus of those against Harkin's Family
Farm bill. Shortly before the singer began speaking, Senator Rudy Boschwitz, a
Republican of Minnesota, leader of the farm bill's opponents, had taken the
floor to inform Mellencamp and Nelson: ''I thought I was going to come here and
listen to Willie Nelson and his friend Mellencamp sing. Instead, I am listening
to the Senator from Iowa, whose song I have heard before.''

''You know,'' whispered Mellencamp into Willie Nelson's ear, ''this kind of
behavior really brings out the juvenile in me.'' But the Little Bastard held his
temper.

It is this new self-discipline and focused fire that have enabled Mellencamp to
reclaim rock - which has in recent years become largely frivolous - as a vehicle
for social commentary. Rock-and-roll is a billion-dollar industry, so such a
move by a singer of Mellencamp's status is nothing if not provocative.
Politically, the songwriter is a left-of-center populist with no love for what
he views as the current ''monolithic forces'' of big business. ''They're willing
to exploit John Doe,'' he says, ''and let America become a third-world country
economically if it benefits them.''

The current rock scene has been largely dominated by the working-class fervor of
Bruce Springsteen, whose showmanship and compositional splendor have been offset
by an ambiguous thematic voice and an equally enigmatic personality. A
Springsteen hit such as ''Born in the U.S.A.'' greets the ears like the sound of
Caesar entering Rome, yet its lyrics are actually the lament of a Vietnam
veteran who sees himself as a beaten dog. Springsteen is a melodramatist whose
personality is deliberately disguised by his theatrics. He carefully restricts
contact with the public and is rarely seen offstage. Mellencamp, on the other
hand, is an open book, with no larger-than-life bravura -even though the deeply
personal side to his music has been little known. Springsteen's flamboyant sound
is all flesh, but Mellencamp's more accessible rock is all bone.

Mellencamp has gained stature as a scrappy musical spokesman who doesn't
broadcast mixed signals or an underlying message of defeat. Like Springsteen, he
declines to permit his defiant brand of rock to be used for car commercials or
ketchup ads. He was particularly pungent when aides of President Reagan
considered the use of ''Pink Houses'' - Mellencamp's paean to the simple
economic hopes of the heartland - as a campaign song for the President's 1984
re-election drive.

''I made it clear from day one that he just had to forget it,'' Mellencamp said
at the time. ''I couldn't bear gettin' involved that way with any politician,
least of all Reagan, and corrupt what is essentially a basic, humble dream of
contentment he can't even understand.''

Mellencamp himself understands that successful rock stars have customarily
retreated from controversy as their fortunes have risen. Yet the songwriter is
taking a bolder approach. In ''The Lonesome Jubilee,'' he says, ''I want to
create songs that include a lot of ordinary people, that raise their
self-esteem.'' This album, his eighth, is his most ambitious attempt ''to report
on my boomer generation's bruised optimism,'' as he puts it. ''The title refers
to ordinary victories, the private ones that are usually very solitary. In the
past, I've tried to sing about overlooked Americans. On the new album, I'm
trying to speak for them.''


MELLENCAMP'S previous three albums of grass roots social commentary - ''American
Fool,'' ''Uh-Huh,'' ''Scarecrow'' - each sold a solid three million copies. The
singer himself believes that their appeal lies in his merging of two major
influences -James Brown and the Rolling Stones - plus a folkish enthusiasm all
his own.

In ''Lonesome Jubilee,'' which has won immediate critical acclaim for its artful
instrumentation and searing imagery, Mellencamp takes heartland rock one step
further. He augments the larger intent of this album with a new musical
vocabulary. At his behest, his eight-member band has expanded its flinty
hard-rock approach by employing such traditionally rustic instruments as fiddle,
hammered dulcimer, autoharp, accordion, banjo, mandolin and lap steel guitar.

''With John's music, you work on the emotional essentials,'' says Larry Crane,
Mellencamp's guitarist and right-hand musical confidant for 20 uninterrupted
years. ''He always insists on an authentic band sound when he's recording, which
has become unusual in this time of endless studio gadgetry. He's also not
willing to sacrifice that band feel for the sake of an idea, or vice versa, so
he makes it our responsibility to keep up.''

Crane practiced tirelessly on a lap steel guitar. Kenny Aronoff, a classically
trained percussionist, was dispatched to consult with Malcolm Daglish, the noted
hammered dulcimer expert, to tackle that vintage instrument. Mike Wanchic was
urged to master the dobro.

''Some critics have said these instruments on 'Jubilee' have an Appalachian
flavor, but that's wrong,'' says Crane. ''Appalachian music, as John and I both
know, is a certain cross between folk and bluegrass. What John said he wanted
was a 'real spooky sort of gypsy rock,' and he used trial and error with us to
find it.''

Lyrically, the bulk of ''The Lonesome Jubilee'' seems an extension of the
underdog themes of Mellencamp's preceding album, ''Scarecrow.'' Titles such as
''Hard Times for an Honest Man,'' ''Down and Out in Paradise,'' ''We Are the
People'' and ''The Real Life'' reflect a continuing interest in America's
troubled countryside. However, the heavily atmospheric musical settings have an
eerie vividness that makes them more than topical.

As with ''Scarecrow,'' whose association with Farm Aid encouraged oversimplified
interpretations, ''The Lonesome Jubilee'' also threatens to be understood only
on a superficial level. Mellencamp readily concedes that ''Scarecrow'' was a
''double-barreled shotgun.'' ''Farm Aid,'' he says, ''made it easy for people to
deal with the title track poetically, romantically, but they often didn't hear
the personal shots fired on the record's other 10 songs.''

''See,'' he adds bluntly, ''a lot of the time I write in the third person, but
I'm mostly describing my own ordeals. When those unsettled struggles prey on
your mind, you become haunted. To get free, you must defeat your ghosts.''

In that light, ''Paper in Fire,'' the first hit single from ''The Lonesome
Jubilee,'' takes on an ominous immediacy:

There is a good life
Right across this green field
And each generation
Stares at it from afar
But we keep no check
On our appetites
So the green fields turn to brown
Like paper in fire.
        (Copyright 1987 Riva Music Inc.)

Is Mellencamp perhaps singing about his own past?

''Let me put it this way,'' he murmurs, seated on the brick stoop outside his
beachside summer house, less than an hour's drive from downtown Savannah.
''Remember that sweet old guy in the alley who said he hadn't been out of there
in 40 years? Well, he took me aside to tell me he'd also been drunk for most of
those 40 years. Because if you come from that place, people mark you for life,
won't hire you, want no part of you. That's a lot of pain to surmount all by
yourself.

''In my corner of the world, I've experienced those attitudes, and the rage they
create. 'The Lonesome Jubilee,' like 'Scarecrow' and the rest of my best stuff,
is about me and my family tree grappling against both the world and our own
inner goddamned whirlwind.''


AT BIRTH, ON OCT. 7, 1951, John J. Mellencamp was found to have a potentially
crippling defect of the spinal vertebrae known as spina bifida. A corrective
operation was a success, but Mrs. Mellencamp would later wonder if the trauma
had a lingering effect on her cantankerous offspring.

Not that the Mellencamps were known for their benign dispositions. The former
Marilyn Joyce Lowe, a runner-up in the 1946 Miss Indiana pageant, first
encountered her handsome brawler of a husband, Richard Mellencamp, during a
hectic Saturday afternoon in the late 1940's.

''Dad knocked Mom over as she was walking out of a store,'' says the singer with
a wide grin. ''He and his big brother Joe were running from the cops after
pummeling four guys in retaliation for a whupping my father had gotten earlier.
The police caught . . . Joe, but Dad pitched Mom on her butt and kept on going.
It was love at first sideswipe.''

And it was of a piece with the temperamental exploits of John Mellencamp's
elders. ''I've often wondered where the family got its anger from,'' he says.
''I can tell you that, for as far back as anyone can care to remember, there has
been a rigid petty small-town class system in Seymour.'' Seymour, Ind., has long
been a tough agricultural town with some light industry. It was in the outlying
farmland that Mellencamp's great-great-grandfather, Johann Heinrich Mollenkamp,
a German-Dutch peasant farmer from Germany, settled in 1851.

In the town's social hierarchy, at the top ''were the people who made their
money during the Industrial Revolution,'' continues Mellencamp. ''In the middle
were the sometimes poorly educated wage earners, and at the bottom were the
folks in shacks. The elite didn't like any meddling with this pecking order.

''My Grandpa only knew one solution to any belittlement or perceived slight - a
fight. A guy who comes on macho is probably the most vulnerable person in the
world, and he was. After the sudden death of his father, the family farm had to
be sold, and Grandpa was forced to quit school in the third grade to make his
way as a carpenter. He was barely literate, couldn't speak English well, and
felt deeply ashamed. Grandpa went to register to vote as a young man and told
the clerk, 'I'm Harry Perry Mellencamp.' She laughed, poked fun at his name, and
he walked out. He never voted in his life, due to that mortifying incident.''

''We were always hearing talk that 'You low-class Mellencamps will never amount
to anything,' so from the instant he was able to swagger, Uncle Joe did,'' says
Mellencamp. The 6-foot-2 Joe became a star running back at Seymour High and
Indiana University, and he built up a successful concrete and construction
business. Women and brawling were Uncle Joe's undoing.

''Joe married, but he . . . was never faithful to his wife,'' the singer
continues. ''In 1967, he got so bored he was briefly involved with the John
Birch Society. That woke me up to the ugliness of his overall outlook.''

Meanwhile, Joe's younger brother Richard - an electrician's assistant - was
crafting his own future, moving from contracting jobs to Robbins Electric, a
company with customers as diverse as Disney World and the nuclear-power
industry. His bullish ambition served him well, but he could not buck Seymour's
rigid hierarchy.

''My Dad went into the Cadillac dealership to buy his first nice car, and the
salesman refused to wait on him,'' says Mellencamp. ''Their attitude was 'You
Mellencamps can't afford these.' '' Undeterred, the senior Mellencamp moved his
wife and five children to nearby Rockford.

Richard Mellencamp, recalls his son, was ''a complete tyrant.'' ''Dad and I
would have fist fights, and then we stopped communicating altogether.'' At 14,
John Mellencamp was a beer-swilling truant. The next forbidden plunge was into
rock-and-roll, ''particularly the popular music of blacks, which -since the
region still had signs reading 'Black man, don't let the sun set on you here' -
was something my friends and I calculated that the right people would hate. I
was raised with a near-oblivious disregard for racial differences, but when I
learned the town elite frowned on these viewpoints I embraced them all the
more.''

His first record purchase was Chubby Checker's 1960 hit ''The Twist,'' but at 15
John Mellencamp found grittier fare. He and Fred Booker, a 17-year-old from one
of Seymour's 28 black households, formed a boisterous eight-man band called
Crepe Soul. As 1960's teen culture evolved from the Beatles and rhythm-and-blues
to acid rock and the sexual revolution, John discovered dizzying new avenues for
parental aggravation. ''A narcotics agent came to school and busted my friends
and me for amphetamines - we'd been high for the whole week when the principal
got suspicious.''

Back home, Richard Mellencamp administered the ritual drubbing, then stripped
his delinquent charge of his long tresses and hippie mufti. John retaliated by
parading around the neighborhood with a hand-lettered sign around his neck that
read: ''I am the product of my father!''

When he was 18, John's 21-year-old girlfriend, Priscilla Esterline, became
pregnant. Indiana law did not permit an 18-year-old to get married without
parental consent, so the couple eloped to Kentucky. John enrolled at Indiana's
Vincennes University, a two-year institution willing to wink at his D average.
After commencement, he found employment installing equipment for Indiana Bell,
but was discharged after he accidentally disconnected all the phone service in
Freetown, Ind. The failed lineman returned to his first passion: music. His
early albums, Mellencamp recalls, were full of ''selfish, reckless
boy-wants-girl stuff, songs I meant then but surely wouldn't write now.''

In 1976, the singer allowed his manager at the time to recast him as John Cougar
- a Midwestern clone of the glittering pop surrealist David Bowie. The
comparison was ludicrous. Four lean years later, John was in Los Angeles cutting
his last-ditch LP ''Nothin' Matters and What if It Did,'' when reports trickled
in from Australia that ''I Need a Lover,'' an earlier single of his, had gone
No. 1 Down Under. Shortly thereafter, the same single went top 30 in the United
States.

Meanwhile, John had fallen in love with Victoria Lynn Granucci, daughter of a
veteran Hollywood stuntman. He was hurriedly divorced from his first wife, and
two months after he and his new love were married he became the father of a
daughter, Teddi Jo Mellencamp.

By the close of 1983, Mellencamp was a family man living with his wife and two
daughters in Bloomington, Ind. He was also one of America's most successful rock
stars. But life remained unsettled. He was changing management again, searching
wearily for a business plan to solidify his belated success. What was worse, his
supposedly indestructible grandfather - the man he always turned to when he had
a problem - was succumbing to lung cancer. ''Just before his death,'' the singer
remembers, ''he called everybody into his bedroom, and although he wasn't a
religious person he said, 'You know, I'm having a real bad beating of a time
with the Devil.' He was saying that the Devil wouldn't let him say a prayer to
save himself. He'd built up this 'I am a rock' pose and where had it gotten him?
It stopped me cold to see my Grandpa so scared. Six hours later, he was gone.''


A BLEAK EARLY-morning breeze penetrates the stand of trees surrounding John
Mellencamp's split-level home in Bloomington backcountry. The summer is spent,
and the family is back to its normal routine. The kids fret over homework, and
Vicky Mellencamp prepares for a board meeting at the area's progressive primary
school. John Mellencamp sits in the tiny kitchen that is his lair.

''Let's face it, you are your parents, whether any of us like it or not,'' he
says. ''I believe the personal history I address on 'Scarecrow' and 'The
Lonesome Jubilee' is the same. I think it's tragic when families don't grow up,
when they don't get past adolescence.''

Mellencamp wrote a lot of songs over the summers of 1983-85, good-time material
with titles such as ''Smart Guys'' and ''The Carolina Shag,'' but none of it
found its way onto the album that became ''Scarecrow.'' Instead, he began to
sift through his grandfather's legacy, wondering what it would take to call a
halt to the Mellencamps' undeclared war within themselves.

''My Dad changed completely when we buried Grandpa, went from being a screaming
dictator to the nicest person you ever met, and he apologized,'' says the
singer, his voice unsteady, ''with his whole heart for the way he'd behaved.
Even Uncle Joe grew up at the age of 54, and became the kindest soul you could
imagine.'' Richard Mellencamp left his job as the executive vice president of
Robbins Electric to become his son's financial manager.

Thinking of his troubled family and his own untempered nature, John Mellencamp
wrote a song for ''Scarecrow'' titled ''The Face of the Nation,'' with the stark
refrain: ''You know babe I'm gonna keep on tryin'/ To put things right/ If only
for me and you/ Cause the devil sleeps tonight.''

Just as ''Scarecrow'' was haunted by the specter of his grandfather, so ''The
Lonesome Jubilee'' is shadowed by the death last year of his Uncle Joe. ''
'Paper in Fire' is about Joe and the family's ingrained anger,'' says the
songwriter. ''I figure rock-and-roll's a far better way to blow off steam.''

''Paper in Fire'' is the sound of a soul in desperate flight, running either
from or toward its destiny. The choir of screaming fiddle, banjo and squeezebox
creates a chilling aura of suspense -but leaves the conclusion to one's
imagination.

''I'm more content and happy with myself than I've been in the last two
decades,'' says Mellencamp, his soft tone slowly rising, ''even though I
sometimes babble stuff that I regret, or wrestle with an impulse to tell off the
U.S. Senate.''

Mellencamp rises to prepare for a band rehearsal, then pauses.

''You know, my smallest girl was born two summers ago in Bloomington Hospital.
Vicky had gotten awful sick with chicken pox and the doctors said the illness
might result in deformity of the fetus. We were so terrified - maybe the way my
parents were with my spinal problems at birth -that we never had time to think
up a damned name for the child. As the doctor began the delivery, we decided
that if there was any justice in the world the baby would be healthy.

''So now,'' he says, smiling faintly, ''as I think about family truths and
consequences with 'The Lonesome Jubilee,' I try to remind myself that there
really is a little justice in this world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of John Cougar Mellencamp (Karen Kuehn) (pg. 40-1); Mellencamp
with his band: Mike Wanchic, Crystal Taliefero, Larry Crane,Lisa Germano, Kenny
Aronoff, Toby Myers and Pat Peterson (Karen Kuehn) (pg. 67)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
A Light, Not a Mission

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


Is there some missionary sense in which the United States has an obligation to
spread democracy throughout the world? A lot of its citizens seem to think so,
judging from the response to a recent column concerning Nicaragua.

''The United States,'' I wrote, ''has no historic or God-given mission to bring
democracy to other nations; nor does such a purpose justify the overthrow of
governments it does not like.''

''Wrong!'' declares Edward Friedman of Marblehead, Mass., in a passionate
letter. ''The maintenance of freedom is a God-given obligation . . . and history
has shown that those who refuse to fight for freedom soon lose it.''

Steven L. Eber of Coral Gables, Fla., advises me to ''study the ideological
foundations underlying the Monroe Doctrine and how the United States was,
indeed, the natural defender of democracy and freedom in the New World.''

Most respondents also accused me of a double standard; thus Roger E. Hernandez
of Upper Montclair, N.J., said that I had exposed an ''inability to think beyond
knee-jerk reactions'' because my ''support for sanctions against dictatorships
such as exist in Chile and South Africa'' contradicted my statement cited above.

To the last point first: Mr. Hernandez is wrong that I ever have asked for
sanctions or any other action against Chile. I despise the Pinochet regime and
deeply oppose any U.S. action that would support or prolong it; but I do not
advocate and would oppose U.S. efforts to overthrow or ''destabilize'' that
Government. My view that the U.S. has no mission to spread democracy holds as
strongly for Chile - or South Korea, or South Africa, or Eastern Europe, or
China - as for Nicaragua.

I did advocate sanctions against South Africa, when Congress considered the
matter. But I specifically stated that I did not believe sanctions would have
any serious effect on the course of events in that country, and should be
applied by the U.S. only because they would express American disapproval of
apartheid. But expressing disapproval is a far cry from active efforts to
overthrow a government or change a nation's internal political system, however
hateful.

As for the Monroe Doctrine, nothing in it or its ''ideological foundations''
gives the U.S. a mission to spread democracy. It declares rather that ''the
American continents, by the free and independent condition which they have
assumed and maintained, are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for
future colonization by any European powers.''

Mr. Eber's view of the U.S. as ''the natural defender of democracy and freedom
in the New World'' is confounded by the long history of U.S. military and
economic intervention in Latin countries, by such episodes as the overthrow of
the Guatemalan Government in 1954, and by the United States' long, shabby record
of support for Latin dictators like the Somozas in Nicaragua, Perez Jimenez in
Venezuela, Batista in Cuba, etc. The idea of the Colossus of the North as the
defender of their freedoms would make many Americans south of the Rio Grande
laugh through their bitterness.

Mr. Friedman seems to me to miss the point. If U.S. citizens were unwilling to
fight - actually or politically -for their own freedom, they might indeed lose
it. But does that mean they'll lose their freedom if they are unwilling to
impose democracy on other countries, or unwilling to overthrow recognized
governments, however repressive or unfriendly? History ''has shown'' nothing of
the kind.

Besides, the ''maintenance of freedom'' is not what I was talking about. U.S.
support for a democratic regime that is being attacked or subverted by
repressive forces of the left or right might well be justified if invited -
although, as in Vietnam, the ''freedom'' being defended may be minimal and the
cost may be astronomical. But even when justified, the ''maintenance of
freedom'' where it exists is not the same thing as overthrowing a government or
financing a revolt in order to impose U.S. ideas of democracy on some other
nation.

If the United States has a ''mission,'' it's not to be the arbiter or enforcer
of any other nation's political system, but to remain the best example to the
world of a democracy confident that the freedom of all its people is its
greatest strength. In that way, the great republic that emerged from the
Constitution framed in 1787 can hold up a light for the world to see and follow
- a far more effective assertion of freedom than any amount of guns and money
shipped abroad ''in search of monsters to destroy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Democrats Exchange Views And Barbs on Foreign Issues

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: DES MOINES, Sept. 27


The six Democratic candidates for President, who up to now have studiously
avoided major disagreements on isues, today clashed, at times sharply, over a
wide range of foreign policy matters.

In a debate sponsored by an Iowa antiwar group, Senator Albert Gore of Tennessee
repeatedly criticized his rivals, saying they had helped to foster the
impression that Democrats were against ''every single weapons system that has
been proposed.''

And Mr. Gore and former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona criticized Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri for proposing a ban on all in-flight testing of
missiles. They argued that such a ban would prevent any modernization of
American forces and weaken nuclear deterrence.

The debate offered the first signs that foreign policy issues could divide
Democrats again in 1988, as they have repeatedly since the Vietnam War.

Hints as to Positions

The debate, sponsored by the Stop the Arms Race Now Political Action Committee,
offered indications of where the various Democratic contenders intend to
position themselves.

Mr. Gore sought to present himself as the candidate with the toughest line on
the Soviet Union, seeking to occupy some of the ground that Senator Sam Nunn of
Georgia would have staked out had he been a candidate.

At the other end of the spectrum, Senator Paul Simon of Illinois and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson were clearly courting the antiwar activists, who play an important
role in Democratic primaries and caucuses.

Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts often leaned in the direction of Mr.
Simon and Mr. Jackson, at one point telling Mr. Gore that ''there's an air of
unreality'' about discussing new weapons systems when ''we can blow up the
Soviet Union 40 times over.''

Seeking a Balance

But Mr. Dukakis, along with Mr. Babbitt and Mr. Gephardt, seemed to be seeking a
balance of positions that would appeal to the Democrats' liberal constituency
without alienating centrist voters in a general election.

The sharpest exchange came when Senator Simon asked why Mr. Gore had voted for
so many weapons systems, including the MX missile.

''The question itself is part of the problem we have been facing,'' Mr. Gore
retorted. The Democrats, Mr. Gore charged, sometimes seemed to be sending the
Russians the message that they ''may be able to get exactly what they want
without giving us anything.''

Mr. Gore also took issue with a suggestion by Mr. Dukakis that the United States
consider withdrawing troops from South Korea.

'Get Your Facts Straight'

Mr. Dukakis replied sharply: ''The first thing to do is to get your facts
straight.'' Mr. Dukakis said he had only suggested that the United States make
clear that it was willing to withdraw its troops from South Korea if the Korean
Government did not move toward democracy.

''I didn't spend 16 months in Korea so these generals could deny human and labor
rights to the people of Korea,'' said Mr. Dukakis, a veteran who served in South
Korea in the mid-1950's. Peppered with questions by reporters after the debate,
he said that he was not proposing a withdrawal of American troops, and that
South Korea had been making progress on human rights in recent months.

Early in the debate, there was general agreement among the contenders on a broad
range of issues, and the candidates frequently exchanged compliments. Mr.
Babbitt praised Mr. Dukakis's tough stand against the South African government,
and Mr. Dukakis praised Mr. Babbitt for encouraging all the candidates to focus
on the importance of Mexico to American interest.

All the contenders supported the recent accord between the United States and the
Soviet Union on medium and short range nuclear weapons.

Against Aid to Contras

The consensus among the candidates was especially pronounced on aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels, which all of the contenders opposed, often in strong
language.

Mr. Gephardt accused the Reagan Administration of putting ''the Constitution of
the United States through the shredder'' in its Nicaraguan policy. Mr. Babbitt
called the Administration's policy in Nicaragua ''a slow motion Bay of Pigs.''

Still, even on the Nicaraguan issue, Mr. Gore sought to differentiate himself
from the others.

After Mr. Simon, Mr. Jackson and Mr. Babbitt had taken forceful positions
against the contras, Mr. Gore said: ''All of the others have said basically the
same thing. I agree with some of it and disagree with some of it.''

'Humanitarian' Aid Backed

While Mr. Gore said that he, too, opposed military aid to the contras, he
supported ''maintenance'' or ''humanitarian'' aid to the contras while the
United States pursued the peace plan advanced by President Oscar Arias of Costa
Rica.

Mr. Gore, however, was not alone in seeking to stake out a position of toughness
on at least some issues.

Mr. Gephardt warned that the Democrats ''take this rap for being weak on
defense'' and needed to counteract this image.

Both Mr. Babbitt and Mr. Dukakis called for enhancing the West's conventional
strength in Europe.

Even Mr. Simon, who sought to position himself - with Mr. Jackson - as the
firmest advocate of disarmament, said in response to a question that he was
strongly against a withdrawal of American troops from South Korea.

In concluding, Mr. Jackson emphasized his support for having America's allies in
Western Europe assume a larger share of the military burden. And he said Japan
should use its wealth to give more help to the third world. ''Make Japan use
some of that money now,'' he said. ''Let Japan take the lead on an international
Marshall plan.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Democratic Presidential candidates, Rep. Richard Gephardt,
Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sen. Albert Gore Jr., Sen. Paul Simon, Bruce Babbitt and
Gov. Michael Dukakis (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

In Response to Cambodian Aide, U.S. Calls for Return of War Dead

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 503 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


The Pentagon, responding to published remarks by a Cambodian leader, said today
that if Cambodia held the remains of missing American servicemen, then it should
return them to the United States.

The United States will seek, through international agencies, to verify
assertions by the Cambodian, Prime Minister Hun Sen, that the Cambodian
Government has the remains of many Americans missing in action since the Vietnam
War, when American planes bombed Cambodia and American forces sometimes crossed
its borders, a Pentagon spokesman said.

The Cambodian official made the remarks in an interview with The Los Angeles
Times published on Saturday.

But a Pentagon spokesman, Lieut. Col. James Jannette, said Washington would not
talk directly to the Vietnamese-backed Government about the issue because, like
most nations, the United States does not recognize the regime in Phnom Penh.

''We welcome any information on the recovery of remains which are possibly those
of American personnel missing in Cambodia,'' Colonel Jannette said, reading from
a prepared statement. ''We hope the Phnom Penh regime will cooperate in the
return to the United States of any remains it has in its possession.''

'No One in Touch With Us'

In the published interview, the Cambodian leader asserted that the Government
has ''the bones of American M.I.A.'s.'' He added: ''But no one has gotten in
touch with us, so we have kept them. If the American Government doesn't come,
there is nothing we can do about that.''

''We are prepared to release them on the basis of humanitarianism,'' he said,
adding that his Government would not demand recognition from the United States
in exchange.

Colonel Jannette said that the United States had inquired several times, through
international agencies and through the governments of Laos and Vietnam, whether
servicemen's remains had been found in Cambodia and could be returned. He said
there had never been any response. Inquiries by an organization representing the
families of the missing also elicited no response, he said.

The United States does not have relations with Vietnam, but visits by American
officials, including John W. Vessey Jr., a Presidential envoy and retired
general, have helped win the return of the remains of missing servicemen.

Prime Minister Hun Sen told The Los Angeles Times that he did not know the
precise number of servicemen whose remains were in his Government's possession,
but said: ''We have quite a number of them. The numbers will not be a
disappointment to the U.S. Government.''

The United States considers more than 2,400 personnel to be missing in action in
Indochina. About 82 of these are recorded as missing in Cambodia.

In the interview, the Cambodian leader also said his Government was holding an
American Vietnam veteran, Sterling Brian Bono, who disappeared in the region
last spring. He suggested his Government was prepared to release him. Mr. Bono
is thought to have entered Cambodia looking for a refugee he knew in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Albanians and Afghans Seek to Reduce Isolation

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 28


Two of the world's most isolated Communist regimes, Afghanistan and Albania,
made it clear to the General Assembly today that for different reasons they are
seeking to reduce their isolation.

Speaking for the Soviet-backed Afghan Government, Foreign Minister Abdul Wakil
appealed to Pakistan and the guerrilla leaders it harbors to open negotiations
on a government of national reconciliation to end a war that has ''ruined our
national economy.''

Three-quarters of Afghanistan's economic progress in the last 50 years has been
undone by the fighting, the Foreign Minister said, listing 2,000 schools, 350
bridges and 258 factories as among Afghan development projects that have been
destroyed.

The Afghan Foreign Minister spoke of ''radical progress'' in the Geneva
negotiations between his Government and Pakistan, which represents the
guerrillas on fixing a timetimable on the withdrawal of the Russians. He
stressed the gap on the timetable has narrowed ''to only eight months.''

He also appeared to promise futher Soviet concessions in these talks, saying
that the next round of negotiations, as yet unscheduled, ''will prove
conclusive'' if Pakistan, as negotiator for the guerrillas, shows ''political
realism.''

Kabul Plan Is Criticized

But as yet no guerrilla leader of importance has agreed even to discuss the
Kabul Government's reconciliation plan, which would create a coalition
government effectively controlled by the Afghan Communist Party even after a
Soviet withdrawal.

Last week Prime Minister Mohammad Khan Junejo of Pakistan effectively called on
Kabul to scrap its own proposals and work out alternatives with the guerrilla
leaders. Speaking for Albania, which has followed a policy of almost total
isolation, Foreign Minister Reis Malile made clear today that his country plans
to continue the gradual thaw in relations with East and West under way since
Ramiz Alia took over from Enver Hoxha as the leader in 1985.

Although his speech was couched in generalities, Mr. Malile said Albania seeks
''peace and stability'' for the Balkan region and was ready to take part in
''bilateral and multilateral meetings and talks.'' Albania, he went on, ''favors
the development of international relations'' and will ''continue to take part
actively in these relations.''

Uttered by any other country, such comments would pass unnoticed at the General
Assembly. But in Albania's case, diplomats said they were of particular
significance, confirming the new Government's decision to gradually lower the
almost hermetic barriers cutting off this last bastion of Stalinist Communism
from the rest of the world.

In another speech today, a member of the Cambodian coalition opposed to the
Soviet-backed Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia accused Hanoi of using
''genocide'' and brainwashing to eliminate Cambodia's culture and absorb the
nation into a Vietnamese-led federation.

''The war stirred up and sustained by the Hanoi leaders is not an ordinary war
of aggression, but a war of genocide,'' said the Cambodian speaker, Son Sann,
who is Prime Minister of a Cambodian Government-in-exile recognized by the
United Nations. ''The ultimate goal is an all out Vietnamization, body and soul,
of Cambodia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Army Looks to 1863 Battle for a 1987 Lesson

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: GETTYSBURG, Pa.


When the student Army officers looked up the mile-wide, gently rising grassy
slope, they began to question Gen. Robert E. Lee's judgment for ordering Maj.
Gen. George E. Pickett's charge.  A half-hour later, the officers from the Army
War College stood on Cemetery Ridge amid monuments to regiments from New York,
Pennsylvania and Massachusetts and gazed back down the clear fields of fire over
which Union cannon had raked the lines of Confederate infantry.

''Crazy,'' muttered one officer. ''Madness,'' said another. A third, like his
classmates a veteran of combat in Vietnam, just shook his head. The South had
been beaten back with terrible losses that day in July 1863; after three days of
fighting, the Army of Northern Virginia retreated with a third of its 60,000
soldiers dead, wounded or missing.

For today's student officers, mostly lieutenant colonels with 18 to 20 years of
service, the tour of the famous Civil War battlefield was not just a Saturday
outing but an integral part of their education as the potential generals of the
future.

Some Things Don't Change

''We're interested in the things that don't change,'' said Jay Luvaas, a
military historian and Civil War buff who teaches at the war college in nearby
Carlisle, Pa. ''We want to get you into the battle,'' he told the officers.

While arms, tactics and organization are vastly different today, the demands for
imaginative use of terrain, relentless reconnaissance and good intelligence,
clear orders and reliable communications are immutable. Above all, the human
element in the fog of war does not change.

Almost immediately after the last shot was fired in the Civil War, the Army
began using the battlefields to educate officers. After the turn of the century,
markers at Gettysburg were placed not for tourists but to show officers where
each unit had been during the battle.

During the 1930's, German officers walked the battlefields and were particularly
interested in the campaigns of the Confederate Gen. Thomas (Stonewall) Jackson
in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia. German panzer, or tank, tactics were
modeled on Jackson's sweeping cavalry.

Tours Stopped for a Time

Just before World War II, however, the Army stopped the battlefield tours
because senior officers in Washington feared they would be criticized for having
bright young officers studying the Civil War while panzer divisions were rolling
into France.

Not until 1982 were the battlefield tours revived, largely because Mr. Luvaas
and Col. Harold W. Nelson, another military historian and faculty member at the
Army War College, considered them important. They are co-authors of the book
''Guide to the Battle of Gettysburg.''

Recently, the college has focused on the operational art of war, in contrast to
the wider, less defined study of national security in previous years. Officers
are assumed to be tactically competent when they are appointed to the college.
The yearlong course is intended to lead them into a more complicated and
demanding level of military matters, just below the level of strategy, which in
the United States is decided by civilian elected and appointed leaders.

On the battlefield at Gettysburg, the officers remarked on Lee's lack of
reconnaissance and how he often operated without knowing where the Union forces
were. Lee had sent Maj. Gen. J. E. B. Stuart off with vague orders; Stuart, a
flamboyant cavalry commander, rode far behind Northern lines but neglected to
report back to Lee.

On the other hand, Northern intelligence was portrayed as accurate, but Gen.
George G. Meade, the Union commander, didn't believe what he was being told.
Several student officers nodded knowingly at that disclosure.

Two Union officers were held up to the students as models. Maj. Gen. John R.
Reynolds had ''an instinct for terrain,'' while Col. Joshua L. Chamberlain,
commander of the 20th Maine Regiment, was cited for courage. He ordered a
bayonet charge that routed the enemy - after his troops had nearly run out of
ammunition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jay Luvaas, a professor at the Army War College in Carlisle,
Pa., as he led a tour of the Gettysburg battlefield for Army officers who are
students at the college and their guests (NYT/Richard Holloran)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Let's Reflag All Shipping in the Persian Gulf

BYLINE: By Chester L. Cooper; Chester L. Cooper is consultant in residence at
Resources for the Future, a public-policy and research organization.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


James Russell Lowell was a poet, not a foreign policy guru, but diplomatic
historians, reflecting on United States naval movements during the summer of
1987, may envy his prescience when he wrote ''pearls of thought in Persian gulfs
were bred.''

The official rationale for the huge United States deployment has varied from
time to time and from one spokesman to another (shades of the early involvement
in Vietnam). But through the rhetorical murk, two ''pearls of thought'' are
discernible: Washington wanted to assure safe passage of allied-bound oil
through the Persian Gulf, and Washington hoped to pre-empt a strong Soviet naval
presence there. Two justifications, ''self-defense'' and pressure on Iran to
comply with a United Nations cease-fire, were added later. The first objective
is noble, indeed. The oil in question is destined not for America but for Europe
and Japan. The tankers and crews involved are not American (despite Old Glory
flapping astern) but foreign, and the resulting revenues flow not to Americans
but to Kuwaitis.

Yet the reflagging exercise is costly to American taxpayers (the Pentagon has
already hinted at an additional $200 million), and the odds increase daily that
it may prove costly in American lives as well.

The second aim is less altruistic and, therefore, more understandable: The Gulf
should not become a Soviet military theater. Yet, even ''America beyond the
beltway'' may wonder whether the Administration hasn't overdone it.

Whatever its origins, our current posture has skewed the United States' once
neutral policy in the long, bloody Iran-Iraq war. The Reagan Administration's
urge to embrace Baghdad - which, if memory serves, was the aggressor and long
the principal menace to oil shipments in the Persian Gulf - may have reflected a
psychological need to demonstrate American forgiveness for the attack on the
Stark. Or it may have provided paranoidal compensation for earlier grotesque
advances to Teheran. Or, perhaps, it was a shrewd move in the great-power game.

Whether any or none of these apply, our current policy seems to have emboldened
Iraq to resume its attacks on Iran's oil installations and tankers. And this, in
turn, has sparked a spate of Iranian madness that has substantially increased
America's risks in the region. It is no small irony that the Gulf is now a much
more dangerous place than it was before the American deployment.

The Iraqi action against Iran and the Iranian counteraction against all comers
raise some awkward questions: Are United States warships in the Gulf solely to
protect Kuwaiti tankers? Or was the Administration's original intent to protect
allied-bound oil? If the warships are there to protect Kuwaiti tankers, then the
Kuwaiti sheiks have royally conned American taxpayers and sailors. The second
consideration is what the Administration implied at the outset. But, if this be
true, shouldn't the United States offer to reflag all Gulf oil shippers? After
all, oil is critical for Western Europe and Japan whether shipped in Kuwaiti or
other bottoms.

Add Iran to the stew. Its oil supplies Japan and - are you ready for this? - the
United States. The Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini would hardly seek American help,
but suppose he asked Syria or Libya to flag Iranian tankers and those countries
then sought Soviet escorts? Given the lofty rationale for American protection of
Kuwaiti tankers (aside from the opportunity to score points in Teheran and to
move Soviet warships into the Gulf), why should not Moscow accede? Far-fetched?
Who would have predicted last June that almost 10 percent of the United States
Navy would now be churning up the waters of the Persian Gulf? Even a fraction of
this grisly scenario could turn the Gulf's sea lanes into a California freeway
at rush hour. Add a few trigger-happy crazies and the situation would be far
from what the Administration and Congress bargained for when Kuwaiti reflagging
began. If the War Powers Act doesn't pass now, it certainly will then.

A way out of this nightmare would be a cease-fire in the Gulf, leading to a
general resolution of the Iran-Iraq hostilities. This now appears unlikely. No
third force, not even the United Nations, seems to have the clout to exact
Iranian concessions in exchange for peace.

The threat of an arms embargo will have little effect: Sleazes anywhere would
provide the goods if the price was right.

As for Iraq, Washington has already failed to persuade Baghdad to halt its
attacks, and Kuwait and Saudi Arabia probably now regard Iraq as their surrogate
in bringing Iran to heel.

Alas, the United States is engaged in the Gulf at substantial cost and great
risk but with virtually no leverage over the principals or even the supporting
cast. In Vietnam, long ago, we discovered that leverage can be established only
before making major commitments of assistance. Once resources are dedicated, the
only leverage remaining is the threat to withdraw them. But such a threat is
rarely taken seriously; international embarrassment and domestic political cost
inhibit follow-through.

And so, no withdrawal. But if a United Nations cease-fire does not emerge soon,
the United States should internationalize the international mess in the Gulf.

It should propose (in addition to arms sanctions, for whatever they are worth)
that the United Nations take over mine-sweeping and escorting. In short, naval,
rather than merchant, vessels should be reflagged. And escorts should be offered
to all merchant shipping.

Washington would have been well advised last June, however, if it had heeded
Balthasar Gracian, a shrewd, 17th century Jesuit, who had it right: ''The
greatest foresight,'' he wrote, ''consists in determining beforehand the time of
trouble - we must not put off thought till we are up to the chin in the mire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 30, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Grown-Ups Gather at the Comic Book Stand

BYLINE: By KURT EICHENWALD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words


Spiderman married. Clark Kent, alias Superman, became a yuppie. And some caped
marvels have aged, developing paunches and mid-life crises.

Such transformations might not interest American children who for decades
devoured most of the comic books for sale. But they have attracted older readers
in such numbers that many publishers say adults are rapidly replacing children
as their major source of revenue.

''If we had to give up every customer below the age of 15, we would survive,''
said Buddy Saunders, president of Lone Star Comics, a retail chain in North
Texas. ''If we had to give up everyone above the age of 17, we'd be out of
business.''

The Adult Invasion

In a business known for creative spirits more than for market researchers, few
figures have been collected to demonstrate the aging of the comic book audience.
But everyone in the industry - from publishers to distributors to retailers -
agrees that the future of comic books lies in the adult market.

Already, a survey commissioned by the publisher of Marvel Comics has found, the
average comic book reader is about 20 years old, illustrating that baby boomers
and those right behind them have entered the market in large numbers. The
average reader spends more than $10 a week on comics, an amount many children
could not afford, the survey reported. Indeed, many newly released comics are
being issued in slick paperback and hard-cover versions and sell for $2.50 to
$20 a copy, even if most newly released comics cost only 75 cents to $1.25.

Typical of the adult aficionado is Jason A. Kinchen, a 26-year-old engineer in
Boston. ''I'm somebody who collects comic books for fun,'' he said of his
collection of 3,000 comics. ''I tend to buy based on the characters that I like.
A lot of other people follow writers and artists around to different comic
books.''

Among the characters who appeal most to adult readers are old favorites with new
looks. One of the most popular comics in the last year has been ''The Dark
Knight,'' which portrays the caped crusader Batman as he would appear in middle
age. The four issues sold out within days.

As another example, sales of Superman comics had been lagging for years as the
plot became more complex and, even for a superhero, less believable. DC Comics,
the publisher, took Superman off the newsstands, reintroducing him months later
in a world where weapons fired at him could cause pain and not every problem
could be solved.

The desire to reach an expanding audience also explains why there are many new
kinds of comics alongside the usual superhero stories. One comic is a study of
aggression, another makes fun of other comics, and there are even historical
comics about the Vietnam War, the life of Pope John Paul II and the Holocaust.

The fascination with comic books seems to be spreading to other segments of the
entertainment industry. While the television and movie industries have long made
millions of dollars from shows based on comic book characters such as Superman
and Batman, they are now are buying rights to produce films based on even
relatively unknown comic book characters.

For example, officials from First Comics Inc. said ABC was negotiating with them
for the television rights to one of their titles, Jon Sable Freelance, the story
of a soldier of fortune.

Thousands of Dealers

About 4,000 stores in the United States are dedicated principally to selling
comic books, up from fewer than 100 in the mid-1970's. Retail sales of comic
books are expected to reach $350 million this year, up from less than $200
million four years ago. And these figures do not include the used-comic market.

Most adults who buy comics see them just as entertainment. But for others, they
are an investment. Prices often soar in months or even weeks.

With three-year-old comics like Albedo, a science fiction adventure, commanding
as much as $500 a copy, it is not surprising that the jargon of the comic book
trade has begun to sound like that of Wall Street.

Buyers can be speculators or long-term investors. Tips about the potential value
of yet-unpublished issues can create a huge demand for a comic. Then there are
market adjustments, such as when the values of comics published in black and
white plunged.

A Reversal from the 70's

The industry's prosperity represents a dramatic turnaround from the 1970's, when
sales of comic books faltered. But as it turned out, a major reason for the
industry's problems was the way comics were distributed and not a lack of
appeal. For decades, comic books had been treated as if they were magazines.
Publishers sold them to independent magazine distributors, which in turn sold
them to newsstands and grocery stores at 20 percent below the cover price.
Retailers and distributors could return any unsold comic books to the publisher.

But because comic books lacked a stable readership, publishers found that sales
of a given line could swing dramatically from week to week. With comics a
relatively small part of their business, independent distributors increasingly
gave them short shrift. Unable to count on delivery, retailers also became
increasingly disenchanted with comic books.

Then came Phil Seuling, a former New York schoolteacher and a comic book fan
with a better idea for selling comics.

In the 1970's he negotiated an agreement with retailers and publishers to become
the first specialty distributor of comic books. Under his arrangement, retail
stores got a 50 percent discount for the comic books they purchased on a
nonreturnable basis, and the stores were guaranteed delivery.

In 1980 several entrepreneurs copied Mr. Seuling's approach, and the competition
among specialty distributors to supply comic book shops intensified. This
encouraged publishers to become more creative.

''Before the presses start to roll, they know what their profits will be,'' said
Maggie C. Thompson, co-editor of the Comic Buyers Guide, an industry publication
based in Iola, Wis.

Once dominated by Marvel and DC, the industry now has about a dozen major new
publishers and many smaller ones.

But if the industry is more stable now, it is still a tough business. The
movement in and out of the market by speculators has made future demand
difficult to gauge. And forecasting is hardly the strong suit of many of the
relatively unsophisticated retailers who entered the business because they loved
comics.

Speculators, each of whom often buys dozens or even hundreds of a new comic
issue, have caused some disruptions in the market, severely affecting the
business of the distributors and retailers. Not knowing which comics the
speculators would snap up, retailers bought everything offered by distributors
for many years.

Then came Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles.

A black-and-white comic, the Turtles in 1984 became a huge success even though
black-and-white comics have traditionally been poor sellers. Speculators began
demanding copies, and the price for the first issue soared as high as $150, 100
times its cover price. Retailers, thinking a fad in black-and-white comics was
beginning, wanted their distributors to provide them with every one printed.

But the fad collapsed last fall. Retailers found themselves drowning in stacks
of unsold black-and-white comics. It turned out that the success of Teen-Age
Mutant Ninja Turtles lay not in the fact that the comic was in black and white.
Readers just liked the story line.

Many retailers and small publishers have since gone out of business, leaving
distributors stuck with unpaid bills.

Many in the industry see this setback as only temporary. ''The slump in the
industry is a natural maturation process,'' said Milton Griepp, president of
Capital City Distribution in Madison, Wis. ''There's going to be a constant
shakeout until things are stable, but there are no signs that the growth rate is
slowing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 3, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article on Wednesday about comic books appealing to young adults carried an
incorrect description from First Comics Inc. about its sale of television rights
for one series.

It was Taft Entertainment Television, not ABC, that negotiated to buy the rights
to Jon Sable Freelance.

Taft approached ABC about broadcasting the program.

GRAPHIC: drawings of Superman; photo of comic books (NYT) (page D5)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 30, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Study Backs View on Lack of Agent Orange Data

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 638 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29


A Congressional agency has agreed that no large-scale study of the effects of
Agent Orange on ground troops in Vietnam can be conducted because too few troops
were actually exposed to the chemical.

That judgment by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment matches one
expressed last month by the Federal Centers for Disease Control. The centers had
been trying to conduct a Congressionally mandated study of American ground
troops who might have come into contact with the chemical.

''All the existing data support the fact that most ground troops in Vietnam did
not have heavy Agent Orange exposure, and that those who might have would be
exceptions,'' the technology office said in a report to Congress.

Congress Sought Monitoring

''No future studies should be contemplated without a clear acceptance of this,''
the report said. ''If studies are proposed, they should be narrowly focused on
specific, testable hypotheses and cannot have the aim of generalizability to all
or most ground troops.'' The technology office had been directed by Congress to
monitor and review the various Federal investigations into the health impact of
Agent Orange, including the Centers for Disease Control's efforts to conduct a
large-scale study of ground troops. The technology office's review of the latest
findings by the centers was delivered to Congressional leaders late last week
and made available to inquiring reporters this week.

Agent Orange was a herbicide sprayed by United States forces in Vietnam to
defoliate jungle areas used by Vietcong guerillas and North Vietnam forces.
Dioxin, a contaminant of Agent Orange, has been found to be highly toxic in some
laboratory animals but experts disagree over whether low levels of dioxin
contamination pose a threat to human health. The Environmental Protection Agency
classifies dioxin as a possible human carcinogen.

The technology office endorsed as ''well designed and carried out'' a
small-scale study by the centers of ground troops that concluded no large-scale
study was possible. The small-scale study had used five different methods to
identify ground troops with high, medium and low likelyhood of exposure to Agent
Orange. Four of the methods used military records of troop sites and spraying
missions to identify men who passed near areas that had been sprayed with Agent
Orange or other herbicides. The fifth method asked veterans to estimate their
own exposures.

Scientists also measured the levels of dioxin in the blood of 573 Vietnam
veterans and in a control group of 88 veterans who had not served in Vietnam,
according to an analysis that is nearly complete.

As it turned out, the median level in the Vietnam veterans was identical with
that in the veterans who served elsewhere, namely 3.8 parts per trillion, which
is within the range generally expected in the American public. Moreover, the
amount of dioxin found in indvidiual Vietnam veterans generally bore no relation
to their estimated exposure to the chemical. Scientists are uncertain what level
of dioxin might be deemed dangerous to health. The highest level detected in a
Vietnam ground soldier was 45 parts per trillion. In contrast, the technology
office said, a separate Air Force study of 30 ranch workers who were known to be
exposed to Agent Orange while spraying it found that about half had dioxin
levels above 100 parts per trillion and four had levels above 300 parts per
trillion.

Some critics have argued that the failure to find much dioxin in the ground
troops reflects the inaccuracy of military records of spraying missions and
troop movements.

The technology office took the opposite view, concluding that the failure to
find much dioxin in the ground troops actually confirmed the accuracy of the
military records, which had predicted little exposure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 337 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 30, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Injured Protester Returns to Lead Rally

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 45 words


Brian Willson using a walker at rally yesterday at the Concord (Calif.) Naval
Weapons Station. The 46-year-old Vietnam veteran lost his legs when he and other
demonstrators protesting arms shipments to Central America tried to block a
munitions train Sept. 1. (AP)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
