
                               1 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

E.P.A.'S DOW TESTS FIND HIGH TOXICITY

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 31


The Environmental Protection Agency reported today that it had found more than
40 toxic organic compounds, including dioxins, in the waste water that the Dow
Chemical Company pumps into the Tittabawassee River in Michigan.

Catfish placed for four weeks in special cages in the river near one of Dow's
outfalls absorbed nearly 14 times as much of the most potent form of dioxin as
did similar fish placed just upstream from the plant in Midland, Mich.
Similarly, water samples taken at the outfall contained more than five times the
concentration of the chemical as samples taken upstream. The company pumps
millions of gallons of waste water into the stream daily.

According to E.P.A. officials, the findings provide the hardest evidence yet
that, despite Dow's denials, the plant is a significant source of contamination
in nearby waters. As such, they furnish new ammunition to the E.P.A. and
Michigan in their long effort to impose new effluent controls on Dow.

'It Has to Be Controlled'

''It confirms for us the problem is there - it was disputed before,'' said
Valdas V. Adamkus, regional administrator for the agency here. ''Now we've got
very good and clear evidence that dioxin and other toxicants are being released
from the plant. The levels are of concern to us. It has to be controlled.''

Today's report did not address the question whether it is safe to eat fish
caught near the plant. The tests found fish with 110 parts per trillion of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. That is more than twice the ''level of
concern'' of 50 parts per trillion set by the Food and Drug Administration, but
the tests were based on whole fish while the F.D.A. level was set for edible
portions.

On the basis of earlier signs of PCB and dioxin contamination, the Michigan
Department of Health has since 1978 warned against consumption of any fish
caught in the Tittawabassee and Saginaw Rivers downstream from Dow.

Dow issued a statement today saying there was ''nothing in the report that is
inconsistent with previously published data, much of which had been generated by
Dow.'' It said there was no way of knowing how the samples compared with water
elsewhere.

The statement did not try to explain the difference between the upstream and
downstream samples.  A spokesman for Dow, Sarah Rowley, said the levels detected
in the water, in the parts per quadrillion range, were so ''incredibly minute''
that they were ''hard to fathom.'' A quadrillion is a million billion.

Mr. Adamkus said the issue was not the concentration at any one time but the
possibility that the chemicals were accumulating steadily in water and fish over
the years. ''We are not saying this will kill people tomorrow,'' he said. ''We
are talking about the future. Maybe it will kill 10 years from now. They don't
want to acknowledge that.''

Company Cites Other Sources

Two weeks ago Mr. Adamkus publicly accused John W. Hernandez Jr., who was then
the E.P.A.'s Acting Administrator, of allowing Dow to modify an agency report on
the company, deleting references to its plant as the major source of dioxin in
the Midland area. The company has asserted that dioxins are formed by ''normal
combustion processes that occur everywhere.''

The E.P.A. recently sued Dow to obtain information it said was needed under the
Clean Water Act to write a new effluent permit for the plant, which produces
plastics, pesticides and other industrial chemicals. Dow has refused the data,
saying it risked disclosing proprietary information, and has barred Federal and
state investigators from the plant grounds.

The study released today was done jointly with the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources, which has been delegated authority by the Federal Government
to issue Dow its effluent license. The company has legally challenged an interim
permit issued by the state and is therefore operating under an old permit that
expired in 1979 and that places few limits on the 61.4 million gallons of waste
water that the E.P.A. estimates Dow discharges daily.

The study found more than 30 organic chemicals in the flesh of fish caged near
the outfall of the effluent, including chlorinated benzenes and phenols, certain
pesticides and dibenzofurans, chemical cousins of the dioxins that are nearly as
potent.

May Be Most Potent Compound

The 2,3,7,8T form of dioxin, or TCDD, the chemical that was found in the fish in
concentrations of 110 parts per trillion, is widely considered the most potent
compound known. By comparison, the control fish caged upstream from the plant
had absorbed only 8 parts per trillion.

Although the E.P.A. analyzed whole fish, it said the result was nonetheless
''indicative'' of possible contamination of food fish.  The Tittabawassee waters
drain into the Saginaw River, thence into Saginaw Bay, where carp, catfish and
other species are harvested commercially and sent to New York and other northern
cities. There is no commercial fishing in the two rivers.

Fish are a potential human source of dioxin and other toxic wastes in water
because they ''bioconcentrate'' them. Fish such as carp or catfish, which feed
on the bottom where dioxin settles, are more likely to accumulate the compound
than are fish that are not bottomfeeders. Dioxin is not soluble in water.

None of the caged fish appeared to have suffered any acute illness from exposure
to Dow's effluent, nor did the water samples taken prove to cause mutations in
micro-organisms. ''Although the discharge was found not be to acutely toxic,''
the report said, ''given the number and type of compounds discharged, the
potential chronic or longterm effects of the discharge are still of concern.''

Samples Taken in 1981

The study was undertaken in September 1981 in an effort to obtain some of the
information that Dow refused to supply. Mr. Adamkus said that it took until now
to report the results because of the analytical difficulties in detecting such
minute concentrations.

Extrapolating from the results, the report estimated that Dow's 1,600-acre plant
discharged 35 pounds a day, or more than six tons a year, of toxic organic
pollutants.

Among the chemicals detected were methylene chloride, chloroform, herbicides
such as Silvex and various pesticides and PCB's. Water samples taken from the
main Dow effluent in 1981 showed 50 parts per quadrillion of TCDD, compared with
less than 10 parts per quadrillion in samples taken just above Dow's intake from
the river.

The report observed that the levels were probably lower than in the past because
the company had changed its manufacturing processes and improved treatment of
its waste before discharge. Dow used to make the herbicide 2,4,5-T, known as
Agent Orange when it was used to defoliate jungles in the Vietnam War. TCDD was
thought to have been a waste byproduct and contaminant of Agent Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Valdas V. Adamkus (Page A13)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS SAY VIETNAM RAIDS CAMBODIANS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 31


Thailand said today that a large force of Vietnamese troops had attacked three
Cambodian refugee and guerrilla camps along the Thai-Cambodian border and that
at least 7,000 civilians had fled westward into Thai territory.

The Thai report, which was confirmed by international aid workers, said the
Vietnamese drive began Monday, and was likely to spread to other border camps.

There were reports that 20 or more people had been killed, but the number of
casualties was not confirmed. The fighting, which began with skirmishes between
at least 3,000 guerrillas loyal to the deposed Cambodian leader, Pol Pot, and
units of the Vietnamese Fifth Division, was said to be continuing today.

One aid official said there was ''very heavy'' fighting Wednesday at Phnom Chat,
a hilltop guerrilla camp 25 miles northeast of the Thai city of Aranyaprathet.

The two other camps that came under attack were identified as Chamcar Kor and
Kok Tahan. Both lie slightly east of Phnom Chat, and are said to have been
market centers administered by nearby Pol Pot forces. The combined civilian
population of the two camps was estimated at up to 15,000.

Thailand Condemns Vietnam

The Thai Government condemned the Vietnamese today for shelling and uprooting
civilians, and called on other nations to join its protest.

Speaking at a news conference this afternoon, Prasong Soonsiri, head of the Thai
National Security Council, warned that Vietnamese troops were in position to
strike at least one other border camp, Nong Samet. The camp, home to more than
70,000 people, lies about 18 miles northeast of Aranyaprathet.

Nong Samet, whose inhabitants are loyal to the non-Communist Cambodian leader
Son Sann, a former Prime Minister, has recently grown by about 25,000 people.
The recent arrivals moved there early in March from a temporary Thai refugee
camp 10 miles to the south.  They had fled to the temporary camp after the
Vietnamese attacked their previous home, Nong Chan, on Jan. 31, burning it to
the ground.

A Western visitor who left Nong Samet Wednesday said here today that the
residents, mostly civilians, had expressed great apprehension about their
situation.

Little Water or Ammunition

The visitor, who spoke on the condition that he not be named, said he had talked
Wednesday with one of the camp's military commanders, Chea Chhut, and learned
that the Cambodian insurgents there had very little water, medicine or
ammunition.

For the last several months the Thai Army has forbidden reporters to visit
border camps or new concentrations of refugees fleeing Vietnamese attacks. The
camp leaders and some other visitors are allowed by the Thai Army to travel back
and forth. The Thais also permit regular supplies of internationally provided
food, water, equipment and, reportedly, ammunition to reach the camps.

----

U.S. 'Appalled' By Attacks

WASHINGTON, March 31 (UPI) -The State Department said today that it was
''appalled'' that Vietnamese troops had ''indiscriminately'' attacked Cambodian
camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.

''We strongly condemn these attacks,'' Alan D. Romberg, a department spokesman,
said. He accused Vietnam of acting in Cambodia in violation of the United
Nations Charter and General Assembly resolutions.

Mr. Romberg called on Vietnam to respect Thai territory and said the United
States would support aid efforts for the refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Indo-China

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: RECESSION PROMPTING NEW STRATEGIES

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 908 words


CONVERSATION overheard between two publishers: ''How's business?'' ''Terrific,
but we hope it'll get better soon.'' As the effects of the recession linger in
many publishing houses, with lists cut back and seasoned editors let go or
quitting under pressure to produce best sellers, one hears more about
diminishing subsidiary rights and efforts to sell everything but the squeal (as
they used to say around the Chicago stockyards).

A variation on the theme - withdrawing an important book from the paperback
market because the price wasn't right - has just occurred with Norman Mailer's
''Ancient Evenings'' (Little, Brown). The spring season's most anticipated novel
was offered around, but the bids were termed far too low to consider seriously.
The book's official publication date is April 25.

Mr. Mailer's literary agent, Scott Meredith, talked about subsidiary rights for
''Ancient Evenings.'' ''When Norman delivered the book last year, we were very
anxious that Little, Brown not offer it at that time,'' he said. ''The paperback
situation is in the worst condition that I've seen it in my 36 years in the
business. One reason is that it's a long book, meaning that it would be fairly
expensive to produce. Little, Brown said, 'What the hell, let's try it.' The
best offer they got was $150,000, with escalators that would bring it to $1
million, depending on sales, the best-seller chart and a film.

''That was too low so the book was withdrawn. Little, Brown is now doing what we
hoped they would do - waiting for the reception. The first reports are fine.''

Spiking rumors about any specific small amounts, William A.  Guthrie, Little,
Brown's director of advertising and publicity, gave his company's response:

''We showed the book before publication to the reprinters as a sort of fishing
expedition to see if we could get an offer we couldn't refuse. No such
overwhelming offer was made. All along, we reserved the right to do our own
trade paperback edition, similar to what Viking did with Thomas Pynchon's
'Gravity's Rainbow.' We aren't rushing to make a determination on which way to
handle the paperback rights. We believe the book will make a strong impact and
tell us which way to go.''

In recent years, paperback houses backstopped the hard-cover publishers, in
effect helping them to lay off their literary bets.  Under the usual contract
terms, authors and publishers split the proceeds of paperback and book club
sales 50-50, although some bigname authors obtain a larger share of these
subsidiary rights.

Today, ''six-figure'' paperback sales are few and far between. But publishers
are pursuing every possibility, from prepublication excerpts in small magazines
to book premiums attached to cereal boxes.

Bernard Shir-Cliff, editor in chief of Warner Books, explained that one reason
for the lower reprint prices was that fewer books were being sold. ''You don't
see the five to six million copies sold - it's more like three million for a big
book,'' he said. ''In five years, the book may reach six million, but you don't
acquire it with that long-range figure in mind. Another reason is that some
massmarket paperbacks have reached $4.95, and that may be the limit.  The
recession has affected paperback purchases. Where a reader might have bought two
books, now he'll buy one - the tried-and-true author.''

Page Cuddy, editorial director of Avon Books, said, ''It's certainly been a
while since the big seven-figure reprint acquisitions. We're doing more
originals, to help keep the prices down. Some of the golden oldies have done
well because of television series, such as our edition of 'Thorn Birds.'
Generally, though, the prices are more in the range of the low six-figures, even
for major books.''

W.W. Norton's subsidiary rights director, Jeannie Luciano, said that a renewed
effort was being made to place titles with the dozens of small-and medium-size
book clubs. In addition to the Book-of-the-Month Club, the Norton edition of
''The Red Badge of Courage'' was sold to the Preferred Choice book club and
Reader's Subscription. With new interest in Vietnam, Miss Luciano turned to its
own backlist and recently sold ''The Killing Zone'' by Fred Downes to Berkley
Books.

Alfred Knopf Jr., chairman of Atheneum Publishers and vice chairman of the
parent Scribner Book Companies, talked about the current titles on which
Scribner's hopes are riding, the backlist - books that continue to sell year
after year in hard-cover or trade paperback editions - and the midlist - the
books that are somewhat marginal and that many publishers are now eliminating.

Of course, one of the strengths of Scribner's is its backlist - including Ernest
Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Edith Wharton, Thomas Wolfe. ''On a more modest
scale,'' Mr. Knopf said, ''Atheneum has built up a backlist, too, including
Luigi Barzini's 'The Italians' and Theodore M. Bernstein's 'The Careful Writer.'
''

Mr. Knopf added that publishers were combing backlist titles of other publishers
as well as their own for new trade paperback editions. ''Seventy-five percent of
the trade paperbacks we've brought out were acquired from other publishers,'' he
noted.

This is a subsidiary right that benefits everyone, providing the original
publisher with income for an old book, giving the new publisher the chance to
bring fresh enthusiasm to a work and giving the reader the opportunity to obtain
a book that may be hard to find.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Technology And Jobless

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 831 words


NEW data on the labor market in March, to be released today, will be scanned for
signs that the recovery is strengthening or weakening. But whatever the new
numbers show, it looks like a very long haul back to anything that can be called
''full employment,'' which was once thought to be equivalent to 4 percent
unemployment.

The Reagan Administration has forecast as the basis for its budget projections
that the jobless rate, 10.4 percent of the civilian labor force in February,
will come down only to 9.5 percent by the end of 1984, 8.5 percent in 1985 and
7.8 percent in 1986.

Is the economy suffering from a higher level of ''structural'' unemployment -
due to basic changes in job requirements and the character of the labor force -
that economic recovery alone cannot cure?

Melvin R. Levin, an urban planner at the University of Maryland, concludes in a
new study, ''Understanding Unemployment,'' that a growing proportion of the
labor force, especially among black, Hispanic and young people, will experience
10 percent-plus unemployment rates even in good times from now on.

He finds little likelihood that improved job training, such as that provided for
in the new $4.6 billion bill, designed to create an extra 400,000 jobs, will
make much of a dent in the unemployment problem, because the gap between
unfilled jobs and prospective applicants is just too large.

While conceding that the disproportion in late 1982 was an extreme case, with an
estimated 1.5 million job openings and 11 million unemployed job seekers, he
says the gap will be wide even in good years, with three or four job seekers for
every job opening. ''The one predictable result of improving job skills of
poorly trained workers,'' he says, ''will be to spread unemployment more evenly
through the labor force.''

Similarly, he argues that removing remaining vestiges of racism would have
limited impact on the job prospects of blacks. He is worried about
''polarization'' of the black community, with poorly prepared blacks facing
growing competition for jobs from Hispanic workers, illegal immigrants, white
women and foreign workers in wagesensitive manufacturing industries.

He thinks the search for a valid foreign model for solving the unemployment
problem is likely to be unrewarding. Countries such as Sweden, Britain, West
Germany and France, which were once considered worthy of emulation, he says, are
experiencing severe economic problems rivaling those of the United States. He
finds the Japanese model, with very low unemployment, nontransferable because
the American and Japanese cultures are so different.

Mr. Levin's answer is large-scale public works programs, which, in his words,
''can turn out work valuable to the nation and critical to the self-respect'' of
the jobless. He expects the coming decade to be ''a period of turbulence, with
upheavals in international trade and in a workplace swept by waves of
robotization and reorganization.''

But is there anything new in all this? Fears that machines, or new systems of
organizing work, are displacing human workers have always emerged in hard times.
In the early 19th century, the Luddites in England smashed the machines that
they thought were destroying their jobs.

The most recent ''automation'' scare before the present one occurred in the
early 1960's, when President Kennedy's Council of Economic Advisers, whose
chairman was Walter W. Heller, engaged in hot debate with a group of economists,
led by Prof. Charles Killingsworth of Michigan State University, who held that
structural unemployment could not be cured by economic recovery. The C.E.A. won.
The unemployment rate, which was 6.7 percent in 1961, dropped to 4.5 percent in
1965, with the help of the 1964 tax cut, and fell to 3.8 percent in 1966, with
the step-up of spending on the Vietnam War.

Has something radically different happened this time? Optimistic economists
insist there is no evidence that the rate of productivity increase, due to the
introduction of robots, computers or other machines, is too fast for the rate of
economic growth to absorb new entrants to the labor force and reduce the rate of
unemployment to politically acceptable levels.

But other economists, including Prof. Wassily Leontief, a winner of the Nobel
Memorial Prize in Economic Science, think that this time the wolf may actually
be here. One worry is that a much bigger proportion of the labor force than ever
before is incapable of fitting into the industrial process because it lacks the
literacy and mathematical skills to work with the new technology.

Another is that wage scales are so much lower abroad, communications so cheap,
and the diffusion of technology so rapid that labor-intensive industry in this
country cannot grow fast enough to absorb the growing labor force and the
unemployed.

Can the problem of structural unemployment be solved - and without radical
change in the economic system? We will look at those questions in the next
column.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS ACCUSE VIETNAM OF KILLING 200 CAMBODIANS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 536 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 1


The Thai Foreign Ministry said today that Vietnamese soldiers had killed at
least 200 Cambodian refugees, wounded hundreds more and driven 30,000 across the
frontier since overrunning a Cambodian guerrilla camp near the Thai border on
Thursday.

It said fighting was continuing between guerrillas loyal to the deposed
Cambodian leader Pol Pot and Vietnamese forces that overran the camp at Phnom
Chat, 25 miles northeast of the Thai city of Aranyaprathet.

The Vietnamese also reportedly seized two other camps, Chamcar Kor and Kok
Tahan, which are slightly to the east of Phnom Chat and are said to be market
centers administered by the Pol Pot forces.

Two Incursions Reported

In its statement, the Thai Foreign Ministry said 500 Vietnamese soldiers crossed
the Cambodian border into Thailand twice today, but were driven back by the
Thais.  The report could not be independently confirmed, however, because
reporters were barred from the battle zone.

In February, a Vietnamese force of about 4,000 soldiers with tanks reportedly
crossed into Thai territory and battled Cambodian forces for three days. That
incursion reportedly came after the Vietnamese overran Nong Chan, an armed
Cambodian refugee camp.

Thailand said the Vietnamese moved more than a mile into Thai territory near the
village of Nong Samet, eight miles south of Phnom Chat, before being driven
back. It said a second incursion, a halfmile deep, had taken place at Phnom
Chat, with five Thai soldiers wounded.

The ministry called on Vietnam to halt the attacks ''forthwith.'' The statement
was issued in the name of the foreign ministers of the five countries in the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Singapore and the Philippines.

Another Version of Fighting

But reporters in contact with Thai military officers in the battle zone said
there was no indication that the Vietnamese had crossed the frontier. The
reporters said refugee casualties were closer to 30 dead and 150 wounded, and
the number of fleeing civilians was about 15,000.

A Western diplomat reached by telephone in Aranyaprathet said United Nations
officials had the situation under control, and the uprooted civilians had been
moved to a camp at Thab Siam several miles away and provided with food and
water.

The diplomat said fighting had subsided since Thursday, when about 1,000
Vietnamese soldiers backed by tanks and artillery overran Phnom Chat and drove
out about 3,500 Pol Pot guerrillas.

He and other sources said Vietnamese troops fired sporadic artillery rounds into
the border area today, and the Pol Pot forces tried to regroup and mount raids
on the Vietnamese guarding Phnom Chat.

Vietnam has mounted offensives against the guerrillas since about 180,000
Vietnamese invaded Cambodia in late 1978 and toppled the Pol Pot regime.

The Thai military authorities have expressed fears that the Vietnamese will
strike next at the refugee camp near Nong Samet, which houses 77,000 Cambodians
loyal to the non-Communist rebel leader Son Sann.

About 40,000 anti-Vietnamese guerrillas and more than 200,000 civilian
supporters occupy several camps strung out along a narrow strip of the border
inside Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Cambodians fleeing into Thailand

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
The Wounds of Vietnam

BYLINE: By ANATOLE BROYARD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


Charlie Company: What Vietnam Did to Us. By Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller, with
Richard Manning, Stryker McGuire, Wally McNamee and Vern E.  Smith. Illustrated.
358 pages. Morrow.  $15.95.

We talk about ''the lesson of Vietnam'' as if we had already learned that lesson
in full. But ''Charlie Company,'' by Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller, suggests
that many Americans have not yet learned what Vietnam may have meant to the
soldiers who served there. While it was considered something like a spiritual
obligation of thoughtful citizens to feel ''demoralized'' by the war, the men
who experienced it at first hand did not seem to be entitled to that same
demoralization. Though some of us are almost proud of the horror with which we
heard the news reports from Vietnam, the horror felt by some of the soldiers who
were actually there was regarded as morally inferior, as if a horror inspired by
an idea was purer than one brought on by a fact.

Without apologizing for the terrible brutality of the war in Vietnam, ''Charlie
Company'' raises the question of whether any war can ever be fought again with
any sort of dignity. We may have lost the kind of human tone or pitch that used
to keep our wars within certain boundaries. The book makes us wonder whether we
can trust ourselves any longer, and whether the guilty feeling arising out of
this loss of faith may not have been turned against the Vietnam veterans.

In 1981 and 1982, a team of Newsweek correspondents tracked down 65 of 162 men
who served together in an Army company in the worst years of the war, a period
bracketed by the Tet offensive of 1968 and the massacre at My Lai in 1969. The
correspondents talked to these men about their experiences on the line in
Vietnam and about their lives during the following 12 years back home.

The part about Vietnam may be familiar by now: the feeling of a terrible
disorganization and absence of understandable purpose, the sense that this war
was being fought without structure, that it could get at you anyhow, any time,
anywhere. Though all wars have an element of insanity about them, these men
talked as if the entire experience was like an all-embracing insanity. As one
soldier put it in a letter, ''We are the unwilling working for the unqualified
to do the unnecessary for the ungrateful.''

There was no way, these men said, to digest such a war and no way, when they
reached home, to spit it out. No one wanted to hear what they felt and they were
condemned to keep it to themselves, like a wound that could not be treated. It
was as if, they said, people were ashamed of them, as if they had an unspeakable
disease, as if ''we were sneaking in the back door of the country at night.''

They felt that what they had seen and done had separated them from their
families and friends. They were ''out of sync'' with the world they came back
to. Some of them couldn't get rid of the feeling of crisis, climax or emergency
- couldn't settle down to the ordinariness of a job and marriage. They told
stories of drifting from place to place, from woman to woman, as if they had
forever lost the habits or rhythms of their species. They were treated to the
irony of seeing the hostages being welcomed home from Iran as ''heroes.'' Hadn't
they been hostages too? they asked. Weren't they still?

Not all of ''Charlie Company'' can be taken at face value. It was to be expected
that some of these men would distort or exaggerate what they remembered, and Mr.
Goldman, Mr. Fuller and their team may not have sufficiently acknowledged this.
Also, the authors' use of terms like ''cannon fodder'' and their habit of
glorifying the enlisted men and depreciating their officers betrays a certain
tendentiousness.

These reservations, however, do not disqualify ''Charlie Company.'' A careful
reader will find more truth in it than most of us may care to take on. In fact,
the story the book tells is so sad and so ugly that it might almost pass for a
prize-winning piece of serious fiction. If it were, the men of ''Charlie
Company'' might have received the attention and compassion they needed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE LEAVE STAMP ON LIVES OF CAMBODIANS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2302 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


More than four years after its invasion of Cambodia, Vietnam has extended its
influence deep into the daily lives of the Cambodian people.

In the marketplace and the rice field, on the stage, in the classroom, in
Government offices and elsewhere, Vietnam's influence over the Cambodians is
far-reaching, as seen on a 17-day trip in March to Phnom Penh and 7 of
Cambodia's 18 provinces.

Militarily, the approximately 180,000 Vietnamese Army troops have become a
fixture across the country, which they invaded in December 1978. Their tanks,
trucks, bases, guard posts and off-duty soldiers are common sights. They have
clearly secured large areas of the countryside.

But they are still fending off attacks in many provinces from Cambodian
guerrillas loyal to Pol Pot, the Communist leader whom the Vietnamese drove from
power, or to non-Communist insurgent leaders such as former Prime Minister Son
Sann.

Within recent weeks a 20-mile-long tank trap has been built near the Thai border
as a defense against the rebels. The plan for the vast earthwork was drawn up by
Vietnamese advisers. Its construction, according to Lim Chhon, the Cambodian
political chief of the Sisophon District, in Battambang Province, has required
the labor of 50,000 Cambodian ''volunteers.''

Politically, the Vietnamese-installed Government of President Heng Samrin,
though expanding, is still deeply dependent for its basic policies and ideology
on Vietnamese advisers and Vietnamese patterns.

In late February, after a secretly initiated conference of Vietnam, Cambodia and
Laos, the three countries' leaders issued an unsigned statement saying that the
''great President Ho Chi Minh'' of Vietnam had also spawned the revolutions of
Laos and Cambodia, and that ''militant alliance'' was now a fundamental law of
Indochina's development. The meeting called for the expansion of economic
cooperation as well.

The theme of alliance is expressed everywhere. Here in Phnom Penh there is a
children's ride in the park near the old Buddhist shrine for which the city was
named, where boys and girls can clamber onto four little jet fighters marked
with the symbols of Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos and the Soviet Union -and be whirled
around in happy circles.

As for the daily exercise of power in Phnom Penh, the consensus among the
dwindling ranks of senior international aid officials here is that any serious
problems they have with the Phnom Penh Government are most swiftly dealt with
through appeals to the Vietnamese Ambassador, Ngo Dien.

But whether the Ambassador is the most powerful Vietnamese here remains a
subject of debate. Some analysts believe he has a superior: the chief of
''B-68,'' the office in Phnom Penh of the Politburo of the Vietnamese Communist
Party. This official has not been identified with certainty. He is said to be a
member of the Vietnamese party's Central Committee.

The Vietnamese have often said their military occupation of Cambodia will end as
soon as the country is stabilized, the insurgency halted and the ''Chinese
threat'' withdrawn. As for Cambodia's Vietnamese advisers, Foreign Minister Hun
Sen of Cambodia said in an interview here that most critics refused to make a
distinction between Vietnamese help and Vietnamese domination.  Fudging the two
is propaganda, he said.

Little Impact on Food or Dress

''Have you ever seen Kampuchean women wearing the pants or dresses that
Vietnamese women wear?'' the Foreign Minister asked with exasperation, using the
term with which the Cambodians refer to themselves. He said the charge of
Vietnamese influence was essentially false.

Vietnam has not, in fact, left its imprint yet on such traditional realms as
those of dress, food or, in most of the country, language.  The chief agents of
change are the Phnom Penh Government and Cambodia's revamped Communist Party,
known formally as the People's Revolutionary Party of Kampuchea. But Foreign
Minister Hun Sen described his Government as never having had any ''divergent
views at all'' from those of Hanoi.

The most powerful force in Cambodia, the Vietnamese Army, has generally kept a
polite distance from the Cambodians. Many people, especially in rural areas, see
little of the Vietnamese except sometimes their troops. And Cambodian
nationalism is still evident in the perceptions even of Government officials.

But Vietnam's influence is being expressed in many new ways.

Ethnic Vietnamese Return

Tens of thousands, and possibly many more, ethnic Vietnamese have flowed into
Cambodia since 1979. Most are assumed to have fled Cambodia during the
anti-Vietnamese Governments of the 1970's and are only now returning.

Others, however, according to officials at both national and provincial levels,
include Vietnamese relatives and friends of the returnees, Vietnamese traders
operating within the law and certain Vietnamese ''bad elements'' who came here
over the ostensible objections of both Hanoi and Phnom Penh.

Mr. Hun Sen placed the number of new and returning Vietnamese at fewer than
50,000. Others, including defectors to Thailand from Mr.  Hun Sen's ministry,
have placed the number at several times that figure.

The Vietnamese immigrants have taken up jobs, in some cases resuming them, as
fishermen, farmers, salt-pan workers, masons, mechanics and small traders. Many
of the restaurants that have opened in Phnom Penh in the last year are run by
ethnic Vietnamese.

Traditional Prejudices

Traditional Cambodian prejudices against them are known to have flared in many
places. In a series of recent high-level directives, however, the Government and
the Communist Party have instructed their Cambodian subordinates to smooth the
way for the entry of the Vietnamese in the interests of furthering solidarity
with Vietnam.

The effects of these directives have been impossible to check. The Cambodian
Government issues few visas to Western correspondents, and reporters traveling
in the provinces are always accompanied by Government officials. Most areas of
reported Vietnamese settlement have never been visited by Western reporters, and
large parts of Cambodia remain off-limits for reasons of ''security.''

Trade between Vietnamese and Cambodians has been picking up as the Cambodian
economy, prostrate four years ago, gradually improves. But it is unclear if this
growing trade is in Cambodia's best interest.

For example, Vietnamese soldiers, who are officially said here and in Hanoi to
eat nothing but what they are shipped from Vietnam or grow in their own gardens
and rice paddies, are some of the main customers of Cambodia's restaurants, both
in the capital and the provinces. More important, many Vietnamese Army units
have been buying rice from Cambodian farmers.

Chea Kong, the Agriculture Ministry's Director of Planning, said of the
Vietnamese soldiers in an interview here, ''They have their own rice, and we
sell them rice.''

Rice for Vietnamese Troops

Mr. Chea Kong said he did not know how much Cambodian rice had been sold to the
Vietnamese, or at what price, but he knew that such sales had occurred with the
knowledge of the Commerce Ministry.

The importance of these transactions for Cambodia's badly fed people depends on
the size of the deals, which could not be determined. But together with
scattered reports on the Phnom Penh radio recently, the reports of rice sales to
Vietnamese troops suggest that more and more Cambodian food is being diverted to
feed the Vietnamese. One radio report said Cambodia had donated rice to Vietnam
after a destructive typhoon there, and another report said Cambodia had sold
Vietnam more than 1,000 metric tons of fish.

Commenting on Cambodia's expected food supplies for this year, the Agriculture
Ministry's chief planner said, ''We are still short 235,000 tons of rice.''

Cambodia's ties with Vietnam are even more evident in the classroom, from the
primary grades through the country's desperately needed faculty of medicine,
dentistry and pharmacology.

Curriculum at a Medical School

Dr. My Samedy, the dean of Cambodia's revived medical school, showed three
American reporters a series of blackboards on which the school's entire
curriculum was outlined. At the top of the board, for each of the school's 1,008
students' first four years of instruction, was a course labeled ''politics'' and
another labeled ''Vietnamese language.''

The outlines had been written in French, which Dr. My Samedy spoke fluently and
which had been the main language of higher learning in Cambodia until Mr. Pol
Pot came to power in 1975. But Vietnamese was the only language the medical
school offered for study.

Asked how students would be able to read the world's medical texts and journals
- very few of which are published in Vietnamese, because Vietnam's medical
establishment remains backward - Dr. My Samedy replied that classes were
conducted in Khmer, the Cambodian language; that French medical terms were used,
and that many students had learned French at home.

But some students, when greeted in French by the reporters, appeared not to know
the language. And since the new Cambodian school system does not offer French,
the country's acquaintance with medical and other technical world literatures
would seem to be at an awkward stage.

'Mutual Cooperation'

Dr. My Samedy, who said the Government's leaders had not yet decided on a
foreign language besides Vietnamese, evidently wished that his students knew
French. Most of the medical school's small library of 2,000 books are in French
or English, and the dean produced a long list of French textbooks he said were
desperately needed.

The Minister of Education, Pen Navuth, said later in an interview that learning
Vietnamese was part of the two nations' ''mutual cooperation.''

''The study of Vietnamese is not only in the medical faculty but in all
ministries,'' he said. In the future, he said, ''we won't need any
interpreters.''

Other languages offered in the country's new teacher training schools were
Russian and German, the Minister said. He agreed that many Cambodians already
knew French, but he pointed out that they were not trained teachers.

Cambodia's long-term plan is to translate foreign technical works into Khmer.
Mr. Pen Navuth said a committee was now studying that possibility. ''When the
technical committee can translate into Khmer, we will use the Khmer language on
all levels,'' he said.

Textbooks From Vietnam

Classes in the nation's primary and secondary schools are conducted entirely in
Khmer, and at the elementary-school level students have been issued new
textbooks written by special Government committees. To date, the books have all
been printed in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

They teach literacy and history by denouncing Mr. Pol Pot, linking his crimes to
those of Chinese ''hegemonists''; by praising the long ties between the
''progressive forces'' of Vietnam and Cambodia, the unity of Indochina and its
deep friendship with the Soviet Union, and by explaining the ''two revolutionary
tasks'' of Vietnam and now of Cambodia: the defense and construction of
Communism.

''We want our children to know about the struggle of international workers and
the movements of liberation around the world,'' Mr. Pen Navuth said. ''We're
trying to transform them into people who love labor and want to maintain
peace.'' Books for secondary-school students have yet to be printed.

School libraries - at the Chatomuk school in Phnom Penh, with more than 4,000
students, at Orphanage 1, at the secondary school in Takeo Province and
elsewhere in Cambodia - testify to the country's emerging values. There are few
books of any kind; most come from Vietnam's presses. A few nonpolitical volumes
are left over from before the Pol Pot era.

Gifts From Unicef and Soviet

A wall map, some rulers and notebooks are likely to be gifts from Unicef. Any
new books and magazines in English or French are invariably gifts from the
Soviet Union. The portraits on the library wall are of Marx, Lenin, Heng Samrin
and Ho Chi Minh. Paintings by students are usually of Mr. Pol Pot's violent
crimes or of the people's equally violent revenge. The Pol Pot Government has
been accused of killing millions of Cambodians in its four years in power.

These themes, together with gratitude toward Vietnam, are repeated on the
Government radio and amplified morning and night, wherever there are
loudspeakers, across Cambodia.

At the royal palace, which was untouched in the Pol Pot years, young dancers in
Cambodia's national ballet can be seen varying traditional sequences with new
ones of a political sort. In one dance, three young women flow onto the stage in
the traditional clothes of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Such harmonies in personal feelings between Vietnamese and Cambodians would be
unusual, but accounts of actual hostility are rare. Vietnam's troops are said by
everyone to be courteous and to stay away from Cambodian women. A resident
foreigner who has watched occupying armies in several countries described the
Vietnamese in Cambodia as the ''most disciplined'' such force he had ever seen.

Occasional Signs of Tension

Signs of tension occasionally appear. Along the country's eastern border, for
example, some Vietnamese immigrants have been so badly treated by the local
authorities - just how is unclear - that Phnom Penh has urged a stop to the
pattern.

Derogatory Khmer terms for the Vietnamese are heard regularly in private
conversations. And a few Cambodian officials are said not to have enjoyed the
company of their Vietnamese advisers. The Foreign Ministry's chief of staff in
1979, Chea Tra, was said by two defectors to have grown so angry at his
Vietnamese adviser that he shot him dead.

----

NEXT: The military situation in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occupied Cambodia; Effects of Vietnam's Invasion; First of three
articles

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of children at park (page 12)

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SUNDAY, APRIL 3, 1983

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 654 words


International

The Soviet leadership responded to President Reagan's proposal for an interim
agreement limiting Soviet and United States medium-range missiles with a
statement from Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko that it was ''unacceptable.''
He said at a news conference in Moscow that there was ''no chance'' that it
could be used as the basis for an agreement at the Geneva arms reduction talks.
He said the Soviet Union would continue to seek an accord that would protect the
security interests of both sides. (Page 1, Column 6.)

The U.S. expressed disappointment in Andrei A. Gromyko's rejection of President
Reagan's arms proposal, describing the Soviet reaction as ''unconstructive.'' It
said it hoped for a more flexible position when arms talks resume next month.
(1:5.)

The U.S. is providing extensive aid to the paramilitary forces currently
fighting the Sandinist Government in Nicaragua, according to a Honduran who was
directly involved in the planning of American covert activities in Honduras. His
information was largely confirmed by two senators on the Senate Intelligence
Committee and by a highly placed Reagan Administration official. (1:3.)

Vietnam's influence over Cambodia has become deeply pervasive more than four
years after its invasion of the country. Few aspects of daily life are
unaffected by the Vietnamese, who maintain a force of about 180,000 troops in
the country. The troops are fending off attacks in many provinces from Cambodian
guerrillas loyal either to Pol Pot, the deposed Communist leader, or to such
non-Communist insurgent leaders as former Prime Minister Son Sann. (1:2.)

No P.L.O. authorization for Jordan to join the negotiations on the American
initiative for Middle East peace followed a meeting in Amman between King
Hussein and Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Neither side issued a statement after the 90-minute meeting, but a senior P.L.O.
official said that the organization would not be granting King Hussein any
formal endorsement to take part in the talks with Israel. (1:4.)

National

Easing of affirmative action rules established for Federal contractors is
planned by the Labor Department. The rules, designed to provide jobs for blacks,
women and Hispanic Americans, affect 20,000 to 30,000 companies that do business
with the Government. The department has decided to go ahead with many of the
proposals that would relax rules that met with intense criticism from civil
rights advocates when they were first announced 19 months ago. (1:1.)

Space shuttle Challenger was ready for its inaugural launching tomorrow,
scheduled at 1:30 P.M., from Cape Canaveral. The initial flight - the first of
five scheduled for 1983 - of the Columbia's lighter and more powerful sister
ship was delayed more than two months by engine leaks and windblown dust
contamination. (16:1.)

Metropolitan

A contract with N.J. Transit was ratified by striking trainmen and conductors,
but whether commuter service would be restored was uncertain because of a
continuing threat by a union faction to walk out at 12:01 Monday morning. The
30-month contract was approved 268 to 158 in a vote by members of the United
Transportation Union, despite their frequent expressions of dissatisfaction.
(1:4.)

Hospitals that do not report cases of misconduct, incompetence or drug abuse by
physicians will be sued by New York State, the Health Commissioner said. The
Commissioner, Dr. David Axelrod, said he would use his emergency power to
suspend the license of any physician to insure that the ''public is protected''
during administrative hearings on charges of misconduct among physicians. (1:1.)

Inspections of some homes on Long Island homes will be made by the State
Department of Environmental Conservation after 250 residents reported that their
homes might have been contaminated by toxic chemicals used to kill termites.
(27:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Battle Thais

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 33 words

DATELINE: NA NGAM, Thailand, April 2


At least 100 Vietnamese troops crossed into Thailand today and fought
hand-to-hand with a Thai border patrol, killing five Thai soldiers and wounding
eight, the Thai Army commander in chief said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRACKING WASHINGTON'S ENDS AND MEANS IN CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1527 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


WHILE politicians and diplomats continued to argue the relative merits of
electoral or negotiated solutions in Central America, the region last week took
a new step toward wider warfare. The latest wave of anti-Sandinist attacks
inside Nicaragua did not threaten the Government installed after the ouster of
the Somoza regime in July 1979. But it suggested that just as in El Salvador,
Nicaragua's troubles were moving toward prolonged military struggle rather than
an early political solution.

The battle last week was waged largely in propaganda. Nicaragua took its case to
the United Nations Security Council, accusing the United States and Honduras of
helping to organize former National Guardsmen of the Somoza era into a terrorist
army that in recent months had infiltrated 2,000 ''counterrevolutionaries'' into
Nicaragua from camps in Honduras.

The size and membership of this cadre was impossible to confirm, but the
anti-Sandinist Nicaraguan Democratic Force, a coalition that also includes
businessmen and exiled Conservative Party leaders, grabbed headlines by claiming
- falsely as it turned out - the capture of numerous small towns in Matagalpa
Province.

The Reagan Administration, meanwhile, sought to portray the fighting as prompted
by a population disenchanted with Sandinist ''repression.'' But Washington's
involvment with the ''contras''is substantial, The New York Times reported. The
support is said to involve intelligence, training, equipment and advice,
according to Honduran and American official sources.

No matter how presented, increased political violence now seems likely in
Nicaragua. The prospect has sent shudders through a region already polarized by
civil war in El Salvador, a brutal, partially successful counterinsurgency
campaign in Guatemala and mounting political tensions in Honduras. The
Nicaraguan conflict prompted fresh calls for negotiations but it also reawakened
fears in Central America that fighting could spread beyond national borders and
that the United States might eventually feel the need to send in combat troops.

For the Reagan Administration, which until now has shaped its Central American
policy around its faltering effort to defeat the Salvadoran left, a change of
emphasis may also be taking place.  Noting that Nicaragua, under both the
Somozas and the Sandinists, was more influential in the region than El Salvador,
some Central American observers believe Washington may have concluded that
undermining the Sandinists is a precondition to prevailing in El Salvador.

In a sense, the idea is not new. The Administration has consistently argued that
the source of El Salvador's troubles was to be found in Managua and Havana.
Every setback in El Salvador has been quickly followed by new charges from
Washington of Sandinist weapons shipments to the Salvadoran rebels, although
American diplomats in the region say they have seen little recent evidence of
large-scale Nicaraguan arms trafficking.

The Sandinists, however, could not be easily dislodged. They have lost much of
their original popularity, but they have built up a powerful political and
military apparatus. The exiled revolutionary hero, Eden Pastora Gomez, plans to
enter the country to prepare his supporters for an eventual uprising. But he has
yet to prove his claims of strong support inside the Sandinist army. The
well-armed rightist forces led by former National Guard officers such as the
Honduras-based Col. Enrique Bermudez Varela are still widely hated.
Nevertheless, so long as they obtain support from abroad, the ''contras'' can
keep up their attacks.

Hopes for peace in El Salvador look no less bleak despite the recent decision to
advance the date of general elections from March 1984 to next December. The
country's interim President, Alvaro Magana, noted recently that his main
objective was to persuade leftist groups to present candidates at the polls. But
the guerrilla coalition, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, has
already discounted the idea of participating without prior negotiations.

Guerrilla Confidence

The United States and its Salvadoran allies have rejected repeated rebel offers
of ''unconditional dialogue.'' And the Reagan Administration, although anxious
to present the elections as a political solution, has asked Congress for an
additional $110 million in military aid to finance yet another Salvadoran
counterinsurgency offensive. This time it is to be accompanied by civil action
programs seemingly modeled after the ''hearts and minds'' campaigns in Vietnam.

But the guerrillas, having demonstrated an improved military capacity in recent
months, are confident that increased United States assistance will not remedy
the Salvadoran armed forces' evident deficiencies - poor officer leadership and
demoralized troops. In recent interviews, guerrilla spokesman have claimed that
Salvadoran troops increasingly prefer to surrender rather than fight.

Yet despite the widespread belief among Salvadoran and Nicaraguan leftists that
they cannot be defeated by their United States-backed foes, both groups have
issued warnings that a frustrated Administration might intervene directly in the
region. The leftists say they are particularly alarmed by President Reagan's
repeated assertions that United States security is threatened by ''Soviet
expansionism'' in Central America.

In Washington, however, the likelihood of direct American military involvement
in the region seems far-fetched. Administration spokesmen have repeatedly denied
the possibility, and Congress, while willing to endorse a new - albeit reduced -
military package for El Salvador, seems to be in no mood to approve sending in
the marines.
Tenuous Talk About Talks

The prospect of continuing civil war in El Salvador and perhaps a mounting war
of attrition in Nicaragua has thus focused attention anew on negotiations. The
option was endorsed last week in the Security Council by several United States
allies. Liberal Democrats in Congress have also frequently tried, without
success, to push the Administration to agree to negotiations between El
Salvador's warring factions.

The Administration, since it took office in January 1981, has viewed Central
America in the context of the broader East-West struggle and has been determined
to make no concessions to the left.  It has refused to allow Salvadoran rebels
''to win at the negotiating table what they can't win on the battlefield'' and
as their battlefield success has grown, Secretary of State George P. Shultz has
vowed that they will not be allowed to ''shoot their way'' into the Government.

At Mexico's urging, Washington and Managua briefly exchanged negotiating
positions early last year, but the State Department has not responded to
Nicaragua's last diplomatic note of August 1982.

Whatever its attitude toward substantive negotiations in the region, Washington
is well aware that the very idea of negotiations plays a key role in the
propaganda war. In response to calls for negotiations by Mexico and Venezuela
and by the Socialist International, the United States last fall mobilized its
Central American allies - El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica - to propose
talks with Nicaragua under an agenda known to be unacceptable to the Sandinists.

Honduras Seems Vulnerable

More recently, Costa Rica promoted the idea of a so-called ''five plus five''
meeting - the five Central American countries plus Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia,
Panama and the Dominican Republic - that would discuss the regional crisis
without United States participation. But Washington's endorsement of the plan
immediately raised suspicions that it was aimed at pressuring the Sandinists
into concessions. Nicaragua has instead called for separate talks with Honduras
and the United States to tackle the specific problem of the ''contras.''

Even in the heated debates over negotiations, the lines have been sharply drawn.
The Sandinists favor negotiations between El Salvador's warring parties but
refuse to contemplate direct talks with rightist rebels at home. Washington,
meanwhile, dismisses proposals for talks in El Salvador but criticizes the
Sandinists for rebuffing their opponents.

The standoff also threatens wider instability. Honduras appears most vulnerable
since it is actively involved in the struggles of its neighbors, serving as a
buffer against Salvadoran rebel movements in border areas and acting as willing
host to Nicaraguan ''contras.'' Even in Costa Rica, which has no army and is
anxious to prevent anti-Sandinist forces from launching attacks from its
territory, political opinion is being polarized by the regional crisis.

Only Guatemala seems immune to the convulsions of the region, perhaps because
its own situation has been so bad for so long. Over the past year, the country's
latest military regime has battered its latest guerrilla movement, but few
Guatemalans are optimistic that permanent stability will be the result.
Guatemala has known political violence almost continuously since a leftist
regime was overthrown by United States-backed rebels in 1954. Its ''30 Years
War'' is already 29 years old.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nicaraguan refugees photo of Nicaraguan troops
photo of Salvadoran troops in U.S.-made helicopter map of Central America

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE DEPOSED POL POT BUT NOT;
POVERTY

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


Rural life in Cambodia, as seen in a visit to ricegrowing Takeo Province south
of Pnom Penh, seems better than at any time since 1975, when the Communist
regime of Pol Pot came to power.

Yet the province is a sad one. Despite increased rice production there and
nationwide, Takeo is still struggling to feed itself and still bewildered by its
new masters, the Vietnamese troops that invaded the country in late 1978 and
deposed Pol Pot. The soldiers have provided a fair measure of security for most
of Cambodia's seven million people, but there is little evidence that their
presence and the Heng Samrin Government they back have done much for the rural
population.

The paved roads of Takeo are still combat-era backbreakers. The province's
villages, which have suffered more than average from local flooding and drought,
range from poor to dirt-poor. The wet season harvest of December and January has
filled small granaries to overthrowing, but now, with the dry season, most
fields are parched and a dusty lassitude hangs over the land.

There is one Cambodian doctor in the whole of Takeo but the province is lucky in
having half a dozen doctors from Czechoslovakia, one of the Soviet-bloc
countries that recognize the Government. But the provincial hospital does not
inspire confidence.

Thousands of Vietnamese soldiers and Cambodian militiamen stroll the highways
and guard their culverts even though there seems little threat of attack - the
province adjoins Vietnam and is far from the western strongholds of Pol Pot's
guerrillas. The soldiers, when they are not filling the restaurants, stick to
their pillboxes rather than working to repair shattered roads, towns and canals.

The Villagers Complain

Between Phnom Penh and the town of Takeo, the capital of the province, the talk
in the villages is of too little food and no clean water, medicine, or
irrigation pumps. This seems the case across wide stretches of Cambodia. Kitchen
gardens have expanded and the Government has allowed the country's private plots
of riceland to grow larger and more productive. But, as in Vietnam, the
Government has placed its long-term faith in ''solidarity groups'' of a dozen
families each, and on directed labor in an eventually collectivized society.

In Dam Nak Pongro, a village that straddles Takeo and Kompong Speu provinces, 35
families - three solidarity groups - farm less than 50 acres of land. Their tiny
houses are built of bamboo and straw. Even now, just three months after the
harvest, they do not eat well. The villagers appear better off, however, than
when they were scattered during the Pol Pot Pot era. Ong Soeun, 53 years old,
who lost 10 relatives during that period, said his family of eight consumes 4
1/4 pounds of rice per day. That means 16 1/2 pounds of rice per person per
month, or 10 pounds less than the United Nations Food and Agriculture

Organization calls essential. Some of the village's children looked healthy
because the Government has provided emergency rations. Others had the
reddish-brown hair, fat bellies and faraway gaze of malnutrition. The village
raises a few pigs, chickens and ducks, but water for vegetables is unavailable.

Top Chorn, the village headman, who always carries an American AR-15 rifle
strapped over his shoulder for ''security,'' said he hoped to extend the
village's area of cultivation by 25 acres. This would mean clearing trees and
digging impoundments for water, and the headman spoke enthusiastically of the
plan. Ong Soeun and his family looked mystified by this talk. Later they asked a
visitor for aspirin and antibiotics.

In the provincial capital, the president of Takeo's revolutionary committee,
Kong Lanh, briefly described a scheme, launched in February, that would move
17,000 poor families into unfarmed lowlands along Takeo's border with Vietnam.

Houses have yet to be built there. The land is sometimes flooded and there are
problems with rats and insects. Dikes still need to be raised against the Bassac
River and its old canal. Yet more than 5,000 families are said to have moved to
the area already. One of the reasons, explained a farmer who planned to move, is
that the new land has been advertised as yielding a rich 2 1/2 tons of rice per
acre. ''It's a fact,'' Kong Lanh's chief of staff insisted. But officials of the
Agriculture Ministry in Phnom Penh said that the land in question was much less
productive, and that the central Government might have to step forward with aid
if the project fared as badly as some of Vietnam's ''new economic zones.''

Like the rest of the country, Takeo Province is a victim of history. In 1970,
soldiers of the Lon Nol regime massacred a crowd of ethnic Vietnamese in the
provincial capital. Outside town, the 30-foot craters of American bombs still
scar the fields. Unknown thousands died and many others were dispossessed. When
Pol Pot arrived, the killing continued. At Kokoh monastery, a pile of skulls and
the pits of graves bear witness to the butchery of several thousand civilians.

Conditions have improved since the Pol Pot years and the famine that followed
Vietnam's invasion. Takeo's secondary school students seem positively cheerful
and, according to the provincial director of education, more than 175,000 of
Takeo's youngsters are now attending school.

They get an education highly oriented by the occupying force. A provincial
student, like his counterpart in Phnom Penh, learns to read, write and
understand history through simple texts, printed in Vietnam, that drive home the
horrors of the Pol Pot regime, extoll the Vietnamese, and recite the doctrines
of the faction of Cambodia's Communist Party that now rules in Phnom Penh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of travelers bound for Phnom Penh

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOAN FORMS AND DRAFT FORMS DON'T MIX

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


To the Editor:

I write in strong opposition to the Solomon Amendment's linkage of Federal
financial aid eligibility to the registration of draft-age male students under
the Selective Service Act.

It is wrong to link unrelatd criteria in order to withhold benefits or services
from individuals who would otherwise be eligible, especially when the Government
already has strong penalties for noncompliance with the Selective Service Act.

In addition, these regulations are patently discriminatory against low-income
students, who need financial aid in order to attend college. Only these students
are subject to screening by colleges to ascertain compliance with the Selective
Service Act. Affluent students are not affected, nor will their education be
terminated.

The requirements are reminiscent of the draft inequities of the Vietnam War, in
which the poor bore a disproportionate share of the fighting and suffering. Has
our Government learned so little from that tragic example that it proposes new
regulations that discriminate against young people from poor families?

The proposed requirements also place added administrative burdens on
institutions already hard-pressed by Federal and state cuts in aid to higher
education. Financially strapped colleges should not be forced to act as
policemen for the Selective Service Act.

I want to add my voice to those others throughout the City University of New
York and in higher education who are urging that the law be repealed.
BERNARD W. HARLESTON, President, City College, New York, March 28, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words


THE TRUANTS: Adventures Among the Intellectuals. By William Barrett.
(Doubleday/Anchor, $8.95.) An insider's vivid and poignant memoir, ''The
Truants'' reexamines both the leading personalities and the governing ideas of a
pivotal intellectual coterie - the Partisan Review's editors and contributors -
as it emerged in the years immediately before and after World War II. Our
reviewer, Hilton Kramer, noted that William Barrett writes ''with an unusual
degree of intimacy, intelligence and candor,'' and said the book ''abounds in
brilliant portraiture.''

THE STOLEN JEW. By Jay Neugeboren. (Pinnacle, $2.95.) The central character in
Jay Neugeboren's ambitious and skillful novel ''The Stolen Jew'' is Nathan
Malkin, who returns from Israel to Brooklyn after his brother's suicide. Haunted
by family ghosts and enmeshed in a plan to help Jews in the Soviet Union, Nathan
decides to rewrite his own work of fiction, a novel also called ''The Stolen
Jew'' that is set in 19th-century Russia. Our reviewer, Vivian Gornick, noted
that Mr. Neugeboren is an experienced novelist who writes well, and other
critics acclaimed this book.

STONE FOX. By John Reynolds Gardiner. Illustrated by Marcia Sewall. (Harper
Trophy, $2.95.) Ten-year-old Willy wants to win the $500 prize in the National
Dogsled Races so he can pay the taxes on his grandfather's farm and restore the
old man's will to live. Stone Fox, a rival in the contest, wants the prize money
to buy tribal land. The situation is ''laudably complex and true-to-life'' and
the race scene ''almost killingly suspenseful,'' our reviewer, Anne Tyler, wrote
about John Reynolds Gardiner's book for readers 8 to 11.

THE GERMANS. By Gordon A. Craig. (NAL/ Meridian, $8.95.) This elegant and
enticing study belongs to a much neglected genre, Fritz Stern said in his
review. Precise, suggestive and evocative, it is a ''tentative essay on a
serious subject, a significant work for ...  the 'general reader.' '' Gordon A.
Craig traces the dominant attitudes and experiences of the Germans over the past
several centuries, ''always with an eye for the present, and always concerned
with the the social and political implications of cultural characteristics.''

RICHARD A. By Sol Yurick. (Avon, $3.50.) Richard Aquilino, an electronics
wizard, is the hero of Sol Yurick's richly plotted, fast-moving fable. Set in
the summer of 1962 - after the aborted Bay of Pigs invasion and before the Cuban
missile crisis - it concerns a man who discovers he can tap into the telephone
lines of Government leaders and C.I.A. agents. Our reviewer, Ivan Gold,
characterized the novel as ''an engrossing (and scary) cerebro-political
thriller'' that ''works just fine.''

NAM: The Vietnam War in the Words of the Men and Women Who Fought There. By Mark
Baker. (Berkley, $3.50.) Presenting firsthand testimony compiled in interviews,
Mark Baker's vivid account of Americans' experiences in Vietnam is organized
chronologically, beginning with tales of induction into the armed forces and
ending with recollections of homecoming. In between, he offers veterans' brutal
war stories which he describes as ''filled with emotion and stripped of ambition
or romance.'' War stories with a markedly different feel appear in UP FRONT by
Bill Mauldin (Bantam, $2.95), which, its author says, depicts ''an army full of
men who are able to fight a ruthless war against ruthless enemies, and still
grin at themselves.'' Orginally published at the end of World War II, ''Up
Front'' struck our reviewer, C.L. Sulzberger, as ''a vigorous, brash, youthful
but excellent book.''

REVERSE ANGLE: A Decade of American Films. By John Simon.  (Clarkson N. Potter,
$11.95.) Assessing films as art and not simply as entertainment, John Simon
brings himself to recommend roughly 15 of the 245 movies he writes splendidly
about in this collection of pieces, most of which ran in magazines between 1970
and 1981. ''I don't mind his telling me that what I thought I had enjoyed was
actually third-rate, because he illuminates so many things I failed to see,''
Andrew Hacker said in his review.

THE TRIAL OF PATROLMAN THOMAS SHEA. By Thomas Hauser. (Avon/Discus, $3.50.) The
author of ''Missing,'' who has also written two novels, recounts the story of a
white New York City plainclothesman who stopped two black males before dawn on
April 28, 1973, on suspicion of armed robbery and fatally shot one of them - a
10-year-old boy.  Charged with murder by his superiors, Thomas Shea was
acquitted by a jury but dismissed from the force after a departmental hearing.
In Thomas Hauser's hands, his trial and the surrounding events make a lean,
unnerving and frequently dramatic nonfiction mystery story.

POEMS AND SKETCHES OF E.B. WHITE. (Harper Colophon, $5.95.) ''Some lovely
snippets are collected here,'' our reviewer, Edward Hoagland, noted, although he
thought well of only a few of the poems and found the sketches that resemble
short stories less successful than those that amount to essays. Among the best
entries in this volume by the man who ''in effect became the voice of The New
Yorker,'' Mr.  Hoagland said, are ''Twins,'' ''Heavier Than Air,'' ''Fin de
Saison - Palm Beach,'' ''Commmuter,'' ''Pigeon, Sing Cuccu!'' and ''The Age of
Dust.''

BISMARCK. By Edward Crankshaw. (Penguin, $6.95.) To the English historian Edward
Crankshaw, Prince Otto von Bismarck, Chancellor of the German Empire from 1871
to 1890, is an antihero - the man who ''exalted the amoral concept of politics
into a principle,'' in the words of our critic, George L. Mosse. Although he
thought that the book personalized history unduly and grafted a later concept of
morality onto the German past, Mr. Mosse called this biography well written and
worth reading.

COSTUME AND FASHION: A Concise History. By James Laver. (Oxford University
Press, $9.95.) The late James Laver's concise history includes 322
illustrations, 58 of them in color, and discusses how people have covered and
adorned themselves since ancient times, with particular emphasis on the
relationship between clothing and cultural phenomena. A new final chapter by
Christina Probert of Vogue magazine brings the survey up to date. At left, a
British cycling costume, circa 1880, consisting of tight-fitting knee breeches,
a tight jacket with a military cut, and a little pillbox cap. ''The really smart
wearer of this outfit carried a bugle to warn pedestrians of his approach,'' Mr.
Laver says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION WEEK

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 869 words


Rare View of the Pope

It seems that ABC television has - in old-fashioned journalistic parlance - a
scoop. On Easter Sunday the network will broadcast a behind-the-scenes look at
Pope John Paul II in the Vatican. ''The Pope and His Vatican'' will be shown
from 7 to 8 P.M.

Ellen Rossen, the senior producer, said that for about a year ''we had the
express permission of the Pope to film in his bedroom, film him at mass and at
breakfast. We were with him in his study when he gave the Angelus, (a prayer
said in commemoration of the Incarnation) as he does every Sunday from his
window. We also were allowed to tape the Pope walking in his private gardens in
Castel Gandolfo and to be with him in certain private meetings. We were
literally right over his shoulder when he went out for some public appearances
as Bishop of Rome. What we really wanted to try and reconstruct was a day in the
life of the Pope.''

This opportunity came to ABC, Miss Rossen said, as many ''scoops'' do, through a
friend. The network was approached by Edward J. Pizek, a Polish-American, who,
she said, ''is a very old friend of the Pope.'' Mr. Pizek told ABC, Miss Rossen
continued, ''that the Pope was very anxious to have a platform in which to get
his message across - to explain what he's trying to do for the church.'' Miss
Rossen said Mr. Pizek told the Pope that he felt American television might be
the best way to do that.''

Av Westin, vice president of program development for ABC News, said that in
consideration of Mr. Pizek's mediating between the Vatican and ABC News, the
network is giving profits from the documentary's foreign distribution to the
Copernicus Society of Philadelphia, a student aid group that Mr. Pizek is
affiliated with.

Speaking of Heroes

Coincidentally, producers of two different CBS-TV movies recently proffered
comments about heroes. ''It seems to me that heroes on television still work,
especially in this depressed era,'' said Michael Sloan, executive producer of
''Return of the Man From U.N.C.L.E.,'' which will be broadcast Tuesday from 9 to
11 P.M. The TV movie brings the United Network Command for Law and Enforcement
alumni Robert Vaughn and David McCallum out of the retirement. These heroes were
seen in the series from 1964-1968 in what many viewed as America's answer to
James Bond.

Another hero is found in Mickey Spillane's ''Murder Me, Murder You,'' which
stars Stacy Keach as the diamond-hard private detective Mike Hammer. The TV
movie will be shown Saturday at 9 P.M.

Jay Bernstein, executive producer of the Spillane film, feels that contemporary
America lacks heroes. However, his idea of the consummate hero ''is the Mike
Hammer character - the way we have written him. He's come home after Vietnam.
This man is very much an American. He's interested in his country and the people
that live there. It's not right wing or left wing, it's just American.''

Will the women in the TV film be brutalized by the hero as Mickey Spillane has
Hammer treat them in the books? ''He's not progressive toward women,'' Mr.
Bernstein replied, ''but he doesn't beat any of them up.''
Dramatizing Failed Scheme

One of World War II's most bizarre episodes continues to inspire theatrical
treatment. ''Private Schulz'' - a BBC six-part mini-series about a underwear
salesman who is drafted into the Nazi S.S. and comes up with a plan to flood
England with German-made counterfeit banknotes in order to destabilize Britain's
wartime economy - will be broadcast by Channel 13 beginning Sunday at 9 P.M. The
remaining five episodes will be shown on successive Sundays.

The late Jack Pulman, who had worked on other BBC adaptations, wrote the
original ''Private Schulz'' script. The series became popular in England in 1981
and won two Royal Television Society awards.

Phillip Hinchcliffe of the BBC, who produced the series, said in a recent
interview from London that ''it's the story of a little man who's a dreamer.''
Mr. Hinchcliffe added that the Germans in this series are caricatured in a way
that makes a point: Mr. Pulman wanted ''to show how very nearly our world was
brought to a stand still by what he called B-feature-film gangsters.''

Director Relationships

Blythe Danner, who won a Tony Award when she made her debut in Broadway's
''Butterflies Are Free,'' explained in a recent interview that her ''first love
is the theater''; however, she does work in about one television movie each
year. One of the more successful recent ones was ''Too Far to Go,'' in which she
co-starred with Michael Moriarty. ''In Defense of Kids,'' her latest effort -
she portrays a successful lawyer who gives up her practice to aid troubled
children - will be broadcast Wednesday at 9 P.M. on CBS. It also stars Sam
Waterston, Joyce Van Patten and Georg Stanford Brown.

The lack of a close relationship with the film directors she has worked with is
one reason why Miss Danner is cool toward making films in general. ''In theater,
you get a lot of time to work with somebody and you just iron out all the
kinks,'' she explained. ''I love it when I can put myself in the director's hand
and trust him completely. That happens so rarely, at least for me, when I do a
film.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA IS ARMED CAMP OF SOLDIERS AND GUERRILLAS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2498 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


In the heartland of Cambodia and along its borders, there are now more troops,
weapons and preparations for war than at any time since the Vietnamese Army
swept through the country in early 1979.

The guerrilla forces of the deposed Government of Pol Pot, which have grown only
slightly in the last two years, are now thought to number more than 30,000. The
insurgent forces of Mr. Pol Pot's non-Communist allies Prince Norodom Sihanouk
and his former Prime Minister, Son Sann - have grown more rapidly, to as many as
15,000 troops.

The combined forces of Vietnam and of the Government it installed in Phnom Penh
have also grown, with Vietnam's 180,000 troops, about the same number as last
year, having lately acquired more armor, more artillery and the aid of a
Cambodian Army that has increased to about 30,000 men.

Getting Ready for War

In addition to Phnom Penh's regular army, there are thousands of Cambodian
policemen and militiamen who can be seen crowding the roads of the country's
most secure areas in trucks, on top of crowded buses, sitting in rows of four on
wobbling motorcycles, packed into pony carts on their way to training and
standing guard outside granaries - each man with an automatic rifle.

If Cambodia is gradually becoming more secure, as Hanoi and Phnom Penh assert,
it has also been getting ready for war. And despite Vietnam's military
superiority over the Cambodian rebels, there are compelling reasons to doubt the
optimistic military assessments offered by Hanoi, Phnom Penh, their Soviet-bloc
allies and some Western analysts who consider Cambodia essentially conquered and
at peace.

The Foreign Minister in Phnom Penh, Hun Sen, said in an interview here that ''we
have smashed the Pol Pot forces''; that the growth of Phnom Penh's army had
already allowed Vietnam to call some of its troops home; that such withdrawals
would continue this year, and that ''we control the whole country.''

Curfew in Phnom Penh

But a 17-day visit to Phnom Penh and seven Cambodian provinces in March
indicated that even in the country's most secure areas, this security was being
achieved with intensive militarization. In other occupied areas the country is
not yet secure, and a few areas have not yet been taken from Vietnam's enemies.

The Government of President Heng Samrin still imposes a 9 P.M.  curfew in Phnom
Penh, and unknown numbers of Cambodians whose loyalty is suspect have entered
camps for political ''re-education.'' Mysterious gunfire, including
automatic-weapons fire, can be heard at night in the western provincial capitals
of Battambang and Siem Reap. A recent Government-planned visit by three American
reporters to the medieval city of Angkor Thom, just north of the famous Angkor
Wat, had to be canceled, without explanation, after shooting was heard from that
direction.

A Cambodian official later explained that before a major Government celebration
at Angkor Thom last Jan. 7, the official holiday marking the end of the Pol Pot
era in 1979, two Government military expeditions had to be sent into Angkor
Thom's forested precincts to ''clear out the rats.''

The official was alluding to Pol Pot guerrillas, who were apparently able to
roam not only near Angkor but also just a few miles north of western Cambodia's
main Vietnamese Army headquarters, at Siem Reap.

Vietnamese Never Far Away

Cambodia's most populous towns and fertile farmlands are governed from Phnom
Penh. Vietnam's forces, never far away, have also shielded most Cambodians from
getting involved in a shooting war.  There are few armed soldiers wandering
Phnom Penh's streets by day.  Reports of robbery and other violent crimes are
rare. Many Cambodian civilians travel the nation's roads at will, though they
have to ask permission first from their local government-sponsored ''solidarity
groups.''

Vietnamese guards at innumerable highway pillboxes look remarkably secure as
they doze away the hot afternoons in bamboo shacks, oblivious to passing jeeps,
bicycles and oxcarts. Vietnamese soldiers often hitchhike, unarmed, along lonely
stretches of road that might seem exposed to attack. There are fewer military
roadblocks along several Cambodian highways than in neighboring Thailand.

Some of the gun-toting by rural militiamen may in any case be unnecessary - less
a response to likely danger than to relentless Government warnings that every
man, woman and child must keep watch for the Pol Pot forces.

But many other signs point to widespread, continuing insecurity in large parts
of Cambodia.

Pol Pot's Military Maps

Military maps used by Pol Pot diplomats at the United Nations mission of the
Cambodian coalition recognized by the General Assembly have long purported to
show that Vietnam and the Phnom Penh Government fully control little more of
Cambodia than the capital and the Parrot's Beak, which juts 50 miles into
southern Vietnam. The rest of the country is supposedly either controlled or
contested by rebels.

The Pol Pot maps are wrong. But it is also an exaggeration to say, as a
spokesman for Phnom Penh's Foreign Ministry did recently, that the only
anti-Vietnamese forces left are ''the remnant Pol Pot forces in Thailand, and a
small number of reactionaries in the refugee camps along the border.''

A well-informed Western aid worker here said Vietnamese troops were still
regularly ambushed in the Elephant Mountains of Kompot Province, in the hills of
Kompong Chhnang Province, and in Kompong Thom, north of Tonle Sap, the country's
sprawling lake.

The aid worker added that reports of trouble in these areas had increased since
last July, the month when the leading Cambodian exiles stepped over the Thai
border into Cambodia and inaugurated their coalition.

'Rare' Ambushes

A Cambodian official, speaking about the 180-mile stretch of Highway 5 between
Phnom Penh and Battambang, said privately that northern Kompong Chhnang Province
was only ''rarely'' hit by ambushes. But he said the same highway between
Kompong Chhnang and Pursat, where the Cardamom Mountains sweep up from the south
to within sight of the highway, was not safe.

Big regions of Cambodia are both hilly or mountainous and deeply forested, and
many miles of the southwest, north and northeast are sparsely inhabited. It is
in remote areas such as these that the Pol Pot patrols still travel and harass
the Vietnamese.

When determined to move in force, the Vietnamese have marched up mountain
valleys and occasionally forced thousands of rebels to scatter into the
mountains or seek refuge in Thailand.

In January 1982, for example, at the start of the dry season, 5,000 Vietnamese
troops attacked the Pol Pot forces' main camp in the Phnom Malai hills, 20 miles
south of Poipet, near the Thai border.  After battling for several months, the
Vietnamese inflicted casualties and forced the rebels to move, but they had also
taken many casualties and failed to push the insurgents out of Cambodia.

Son Sann Stronghold Attacked

In March 1982, still in the dry season, a large Vietnamese force stormed Mr. Son
Sann's most important military stronghold not far from the Thai border in the
Cardamom Mountains of Pursat Province.  But the base, from which thousands of
Mr. Son Sann's soldiers and civilian followers fled, was soon abandoned by the
Vietnamese and eventually reoccupied by the rebels.

The Son Sann army has grown since then and may now number more than 10,000.
Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam said recently of his country's
less-than-decisive campaign, ''Why should we use a big net to catch little
fish?'' But given the embarrassment that the Cambodian insurgents are still
inflicting on Vietnam, the question remains why Hanoi has not applied the
necessary manpower from its army of one million men.

The most common speculation is that the Vietnamese at first hoped to crush Mr.
Pol Pot soon after their invasion. But, this line of reasoning goes on, the
crushing blow never came, and after China's brief invasion of Vietnam in
February 1979 Hanoi chose not to risk too many troops in Cambodia.

The hardened Pol Pot guerrillas are therefore still able to operate many miles
inside Cambodia, at least in small numbers. Recent travelers have described the
highway linking Phnom Penh with the southern port of Kompong Som, which passes
through the Elephant Mountains, as extremely well guarded by Vietnamese. Almost
none of Cambodia's diminishing group of Western aid workers have been allowed to
visit the port for many months.

Attacks and Counterattacks

The Phnom Penh Government has itself announced attacks and counterattacks far
from the Thai border. Last July, for instance, Phnom Penh's domestic radio
service said that in the first half of 1982 its forces in one district of
Kompong Cham Province, ''in close cooperation with the Vietnamese volunteer
troops,'' had ''launched 37 medium-scale and small-scale operations against the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sary-Khieu Samphan remnants hiding in the jungle.'' Mr. Ieng Sary
and Mr. Khieu Samphan are Mr. Pol Pot's longtime lieutenants.

The Vietnamese side was said to have killed 45 rebels, wounded 32, taken 4
prisoners and accepted the surrender of 26 others. The district named, Memot, is
close to the Vietnamese border and more than 200 miles from Thailand. It was in
the same province, last August, that Phnom Penh's Deputy Minister of
Agriculture, Nhem Heng, was shot dead in an ambush near the Chamcar Leu rubber
plantation.

Violent Kompong Cham is also one of Cambodia's most populous provinces and one
of half a dozen provinces that the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization, after a recent study, identified as likely to suffer food
shortages this year.

A wide band of northern Cambodia from the Dangrek Mountains, along which the
Thai border turns east, through all the eastward provinces up to the Vietnamese
frontier - is thought by foreign intelligence sources in Bangkok and Western aid
workers in Phnom Penh to be insecure. Even the main east-west road north of
Tonle Sap, Highway 6, has long been off-limits to foreigners east of Siem Reap.

The Pol Pot guerrillas are assumed to be the reason. Only heavily armed
Vietnamese convoys appear to travel the road safely, Cambodian refugees in
Thailand have said.

Farmers Killed by Mines

Kompong Thom, through which Highway 6 passes, is one of at least three
provinces, along with Kampot and Siem Reap, where farmers have lately been
killed or wounded when their plows struck land mines, according to a
knowledgeable foreign resident here who often works with doctors. The three
provinces are under stricter than average Vietnamese Army control.

One of the provinces that has seen some of the most intense combat in the last
four years is Battambang, which borders on Thailand. Lim Chhon, the garrulous
political chief of the Sisophon District, in Battambang Province, said in an
interview that any enemy Cambodians who surrendered were sent to re-education
camps.

He said that 300 such people had turned themselves in during the first two weeks
of March and that ''orientation'' for civilians who ''confessed'' lasted a week
or two. After ''confessing'' they would be offered pots, pans, mosquito nets and
other basic equipment and could start a new life, he said.

Confessed enemy soldiers might have to be re-educated longer, perhaps for a
month, Mr. Lim Chhon said. Whether Pol Pot soldiers or nationalists, it does not
matter, he said; all are welcome home. But if they later do something wrong, Mr.
Lim Chhon said with a smile, ''we catch them.''

He also commented on Cambodian refugees in Thailand who might be encouraged by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to return. This ''repatriation
program'' is being promoted by Thailand and several Western countries that feel
overburdened by Indochina's refugees. Mr. Lim Chhon said, ''These people have
already been trained to set up their spying and sabotage activity.''

Defenses Against Rebels

He also said 50,000 Cambodian civilians in the last few weeks built an earthen
wall and a tank ditch - the ditch filled with sharpened stakes -that runs north
for 20 miles from the highway near Poipet. He displayed the blueprints for the
project. One was headlined in Vietnamese, ''Front-line defensive barricade:
Survey of a fortification opposing tanks.'' The Cambodian insurgents do not have
tanks.

What the Vietnamese will do next in western Cambodia cannot be predicted, but
they and their Cambodian Army allies do have some new equipment: new trucks,
off-loaded at the port of Kompong Som, which have arrived in the last six
months; new Soviet-built 122-millimeter howitzers; more 130-millimeter guns,
tanks modeled on the Soviet T-55 and American-made M-113 armored personnel
carriers abandoned in South Vietnam, and some new Soviet scout cars.
Antiaircraft guns have also been spotted in western Cambodia in recent weeks.

There have been reports that the Vietnamese troops in Cambodia are demoralized.
Malaria, poor rations, long stints in a foreign country and homesickness among
soldiers who are often just 16 and 17 years old are among the stories told by
defectors to Thailand and by others now home in Vietnam. Foreign Minister Thach
of Vietnam has told some diplomats in Hanoi that morale is poor. But he has
added that the troops will stay as long as necessary.

Since contacts by foreigners with Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia are
prohibited, Vietnamese morale was hard to assess. Some soldiers looked cheerful;
they invited foreigners to take their pictures around their tanks, trucks and
rocket-propelled grenade launchers.  Others seemed distant. None showed signs of
being incompetent soldiers.

A Fear of Pol Pot

A more immediate problem for the Phnom Penh Government, and one that helps keep
it insecure, is that despite its new guns, its militia and its growing army, its
troops are no match for the Pol Pot guerrillas.

Western analysts agree with the Government in Phnom Penh that the Cambodian Army
looks stronger than it did two years ago. But they also agree that Phnom Penh
still needs the Vietnamese. The Western analysts add that Phnom Penh's army is
plagued with desertions.

Nobody here thinks the Vietnamese will leave soon. Hanoi has conditioned
withdrawal on an end to Chinese and Thai support for the insurgents and a change
in China's hostility toward Vietnam. Many Cambodians, remembering the
convulsions of the Pol Pot era, fear the return of the ousted leader's forces.
Others wonder just what the Vietnamese want to accomplish here.

A middle-aged Cambodian said that if the Vietnamese went home the Pol Pot forces
would return. Phnom Penh's army cannot defend itself, he said, because the
people have not rallied to its support. They have not rallied, he added, because
the Phnom Penh Government is Communist. Therefore, he said, the Vietnamese will
not leave and the tension will continue.

----

NEXT: The legacy of the Pol Pot era.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occupied Cambodia; Effects of Vietnam's Invasion; Second of three
articles

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Cambodia (page 8) photo of disabled tank (page 8)
photo of village (page 8)

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS PLANNING BID TO WIN OVER EUROPE'S YOUNG

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Reagan Administration is devising a broad strategy to counteract what it
views as growing anti-American tendencies among younger Europeans, according to
Government officials.

The target of this strategy is a new generation of European leaders who share
none of their parents' experience immediately after World War II, when Americans
and Europeans worked closely to form a military alliance and reconstruct
Europe's shattered economies.

Government and private public-opinion polls show that these young leaders -
known here as the ''successor generation'' - have a far less positive image of
the United States, partly because their perceptions have been shaped by American
involvement in Vietnam and by domestic crises like Watergate.

Troublesome Implications Seen

Government and private analysts are warning that the emergence of a new, far
more skeptical generation of European leaders, if their attitudes persist, has
troublesome implications for future cooperation between Western Europe and the
United States.

To counter these trends, Administration officials and foreign policy groups have
undertaken a series of actions designed to reestablish the close bonds that
existed between leaders on both sides of the Atlantic after the war.

The Administration has a multipronged effort. Administration officials said
President Reagan's presentation last Wednesday of a new negotiating proposal for
limiting medium-range missiles was partly intended to respond to growing
pressure from Western European governments for the United States to demonstrate
more flexibility in the arms-control talks.

European leaders have come under intense political pressure from many of their
citizens, especially the young members of the European movements that intensely
oppose deployment of the new American nuclear weapons in Europe.

More Youth Exchanges Planned

Charles Z. Wick, director of the United States Information Agency, has raised
several million dollars privately to double youth exchanges between Europe and
the United States from 15,000 to 30,000 in the next three years.

His agency is completing a poll in Italy that concentrates on successor
generation attitudes. A similar survey is planned later this year for West
Germany.

Report by Ambassador

Peter Dailey, United States Ambassador to Ireland, recently completed a report
for the White House on ways to strengthen European support for deployment of the
Pershing 2 and low-flying cruise missiles in Europe, should arms-control talks
with the Soviet Union fail. The negotiations resume in Geneva next month.

Among the proposals Mr. Dailey has recommended, State Department officials said,
is the designation of a White House ''arms reduction ombudsman'' to help present
President Reagan's arms policies more effectively.

Seminars for 'Generation Elites'

The Administration is also seeking $1.5 million in the next fiscal year for
increases in exchange programs and seminars intended for what are termed
successor generation elites - teachers, press representatives and political
party leaders. Officials complain that the number of people involved in
Government-sponsored exchanges has declined by more than half in the last
decade. Spending for the Fulbright student exchanges has been reduced by 40
percent in real terms over the same period.

Concern is widely shared in foreign policy circles. The Rand Corporation, a
military research center in Santa Monica, Calif., sponsored a weeklong
examination in February of the implications for the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization of a shift in successor generation attitudes.

The Atlantic Council, a private group that promotes cooperation between Euorpe
and the United States, is in the third year of a program to educate younger
Europeans about the United States and foster increased contacts among younger
leaders.

'Close the Memory Gap'

''We've got to close the memory gap between older Europeans - whose image of
America was shaped by Care packages, Marshall Plan aid, and the Berlin airlift -
and their children, who have been influenced by Vietnam and Watergate,'' said
Stephen F. Szabo, whose new book on the successor generation is to be published
soon.

In a paper for Rand, Mr. Szabo argued that the successor generation was
responsible for the emergence last year of the European antimissile movement.
Although not generally anti-American, he wrote, this group is ''motivated by a
deep suspicion of American motives and policies.''

A survey conducted by Louis Harris for the Atlantic Institute and The
International Herald Tribune in seven European countries and the United States
shows some erosion of support for the United States, especially among young
Europeans.

Young Fault U.S. Policies

When asked to identify what was ''most responsible for current international
tensions,'' one of two possible anti-American responses was given most
frequently by the young in every country except Britain.

In France, 25 percent of those 18 to 24 said the ''U.S. military buildup'' was
to blame, compared with 13 percent of those 35 to 49, and 12 percent 65 and
over. Similarly, 24 percent of the youngest age group selected ''U.S. aggressive
policies towards the Soviet Union'' as the cause of tensions, compared with 16
percent in the 35-to-49 age category, and 7 percent for those over 65.

In West Germany the gap was even more striking: 64 percent of West Germans, aged
18 to 24, blamed international tensions on the United States military buildup,
compared with 41 percent of those in the middle-age category and 29 percent of
those 65 or older.

Growing suspicion of the United States, however, does not mean increasing
support for the Soviet Union. Analysts maintain that younger Europeans seem
supicious of both superpowers. Their identification is with the ''nontraditional
left'' - French Socialists, Italian Radicals and the Greens in West Germany -
and not with Moscow, pollsters say.

Higher Education Cited

In an article last week in Public Opinion magazine, William Schneider, an
analyst at the Washington-based American Enterprise Institute, said the growth
of higher education in postwar Europe accounted in part for the generation gap.

''Each country, except Great Britain,'' Mr. Schneider said, ''has experienced
steady growth in the percentage of citizens attending university.''

He argues that the fact that only about 5 percent of the British population has
attended college - a fairly constant figure for the last two decades - partly
explains why Britain is virtually the only country in Europe where a successor
generation gap is not evident.

Mr. Szabo's data shows that the generation gap appears smallest in Britain and
in France and greatest in West Germany and Italy, where, paradoxically, the
United States played a major role in the social and cultural reconstruction in
the postwar period.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA FIGHTING IS SAID TO SPREAD

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Monday, April 4


Vietnamese troops in western Cambodia continued battling insurgents along the
border with Thailand on Sunday, and the fighting has spread, according to
Western diplomatic sources.

Six wounded followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former head of
state, were evacuated Sunday from their armed camp at O Smach, north of the
Cambodian town of Samrong. O Smach, which the Vietnamese shelled Sunday, is more
than 50 miles up the border from the initial focus of Vietnam's attack last
week.

John de Salis, head of the International Committee of the Red Cross here, said
this morning that 29 wounded Cambodians had been admitted to the Red Cross field
hospital at Karb Cherng, opposite O Smach, by Sunday night. Thousands of the
camp's 30,000 people had fled the shelling, and there were unconfirmed reports
that the camp's entire population was moving to the Thai border nearby, Mr. de
Salis said.

Just east of the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet, shelling was heard for more
than four hours Sunday morning along Cambodia's Highway 5. Vietnamese troops
there were believed to be fighting guerrillas loyal to Pol Pot, Cambodia's
ousted Communist leader.

Guerrillas Along a Tank Ditch

At least 7,000 more Cambodians, including many civilians, gathered Sunday along
a Thai tank ditch opposite the former Pol Pot stronghold at Phnom Chat, about 25
miles north of Aranyaprathet. More than 20,000 refugees have entered Thailand in
the Phnom Chat area alone since last Thursday.

''I gather there are a lot of Khmer Rouge troops along the tank ditch as well,''
a Western diplomat said, referring to the Pol Pot forces.

''Phnom Chat is apparently entirely under Vietnamese control,'' the diplomat
added. The nearby Cambodian settlements of Chamcar Kor and Prey Moin, opposite
the Thai village of Kok Tahan, have also been occupied by the Vietnamese. They
were formerly controlled by the Pol Pot guerrillas.

Vietnamese troops have been moving westward since last week against Cambodian
insurgent camps that either straddle the Thai border or are situated just inside
Cambodia. Many civilians live among or near the insurgents.

Hundreds Reported Killed

The Thai Government has announced that hundreds of Cambodians have been killed
in the Phnom Chat area, and international aid workers report that more than 200
wounded Cambodians have been hospitalized at the Khao-I-Dang refugee camp in
Thailand.

In the last few days many Vietnamese shells have landed inside Thailand,
particularly in the area opposite the Pol Pot forces' Phnom Chat camp. Five Thai
soldiers were killed in the area on Saturday, and at least one other reportedly
died Sunday of his wounds. The border artillery duel subsided Sunday.

The Thai Army said Friday that Vietnamese ground forces had also crossed the
border, but their location could not be independently confirmed. The army has
barred reporters from the battle zone and from most areas in Thailand where new
refugees are gathering.

Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek, the Thai Army commander, said Saturday at a news
conference not far from the border that the Vietnamese incursion had been
repulsed.

Prince Sihanouk's camp at O Smach, known by its inhabitants as Sihanoukville,
was reportedly hit by heavy shelling. The Vietnamese Army in Cambodia has
pursued a special mode of attack for the last two dry seasons and has depended
increasingly on artillery before sending ground troops into enemy camps near the
border.

Sihanoukville has been heavily bunkered since last summer, when Prince Sihanouk
appeared before 40,000 refugees at the Khao-I-Dang camp and encouraged thousands
of them to return to Cambodia in anticipation of the expulsion of the
Vietnamese.

The Vietnamese are now believed to be attacking as hard as they can before the
end of the dry season in May, when monsoon rains may force them to withdraw
their tanks and artillery farther into Cambodia, as they did last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, APRIL 4, 1983

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


International

The Soviet leadership's rejection of President Reagan's interim proposal for
limiting medium-range nuclear missiles is not likely to be its last word on the
issue, according to Western European governments. Senior North Atlantic Treaty
Organization officials said in Brussels Saturday that Foreign Minister Andrei A.
Gromyko's rejection of the new proposals disappointing, but not surprising.
Meanwhile, organizers said about 200,000 Western Europeans took part in
demonstrations over the weekend protesting the possible stationing of the
Uinited States missiles in Europe next fall. (Page A1, Column 6.)

Anti-Americanism of young people in Europe has troublesome implications,
Government officials said, and to counteract it the Reagan Administration is
planning a broad strategy aimed at a new generation of young European leaders.
The goal is to re-establish the close bonds between leaders on both sides of the
Atlantic after World War II. (A1:5.)

Cambodia is an armed camp of soldiers and guerrillas despite Vietnam's
superiority over the Cambodian rebels. There are compelling reasons to doubt the
optimistic military assessments offered by Hanoi, Phnom Penh, their Soviet-bloc
allies and some Western analysts who consider Cambodia essentialy conquered and
at peace. (A1:2.)

National

Recall of 238 X-ray scanners in use around the country could follow the
discovery of a defect by the Food and Drug Administration that might carry ''a
risk of injury.'' The agency, which has taken action that could lead to a recall
of the devices, said that some of the computer axial tomography, or CAT,
scanners designed and built by a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, sometimes
turned on without a technician's command, repeating a scan n?d exposing the
patient ''to unnecessary and possibly hazardous amounts of radiation.'' (1:6.)

Utah's big lakes are overflowing following record rains and snow.  Utah Lake has
inundated the state park near Provo. Beaches and parking lots on the south shore
of Great Salt Lake are under water.  (A1:3.)

Murder indictments will be sought for the third time in three years against a
nursing home in Galveston County, Tex. A special prosecutor for the State
Attorney General's office maintains that at least eight patients and perhaps
many more were starved and deprived of medication while the nursing home,
operated by Autumn Hills Convalescent Centers Inc., collected Medicaid fees for
care it never provided. Murder charges were made twice before, but did not reach
trial for technical reasons. (A1:1.)

Four oil barges struck two bridges spanning the Mississippi River at St. Louis
and two of the vessels exploded, setting fire to grain barges and brush along
the waterfront. The spilled oil formed an oil slick seven miles long on the
river. (A14:1.)

A nitric acid spill in Denver made 2,000 people flee their homes. The acid was
spilled in a collision in a railroad switching yard between a coupler and a
freight tank carrying the acid. About 20,000 gallons of it vaporized into thick
clouds over the city. (A14:3.)

A very smooth countdown is leading up to the scheduled launching of the space
shuttle Challenger at 1:30 P.M. today, space agency officials at Cape Canaveral
said. The skies are expected to be ideal for the liftoff. Two of the four
astronauts who will man the craft are scheduled for a a three-and-half-hour
workout in space. (A17:1.)

Metropolitan

Restoration of full commuter service was going ahead this morning on the nine
lines of N.J. Transit. A strike declaration from dissident union leaders who had
threatened a new walkout, making restoration of service uncertain, was not
forthcoming. Railroad officials said they had been told indirectly that there
would be no strike, and a mediator said he was operating on that assumption.
(A1:4.)

900 pounds of gold chains were stolen from a Manhattan wholesale jewelry
company. The police said the theft of the chains, valued at $6 million, was one
of the largest jewelry robberies in New York City's history. (A1:1.)

Agents of the Cuban Government conducted narcotics trafficking in the New York
metropolitan area and in Florida in 1980 and 1981, a Cuban defector has told
Federal and New York State law enforcement officials. The defector, Mario
Estebes Gonazales, was arrested on drug charges 16 months ago. (B1:6.)

A Pakistani was was arrested on charges of smuggling heroin at Kennedy
International Airport, and 12 pounds of the drug he was carrying in a garment
bag was seized. It was the largest confiscation of the drug in the the New York
area this year. The Pakistani, identified as Chaudry Alam, a lawyer from Lahore,
attracted the attention of a customs inspector who thought that the garment bag
seemed too heavy. (B3:6.)

The bald eagle is returning to the New York metropolitan area, according to
conservation officials who have spotted the birds on the shores of the Hudson
River, within 50 miles of Manhattan. The eagle population started to decline 20
years ago with the increasing use of the pesticide DDT. Their number started to
grow after the spraying of DDT was banned about a decade ago. (B2:3.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE FORCE IS SAID TO OVERRUN A CAMBODIAN BASE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 4


Vietnamese troops reportedly enlarged their control of Cambodian areas along the
Thai border today, overrunning another insurgent headquarters and sending more
than 20,000 Cambodians fleeing into Thailand.

Refugees told international aid workers in Thailand that the military
headquarters of forces loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian
chief of state, had fallen to the Vietnamese after shelling that began on
Sunday. But some fighting was said to be continuing near the base, which was at
O Smach, a civilian settlement also known as Sihanoukville.

A total of 45,000 Cambodians are estimated to have fled into Thailand since last
Thursday, when the Vietnamese seized the guerrilla base of Phnom Chat, which
straddles the border. The estimates were made by spokesmen for the United
Nations Border Relief Operation and the International Committee of the Red
Cross.

Drive to Clear the Border Area

The Vietnamese, who have had troops in Cambodia since late 1978, are now
pressing a drive to clear the border area of elements opposed to the Communist
Cambodian Government that they support.

(Thailand, which has been angered by Vietnam's violations of its territory
during its border operations, sent fighter-bombers to bomb and strafe a small
Vietnamese force just inside the Thai border near Phnom Chat on Monday,
according to Thai military sources quoted by The Associated Press. Reporters
near the area, where the border is difficult to define, said they saw three
bombing runs by what appeared to be American-made F-5's.

(In Washington, the State Department said it was concerned by the increasing
level of violence on the border. Alan D. Romberg, a department spokesman, told
reporters that Thailand had not asked for additional military aid. But he said,
''We will consult closely with the Thai Government on how we can be of
assistance.'')

Phnom Chat, which is about 30 miles northeast of the border town of
Aranyaprathet, Thailand, had served as a base for more than 3,000 guerrillas
loyal to Pol Pot, the ousted Cambodian Communist leader.

Aid officials said most of the Cambodians who had fled into Thailand since last
Thursday were civilians living with or near the Sihanouk and Pol Pot rebel
factions.

The officials said there were about 23,000 people ''at the evacuation site''
near O Smach. A spokesman for the United Nations operation estimated that 75
wounded and other ''medical cases'' had been taken to a nearby International Red
Cross field hospital since Sunday morning.

8,000 Remain Unaccounted For

The refugees from O Smach had reportedly gathered just inside Thailand near the
village of Nong An.  Western diplomats and aid workers said about 8,000 people
who settled last month just east of O Smach remained unaccounted for.  Their
earlier home was a temporary camp in Thailand opposite the border settlement of
Nong Cham, from which they fled in early February after the Vietnamese attacked
and burned it.

Aid workers speculated that the latest Vietnamese attack had cut off the
newcomers' escape route to Thailand.  Each of the refugee camps attacked in the
last few days, like Nong Cham earlier, had also supported troops loyal to one of
the anti-Vietnamese Cambodian factions that joined politically last June into a
coalition.

The third leader of the coalition, after Prince Sihanouk and Mr.  Pol Pot's
associate Khieu Samphan, is Son Sann, a former Cambodian Prime Minister. Mr. Son
Sann, who is in Bangkok, has warned that two large, armed border camps that
together house nearly 100,000 Cambodians are now under clear threat of attack.

The two camps, Nong Samet and Ban Sangae, are situated a few miles north and
south of Phnom Chat. Both are controlled by Mr. Son Sann's group, known as the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front.

Most of the 7,000 refugees who fled into Thailand on Sunday from sporadic
continued fighting around Phnom Chat were escorted today to greater safety west
of a tank ditch. More than 1,000 of Sunday's group, according to a United
Nations border relief official, chose to walk north or south toward other border
towns.

The Commander in Chief of the Thai Army, Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek, was quoted as
saying here this morning that the army had been collecting evidence of last
week's reported Vietnamese incursion into Thailand so that the Government could
protest it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Cambodia (page A7) photo of wounded soldier

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE BITTER LEGACY OF POL POT WEIGHS ON CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1873 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


This country's suffering under the Pol Pot Government, which was overthrown in
early 1979, is still a live memory for millions of Cambodians. But a factual,
historical account of what happened is hard to find here. Four terrible years,
together with the events that preceded and followed them, have been simplified,
rewritten, ignored and in some cases probably falsified by Cambodia's new
Government and the Vietnamese who set it up.

Nearly every survivor has an awful tale to tell. Some tell their stories as if
the world must hear. Others keep silent until asked simple questions: How many
relatives died? What grinding labor did they perform? What provinces were they
moved to?

In the private lives of families and individuals, the realities of Cambodia's
first Communist Government seem even now, more than four years later, to be
fundamental, unchangeable facts.

But in the public realm, under Cambodia's second Communist Government, the
legacy of those years has assumed the narrow and sometimes unreal character of
propaganda. Its expression was seen in many forms on a visit in March to Phnom
Penh and seven provinces of Cambodia, which is also known as Kampuchea.

Pol Pot's Name Repeated Daily

The name Pol Pot is repeated daily on the Government radio. The executions,
tortures and other terrors of that era have become a Government-sponsored litany
heard in grade school, at work and in the daily statements of officials.

Although a former Pol Pot death camp in Phnom Penh and at least one rural
killing ground have become Government museums, with much moving evidence of
atrocities, other records of the period have been gathered up by the Government
and are unavailable to the public. At several provincial killing grounds,
officials tend to display skulls and graves and insist that not 200 or 2,000
people were buried there, as the skulls attest, but 10,000 or 50,000.

Responsibility for the undoubted crimes of 1975 to 1979 have been greatly
narrowed. The ''Pol Pot clique,'' a tiny group of ''plotters'' surrounding the
onetime head of the Cambodian Communist Party, is blamed for everything.

Although there are good reasons to wonder, as many Cambodians do privately, who
else may have been involved in the deaths of as many as two million people, the
new Government's answer to the question is confined to the ''clique'' and to
China, the Pol Pot Government's main backer then and now.

Vietnam Portrayed as Savior

Vietnam, whose Government provided aid to Mr. Pol Pot's party in its military
victory in 1975, is presented in posters, radio broadcasts and speeches not only
as Cambodia's recent savior but also as its longtime friend.

The Government of President Heng Samrin says it has overturned all that its
predecessors stood for, and it is true that this country's officially sanctioned
cruelties have ended. But milder versions of some policies that the old
Government swore by - rural collectivization, rule from the top, total control
over information, reeducation camps and the relocation of people are subscribed
to by the new Government.

The Government says it plans to strengthen and extend such policies as the power
of the state increases.  Although the Government and the new Communist Party
here say their values, activities and biographies are easily distinguishable
from those of their predecessors, important members of the current
administration served the old Government until shortly before they joined forces
with Vietnamese troops in 1978 to overthrow Mr. Pol Pot.

Accounts of Survival

Personal accounts of survival here after April 17, 1975, when the
revolutionaries entered Phnom Penh, are similar to accounts from hundreds of
thousands of Cambodians who fled the country in the chaos of Vietnam's invasion
in December 1978.

Dr. Ho Bun Hon, the 52-year-old director of the national pediatric hospital, was
asked recently in an interview with three American reporters here how he spent
the Pol Pot years.

Speaking through an interpreter, he said he noticed soon after the Communist
victory that intellectuals were being segregated from others. So he concealed
that he was a doctor and posed as an ethnic Chinese trader in antiques.

People around him died of hunger, dysentery and beatings. After his 13-year-old
daughter contracted malaria, she was given a useless ''traditional medicine,''
he said. The disease eventually affected her brain, and she then refused the
medicine. Her angry guards strangled her to death, the doctor said.

'She Alive, but She's Mad'

His other eight children are still alive. He said one of his brothers, ''accused
of being a teacher,'' was executed. He said of his wife, ''She's alive, but
she's mad.'' His anxious eyes strained toward the ceiling.

Poor farmers as well as members of the middle class tell of losing relatives,
being forced to move, laboring day and night, going hungry, being punished for
meaningless infractions and seeing suspected spies and enemies beaten to death.

Accusations by the former Government's functionaries and soldiers seemed so
ludicrous at times that today they make survivors laugh out loud. Cham Borey, a
26-year-old Foreign Ministry official, recounted one such tale:

After the capture of Phnom Penh, a factory worker told a soldier who was
dividing people into categories that he worked for B.G.I., a bottling and
refreshment company whose full name was Brasseries et Glacieres de l'Indochine.
''Yes, I know you're B.G.I.,'' the soldier said. ''C.I.A., K.G.B., they're all
the same.'' The worker was told to join a group of the ousted Government's
soldiers, and presumably he died with them.

U.N. Support for Coalition

Such experiences lend some pathos to political comments aimed at Westerners by
Cambodians, whether Government officials or not. Two of the most frequent such
comments are that only the Vietnamese Army ended the Cambodians' worst misery
and that many Cambodians here simply cannot understand the world's support in
the United Nations and elsewhere for an anti-Phnom Penh coalition that includes
the Pol Pot forces.

At Tuol Sleng prison in Phnom Penh, a high school that the old Government turned
into a torture and death camp for more than 15,000 people, overwhelming evidence
of extreme cruelty in the past is occasionally diluted by the current
Government's secrecy, insensitivity and political jargon.

The prison's extensive records are not available for full inspection. A huge map
of Cambodia in one of the prison's old classrooms has been decorated with human
skulls.

After showing a visitor a wall covered with photographs of the camp's young
Cambodian guards, torturers and killers, a Government guide resumed his
description of what had gone on at Tuol Sleng in terms of ''the Pol Pot
clique,'' as if no other Cambodians were involved.

Convicted in Absentia

Mr. Pol Pot and his longtime associate Ieng Sary are the only two members of his
group whom the current Government has tried in absentia. They were found guilty
of genocide and condemned to death in August 1979. The Pol Pot guerrillas have
been offered amnesty.

Although Mr. Pol Pot has not been interviewed for years, Thai and Western
intelligence sources in Bangkok do not doubt that he is alive, probably living
somewhere along the Thai-Cambodian border. He has spoken briefly within the last
few months on his group's radio station, and he is believed to have visited
Bangkok for treatment of malaria and kidney disease.

Mr. Pol Pot, once known as Saloth Sar, has nearly always been a shadowy figure.
A trip that he took in 1965 to Hanoi - the Vietnamese were then his allies - was
long a secret. Few Cambodians heard the party leader's name when he was in
power. Today his formal title is simply that of military commander of his 30,000
guerrillas.

A Pyramid of Human Skulls

Many such details are never repeated in Cambodia today, and many of Mr. Pol
Pot's killing grounds are now made to offer political puzzles.

One killing ground, at the Kokoh Monastery in the Pati District of Takeo
Province, displays a square pyramid of human skulls that can be almost
mathematically estimated to number more than 1,000 and fewer than 2,000.

But the head of the government's local committee on religion insisted that the
skulls had been counted and that they numbered more than 5,000. He also said
captured documents at the monastery revealed that 50,000 people had been
murdered there. He added that the documents were in Phnom Penh and unavailable.

At still another killing ground - outside the village of Samraong, a couple of
miles northeast of the city of Battambang, in western Cambodia - human bones and
graves spoke powerfully of the deaths of at least several hundred people. Local
residents said the place was known as the scene of slaughter in the Pol Pot
years.

The Government supplied a local man named Thoun Savath who said captured
documents had described the deaths of 10,000 people there.  The possessor of the
documents, he said, disappeared with them in early 1980.

The Issue of Responsibility

With a large number of Cambodians having died under the policies of the Pol Pot
Government, the question arises whether Mr. Pol Pot and his close associates
were the only Cambodians responsible for those policies.

Foreign Minister Hun Sen said in an interview here that they were.  ''There was
no mistake made by leaders on the provincial level,'' he said.

At least some Cambodians are known to wonder about their littleknown leaders.
Many educated people take a skeptical view of the Government's relentless
distinction between ''true revolutionaries'' and the Pol Pot kind, despite the
current Government's mildness by comparison.

The two revolutionary groups have often expressed themselves in similar
formulations. Though Phnom Penh's official views today are modeled closely on
those of Vietnam, its talk of ''plots,'' ''hegemonists'' and ''socialist
construction'' reminds many Cambodians here of the old Government.

A New Communist Party

More important are certain comparable ways of viewing society. Mr.  Pol Pot's
party has been replaced by a new Communist Party that is friendly with Vietnam
and the Soviet Union and hostile toward China, the opposite of its predecessor's
position. But both parties have governed invisibly from above, and both have
been dedicated to the transformation of Cambodian society.

The current administration even has plans, though more humane ones than those
put into effect by the old Government, to send some of the people who have moved
to Phnom Penh back to the countryside.

The Pol Pot Government forced the entire population out, and the eventual cost
in dispossession, famine and death was immense. The Heng Samrin Government will
merely send some people back ''to their native villages,'' according to Keo
Chenda, the Mayor of Phnom Penh.

''The population of this municipality is more than 400,000, officially,'' he
said in an interview. ''But we estimate that the population is 500,000 to
600,000.'' He spoke of a plan to expel as many as 200,000 people from Phnom
Penh, perhaps later this year.

Do not bite SUB CAMBO. If a further trim is needed, kill subheds or call the
foreign desk. Thanks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occupied Cambodia; Effects of Vietnam's Invasion; Last of three articles

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of thoroughfare in Phnom Penh photo of the pyramid
of skulls photo of Hun Sen photo of Keo Chenda

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICAL HIRINGS BANNED IN CHICAGO

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL SHEPPARD Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, April 4


A Federal judge today gave the City of Chicago and Cook County a year to
eliminate politically motivated hirings, dismissals and harassment of municipal
workers.

The order by Judge Nicholas J. Bua, in a case brought 13 years ago, further
undercuts the Democratic political organization's base of power. Until 1979 the
organization controlled the city and county governments by rewarding and
punishing municipal workers on the basis of their political loyalty and efforts
on behalf the party.

But three years ago the political organization suffered two setbacks: the
election of Jane M. Byrne, who ran for Mayor as a reformer; and a ruling by
Judge Bua that the patronage hiring system for city and county jobs was
unconstitutional.

Mayor Byrne abandoned her promises of reform not long after her election, but
Judge Bua began hearings on a way to correct the illegal practices. Today's
order gives city and county governmental agencies 120 days to file a detailed
plan for eliminating the unconstitutional practices within a year.

Temporary Hirings Curbed

The order also affects the hiring of temporary employees, a method often used by
city and county officials to circumvent civil service rules to reward those
loyal to the party. Judge Bua said that the compliance plans ''may make use of
reasonable provisions for hiring persons in exceptional emergency situations''
but that ''any such provisions shall contain rigorous limitations on the number
of persons who may be so hired in a year.''

The case was filed by Michael L. Shakman, a lawyer who was an independent
candidate in an election for delegates to the 1970 Illinois Constitutional
Convention, and by Paul M. Lurie, a voter who supported his candidacy. The two
contended that the Democratic organization controlled the political behavior of
patronage employees by coercion. They said this violated the rights of
independent candidates to fair and equal participation in the electoral process.

Today's order affects the city, the Cook County Democratic organization, the
Chicago Park District, the County Sheriff's Department, the Forest Preserve
District of Cook County and the Cook County Clerk, Circuit Court Clerk,
Treasurer, Board and Assessor.

The order gives officials narrow leeway to make some appointments on the basis
of political considerations by allowing for ''interim'' exempted positions,
including heads of departments, secretaries and an arbitrary number of jobs in
each department. This leaves the door open for case-by-case determinations of
compliance with the court order.

Annual Reports Required

The order also requires the agencies to file annual audited reports detailing
their efforts to comply with its provisions and to post all job openings at
least 14 days in advance.

The issue of political hirings and dismissals has emerged in the current mayoral
contest, which is to be decided April 12.  Representative Harold Washington, the
Democratic nominee, has vowed to eliminate the patronage system, which he
asserts has kept many black, female and Hispanic Chicagoans out of powerful
government jobs, and to replace it with a merit system.

Bernard E. Epton, his Republican opponent, has stopped short of saying he would
end patronage but has said he would use hiring practices fair to all Chicagoans.
He also said he would not give special consideration to potential employees
whose applications were accompanied by letters of recommendation from political
bosses.

In other local political developments today, Mr. Washington and Mr. Epton
continued the last week of their hotly contested campaign. Mr.  Washington, who
is black, was repeatedly asked at campaign appearances today to comment on the
jeering he received from a group of whites on the city's Northwest Side as he
prepared to leave a speaking engagement sponsored by the Greek Americans for
Harold Washington organization. He had to leave under police escort as the crowd
began to use racial epithets.

Similar Incident on Palm Sunday

Mr. Washington, with former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, was similarly
jeered outside a Roman Catholic church on the Northwest side on Palm Sunday.

Today he remained undaunted by the reception. ''The kind of mayor you will get
is a sensitive, understanding person who can understand the emotions and
sentimentality of those who booed me when I walked in,'' he said at one campaign
stop.

Meanwhile, Mr. Epton, who asserts that his health is ''perfect,'' continued to
field questions about the extent of psychiatric treatment he has received since
1975.

Last week the 61-year-old candidate said he had undergone psychiatric
evaluations in 1975 and 1978. Today, pressed by reporters, he acknowledged that
he had received additional psychiatric counseling between 1975 and 1979 but said
he did not take medication for his problems.

Later, Judith Anne Knapton, an Epton spokesman, said Mr. Epton and his wife,
Audrey, had ''repeatedly'' undergone family counseling in 1965 and 66 as a
result of problems ''relating to their children,'' especially their sons'
opposition to the Vietnam War.

Questions about Mr. Epton's medical history have overshadowed his criticism of
Mr. Washington for failing to file Federal income tax returns and his temporary
disbarment for accepting $500 in fees for work he never performed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MEN IN THE NEWS: PAUL J. WEITZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words


Paul Weitz, a retired Navy officer, is making his second journey into space as
commander of the space shuttle Challenger on its maiden flight.

But the current flight is quite different from the one he made nearly 10 years
ago, when he spent almost a month in space in the first manned Skylab mission,
helping to set what was then a world's record for time in space by spending 672
hours aboard the earthorbiting laboratory.

The 50-year-old astronaut fondly recalls his Skylab experience and says that in
28 days he never got tired of looking at the Earth.  ''Nearly all my time was
spent at the window,'' he said.

Before joining the space program, Mr. Weitz went through Navy flight training
and received his wings in 1956. Two years earlier, he was commissioned as an
ensign through the Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps program at Pennsylvania
State University while he was earning a bachelor of science degree in
aeronautical engineering.

He was flying airplanes thousands of miles from his home in Pennsylvania when he
was notified that he was eligible to apply for astronaut training. It took him
one day to decide to apply.

The astronaut was born in Erie, Pa., and went to high school in Harborcreek,
Pa., before matriculating at Pennsylvania State University. He later attended
the United States Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif., from which he
received a master's degree in aeronautical engineering in 1964.

He retired from the Navy in July 1976, after a 22-year career in which he
received a number of awards, including a Commendation Medal for combat flights
in Vietnam.

Mr. Weitz, whose hobbies include hunting and fishing, is married to the former
Suzanne Berry of Harborcreek, and they have two grown children.

Col. Karol Bobko

Col. Karol J. Bobko of the Air Force, the pilot of the space shuttle Challenger,
who is making his first space flight, admits that in his 13-year career as an
astronaut, he has sometimes been tempted to quit.

''There was a time when I thought I was just an out-of-synch person because I
got into the space program about the time it started downhill,'' he said.
Colonel Bobko, who is 45 years old, joined the astronaut program in September
1969.

Colonel Bobko was born in Queens and was graduated from Brooklyn Technical High
School in 1955. After graduating from the Air Force Academy as a member of its
first class in 1959, he received a master of science degree in aerospace
engineering from the University of Southern California in 1970. He received
military flight training after graduating from the Air Force Academy and has
logged more than 4,800 hours of flying as a jet fighter pilot.

Among his major assignments as an astronaut have been serving as a crew member
on the Skylab Medical Experiments Altitude Test, which was a 56-day simulation
of the Skylab mission and enabled crew members to collect data from medical
experiments and to evaluate equipment and procedures.

In 1975, he was a member of the astronaut support crew for the American-Soviet
Apollo-Soyuz project. Subsequently, he took part in the space shuttle approach
and landing tests at Edwards Air Force Base in California.

Colonel Bobko said he was excited but cautious about his first voyage into
space.  ''Anybody that thought it was was an absolutely safe adventure would be
fooling themselves,'' he said.  Colonel Bobko is married to the former F. Dianne
Welsh. They live in the Houston area with their two children, Michelle, 20, and
Paul,

l7. Story Musgrave

Dr. Story Musgrave, a mission specialist aboard the space shuttle Challenger,
has a reputation among his colleagues for high intellectual performance,
personal intensity and even a bit of eccentricity.

''I work very hard,'' the 47-year-old scientist and physician said. ''I try to
excel in the various things that we do, and maybe at times I'm colorful in the
way I do it.''

Dr. Musgrave, who has been an astronaut for l5 years, added: ''I tend to
technically pursue things extremely hard, like the NASA T-38 jets we fly for
proficiency. I think of that airplane as a person. I relate to that airplane as
not just a hunk of metal.''

While serving as a surgical intern at the University of Kentucky, Dr. Musgrave
said he decided to become an astronaut partly because of his aviation experience
and partly because he had ''the physical background.''

''I love to run, to exercise, to parachute and fly and that stuff,'' he said.
Dr. Musgrave, who was born in Boston but calls Lexington, Ky., his home, showed
an early interest in mathematics and science at St.  Mark's School in Southboro,
Mass., from which he was graduated in 1953.

Dr. Musgrave has five academic degrees, including a bachelor of science degree
from Syracuse University in 1958 and a doctorate in medicine from Columbia in
1964, and is the author of 35 scientific papers on aerospace medicine and other
topics.

He served in the Marine Corps and worked for the Eastman Kodak Company in New
York before becoming an astronaut in 1967. As an astronaut, he participated in
the design and development of equipment for activity outside the shuttle,
including spacesuits and airlocks. Today's flight was his first venture into
space.

Dr. Musgrave, who is divorced, is the father of five children; the oldest is 23
and the youngest is l5.  He has flown more than 120 types of aircraft and has
logged more

than 14,100 hours of flying. Donald Peterson

Donald H. Peterson grew up in World War II in Winona, Miss., a small rural town
where flying in space was only a dream stimulated by reading science fiction.

''Back when I was a kid there was no space program,'' the 49-yearold retired Air
Force colonel said in an interview. ''I grew up when there were a lot of things
written in the newspapers and books about airplanes and the great fighter pilots
and their exploits. That was exciting stuff.''

Now Mr. Peterson is making his first space flight as a mission specialist on the
space shuttle Challenger. On Thursday, he and Dr.  Story Musgave are scheduled
to don spacesuits and venture into the open cargo bay to test tools and
techniques for satellite repair assignments on future flights.

After graduating from Winona City High School, where he demonstated a
proficiency in mathematics, the future astronaut entered the United States
Military Academy at West Point. He receiving a bachelor of science degree in
1955.

Joining the Air Force after graduating from West Point, he earned a master's
degree in nuclear engineering from the Air Force Institute of Technology at
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.

He volunteered for service in Vietnam and for the astronaut program at the same
time. He was selected for both, and began gunnery training before being pulled
out for the astronaut program.

Mr. Peterson retired from the Air Force in 1969 after 24 years of service, and
then joined the civilian space program. His duties as a civilian astronaut
include responsibility for areas involving engineering support and safety
assessment. ''It's a place where you can combine flying and engineering to a
larger degree than you can in most places,'' he said.

Mr. Peterson is married to the former Bonnie Love of Coffeeville, Miss. They
have three grown children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Space Shuttle astronauts

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 6, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN-THAI BORDER BATTLES SUBSIDE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 521 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 5


Fighting between Vietnamese troops and Cambodian insurgents reportedly subsided
today along the Thai-Cambodian border northeast of here.

In Bangkok, meanwhile, the Thai Government accused Vietnam of trying to provoke
a showdown with Thai forces through incursions across the border and said the
Vietnamese would have to accept the consequences of any Thai retaliation. This
statement was said to have been made to the Vietnamese Ambassador at a meeting
at the Foreign Ministry.

The Foreign Ministry also called in the ambassadors of the Soviet Union and of
Western and pro-Western countries to charge that Vietnamese troops had ''carried
out cruel and barbarous liquidation of the Cambodian people'' along the border
and had intruded into Thai territory.

(The Vietnamese press agency said Vietnam rejected Thailand's ''slanderous
charges,'' The Associated Press reported.)

Thai Planes Strafed Vietnamese

Thai military sources said on Monday that two Thai Air Force F-5E jets had
bombed and strafed a Vietnamese outpost inside Thailand near the border
guerrilla camp of Phnom Chat seized by Vietnamese last Thursday. The camp, which
was a base for guerrillas loyal to Pol Pot, the ousted Cambodian Communist
leader, straddles the border about 25 miles northeast of here.

(Reuters said there were unconfirmed reports that Thai troops had attacked the
outpost and forced the Vietnamese to withdraw into Cambodia.)

Vietnamese shelling reportedly ended today in the area of the border insurgent
camp that was overrun on Monday about 75 miles northeast of here. The camp, O
Smach, also known as Sihanoukville, was the military headquarters of insurgent
forces loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian chief of state.
Vietnamese gunners also reportedly stopped firing at a string of insurgent
Cambodian settlements between O Smach and here.

About 45,000 Cambodian civilians who reportedly fled the Vietnamese attacks at
Phnom Chat and O Smach were said by senior international aid officials to be
safely camped inside Thailand.

Today's Thai denunciation of Vietnamese incursions followed the delivery of a
letter on the subject to the United Nations Secretary General by the Thai
delegate, Birabhongse Kasemsri.

'Unprovoked and Blatant Acts'

The letter denounced the ''unprovoked and blatant acts of aggression by
Vietnamese forces against Thai sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as
crimes against unarmed and innocent'' Cambodian civilians. Thailand protested
what it described as a Vietnamese incursion last Thursday in the Phnom Chat area
and a brief one on Friday. It also denounced shellfire that it said landed in
Thailand.

Thailand's Prime Minister, Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, told reporters today in
Bangkok before entering a cabinet meeting that he had summoned the commanders of
the army, navy and air force Monday night to discuss the border situation.
General Prem made few comments beyond saying that the country's military was
ready to protect Thailand.

Thai armored and infantry troops along the border have been augmented and placed
on full alert in the last few days.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 6, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
The Forgotten Farmers

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 5


The State and Defense departments haven't had much success in dealing with the
Russians lately, and the notion in this corner is that maybe the problem should
be turned over to the Department of Agriculture.

It is obviously the most successful department in Washington. From Vietnam to
Iran, the Defense Department hasn't won a war and has failed in everything
except selling arms, now the major growth industry in the nation.

From the Middle East to Central America, the State Department hasn't won a
diplomatic game since Panama. From Japan to West Germany, the Commerce
Department has been a loser in world trade.

But nobody seems to match the Department of Agriculture anywhere in the world.
With the help of the farmers, the land grant colleges and the farm agents in
every county, they are producing so much fodder, beef, milk and cheese that
President Reagan is now cutting down on their production and giving away their
surplus to the poor in Chicago and elsewhere in the country - never mind the
third of the human race going to bed hungry every night.

The Department of Agriculture doesn't make much news around here.  The President
and the press seldom mention it except at Presidential election time, when the
farmers' votes are important in Iowa.

Meanwhile, all it does is preside over the most productive stretch of land in
the history of the world, feeding more people than ever before with fewer
farmers, now hurting from high interest rates and the cost of machinery, and
worrying about how to keep their children on the land. Washington is vaguely
indifferent about this these days.

The success of American agriculture is one of the wonders of the nation, and
ironically these days, a symbol of the importance of Federal aid and cooperation
between the state and the individual. It was the idea of Jonathan Baldwin Turner
of Illinois and Justin S.  Morrill of Vermont that grants of Federal land should
be made for the establishment in every state of the Union of agricultural and
mechanical arts colleges. Somehow President Lincoln found time in 1862, during
the Civil War, to get the Morrill Act through Congress.  This was the basis of
American agricultural supremacy today.

The questions here are whether the United States is really using this unique
agricultural resource to best advantage as an instrument of peace in the world;
whether we should be sending more food rather than more military arms to the
contending factions in Central America; whether we should always be talking to
the Russians about confrontation in missiles, or offering to cooperate with them
in solving the production of food at home.

No doubt this raises a political and commercial problem. The farmers of the
Middle West want to sell their grain to Moscow, and the Reagan Administration
wants to talk to Yuri Andropov, the Soviet leader, about trade. But the
Department of Agriculture has something to offer that the Departments of State
and Defense ignore.

It can offer cooperation instead of confrontation. Maybe it couldn't get around
the crazy communal system of the Soviet farms, but if given a chance the
American farmer can grow wheat or corn in cement, and the guess here is that he
could show them how to grow food and fruit in Siberia in far greater quantities
than they are now doing.

Maybe this is a goofy proposal - the Russians would undoubtedly resent the
suggestion that they need our help - but everybody who has ever raised a child
knows that when things get tough, you have to change the question. If done
quietly, it might make a difference.

I have talked to the Secretary of Agriculture about this and he was very canny,
recognizing the political problems, but he agreed that there were areas of
potential cooperation in agriculture in the Soviet Union and in Central America
that might be explored to the benefit of peace and the American farmers.

This, however, is not what is being discussed in Washington.  Everything is
confrontation with Secretary of Defense Weinberger. He went to a concert at the
Kennedy Center the other night and all he heard were the drums.

Secretary of State Shultz is different. He listens for the melody and is looking
for cooperation, but maybe the best chance of cooperation with Moscow is not
with the soldiers or the diplomats, but with the farmers, who may have more to
offer and more to say about cooperation and peace than anybody else.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 6, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LET LATINS ALONE

BYLINE: By Roland S. Homet Jr.; Roland S. Homet Jr. is a lawyer and member of
the American Committee on East-West Accord. He has held various assignments in
the White House and the State Department.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 614 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A citizen unversed in Central American affairs may nonetheless inquire what
United States interest is supposed to justify the political costs of
breast-beating intervention in the growing-up process of an incidental neighbor.

The days of reflexive intrusion, of banana peonage and gunboat diplomacy, have
surely passed. But some illusions may die slowly. In its policy toward El
Salvador, the Reagan Administration appears to believe that if it recites a
litany of accelerated elections and land reform it can intervene with military
and economic support to shore up a beleaguered regime.

The issue this provokes is not so much the distinction between military advice
and military training, much ballyhooed, or even the avoidance of progressive
Vietnam-style entanglement. The question is: What proper business is it of ours?

Of course this growing-up process is noisy and uneven. (Consider our own
families; consider ourselves.) Of course the Cubans and the Sandinists would
like to profit from the turmoil. That does not mean we have to help them. The
cries of alarm now issuing from official Washington about destabilization of
Mexico and the Panama Canal are so patently absurd as to manifest a root disdain
for the long-run prospects of democratic stability and self-reliance throughout
the region.

Turn back the calendar to North America 170 years ago. An armed rabble in the
American Colonies has turned out its British governors and exiled much of the
local propertied class. Dangerous doctrines of the ''rights of man'' have gained
currency and helped to inflame a destructive revolution in France, the new
country's only firm ally.  Jacobin upstarts are circulating freely, preaching
upheaval in many lands. What is a responsible great power to do?
Britain chose the War of 1812, in part to encourage the merchant class of
America and to promote stability. It prevailed at Waterloo against Napoleon -
the other great power of the day - but not against the unruly new regime in
Washington. What is the worst that can happen now? El Salvador, like Nicaragua,
may yield to a ragtag governance by factions not of our choosing. They may call
themselves Communists, and they may stay. The internal economy of these
countries may be disrupted, and innocent people may continue to be maimed,
killed and dispossessed. Votes and speeches in the United Nations may for a time
gain an added anti-American fervor. Is this more than a ''great power'' can
abide? Are we incapable of taking a longer view? Thirty to 50 years after these
upheavals, the region will in all likelihood be strengthened by the stability of
self-determined states. And it would surely be better for the United States to
have influenced this evolution by example and by good relations. We can have our
own ''War of 1812'' by proxy in Central America if we choose. The world, and our
power position in it, will probably endure. But why lower our standing with a
Sri Lanka, a Gabon or other responsible leaders of third-world opinion? Why
confirm, and imitate, the Soviet Union's stand on great-power hegemony? Why
pander to our own meanest view of ourselves? Why not demonstrate instead our
grander confidence in the flow of history toward democratic selfrule? Americans
like to think of their country as a world leader. That calls, arguably, for
vision and restraint exceeding that of a precinct policeman. We have serious
long-range concerns - for nuclear arms reduction, for a stable Middle East, for
international trade and finance - that summon the best in enlightened
leadership. A shortterm preoccupation with the to-and-fro of Central American
wars diverts our energies and demeans our purposes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS READY TO ORDER NEW STRIKES ON VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 511 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 6


Thai military commanders said today that they were prepared to order new air
strikes against 150 Vietnamese soldiers who crossed from Cambodia over the
weekend and entrenched themselves in hillside positions just inside Thailand.

The first air strikes were flown Monday by two American-made F-5E
fighter-bombers, and senior army officers said today that the planes had
inflicted heavy casualties on the Vietnamese but had not dislodged them from the
hill known as Phnom Pra. According to Maj.  Gen. Prachum Phibunphanuwat, the
commander of the army's Second Division, who is the senior officer at the
frontier, the planes also dropped napalm during their bombing runs against the
Vietnamese.

Thai officers talked of new air strikes today after ground forces reportedly
tried in vain to oust the Vietnamese. Earlier reports that the Vietnamese had
been driven back into Cambodia were denied today by Thai military sources at the
border.

The Vietnamese were occupying an area where the border is illdefined. They were
part of a force that overran a guerrilla base that straddles the border at Phnom
Chat last Thursday.

Frontier Calm Wednesday

International relief workers said the frontier was calm today, with only a brief
burst of artillery fire before nightfall.  The number of casualties reaching
foreign-run hospitals has dwindled, and their injuries have not been from shells
but from land mines.

By Thai estimates, about 200 Cambodian civilians and five Thai soldiers have
died in the current round of fighting, which began on March 31 with Vietnamese
troops seeking to clear the frontier area of Cambodian insurgents. International
aid workers estimate that about 50,000 Cambodians, most of them civilians who
had settled near guerrilla camps, have been driven into Thailand.

In other developments today, an American official, Paul Wolfowitz, Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said after touring the
border area that the Reagan Adminstration would add $1.5 million to the $3
million it recently pledged for emergency medical aid for refugees.

He said the money would go to the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
he expressed the hope that other countries would also help. During his tour of
the frontier, Mr. Wolfowitz donated blood at a Red Cross hospital.

Bangkok Says Hanoi Lied

In Bangkok, a spokesman for the Thai Foreign Ministry said Vietnam lied on
Tuesday when it denied Thai charges that Hanoi's forces had crossed the border
and attacked civilians in refugee camps. The spokesman said the Thai Government
had evidence of border violations by Vietnamese troops.

The Vietnamese statement Tuesday, circulated by the official press agency, said
Vietnam's ''volunteer troops'' were merely helping Cambodian regular soldiers to
''punish guerrillas opposing the Government of Heng Samrin.''

That Government was installed in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, by the
Vietnamese after their troops invaded Cambodia in December 1978. Vietnam is
estimated to have 180,000 soldiers in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Torturing Cambodia Yet Again

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 459 words


There are many ways to kill a nation, and all of them have been tried in
Cambodia. Unimaginable slaughter, invasion, brutal occupation have followed
famine and pestilence, all of it aggravated by the cynicism of big powers and
the paranoia of smaller ones. And now Vietnam, having already done so much to
reduce Cambodian nationhood, is striking at Cambodians in camps along the Thai
border. The arc of misery widens and the flood of refugees swells to 45,000 in a
week.

Vietnam's border war comes only days after its client regime in Phnom Penh
boasted that ''we control the whole country.'' The truth is otherwise, as Colin
Campbell reports in The Times. Vietnam fields an occupation army of 180,000 and
controls a Cambodian Army of 30,000. Yet the country is not pacified, and the
Vietnamese should be the first to understand why: They deny it the
self-determination they fiercely claim for themselves.

The tragedy comes in layers. When Vietcong guerrillas used a neutral Cambodia as
a sanctuary, it was pounded by American bombs and drawn into a war it hoped to
avoid. This opened the way for the eventual victory of the Chinese-backed Pol
Pot. As many as two million died in ideological purges and in forced migrations
to rural communes.

The Communist regime later installed by Vietnam is writing a new chapter in the
tragedy. The current rulers, Mr. Campbell reports, while less murderous, adhere
as fervently as Pol Pot to rural collectivization, ''re-education'' camps, harsh
relocation of masses of people and rule from the top. A tiny cadre of party
members, 700 in all, promotes a rewriting of history to deny the Cambodian past
and the awkward reality that Pol Pot was enthroned with Vietnam's help.

Vietnam may thus try to blame the excesses of ''cliques,'' but what it cannot
deny is that it shares much the same ideology as Pol Pot.  His real offense in
Hanoi's eyes was to ally himself with China, Vietnam's hated foe. It was out of
deference to China that successive American Governments treated Pol Pot as an
acceptable partner in the coalition opposing Vietnam's client regime. However
rationalized, this tolerance for a mass murderer taints any United States claim
of concern for Cambodian liberation.

Liberation will come when Vietnam withdraws, restoring to Cambodia an inclusive
government at peace with its people and neutral toward outsiders. To bring that
about would require a regional settlement securing all frontiers in an Indochina
at peace with its neighbors.  That deliverance seems light years away. Still,
there's immediate work for the United States to do: rally to Thailand's aid in
the face of the current Vietnamese raids and give comfort to refugees. In an
ambiguous conflict, that much can be unambiguous.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BLOC SAID TO PLAN ECONOMIC SUMMIT TALKS

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 563 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, April 6


The Soviet Union and its principal allies are preparing to hold their first
economic summit meeting in 12 years, probably in May, NATO officials and other
experts on the Communist bloc said today.

A major aim of the meeting, these sources believe, will be to agree on a
strategy for overcoming the Communist world's economic difficulties and
combating Western trade sanctions. This could lead to a measure of top-level
backing for new economic reforms intended to increase competition and reduce
centralized state planning in the Soviet Union and the nations of Eastern
Europe.

The conference will bring together the new Soviet leader, Yuri V.  Andropov, and
the leaders of the nine other members of the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance, or Comecon, as the economic organization linking the Soviet Union
and its allies is called. The other members are Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary,
Rumania, Bulgaria, East Germany, Cuba, Vietnam and Mongolia.

Several countries in Eastern Europe have been urging a Comecon summit meeting
for more than a year against signs of Soviet resistance.

Preliminary Plans Are Made

However, officials of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization believe Moscow has
become more sympathetic toward the idea since Mr.  Andropov took power after the
death of Leonid I. Brezhnev.

Preliminary planning for the conference is believed to have taken place in
January, at the deputy prime minister level, when Comecon's executive committee
met in Moscow. Then, in February, party secretaries in charge of economic policy
from the 10 member countries assembled, also in Moscow.

Where the meeting will be held is unknown. But Hungarian sources have recently
said it could take place as early as next month.  Western leaders have scheduled
their own annual economic summit meeting in Williamsburg, Va., in late May.

Comecon's leaders last held a summit meeting in 1971 when they approved a
''comprehensive program'' calling for closer integration of their economies,
with each country specializing in the production of certain categories of goods
for the rest of the bloc.

Western experts believe that Comecon's failure to achieve the economic goals it
set for itself in 1971 is a major reason why its members are now planning
another summit conference.

Economic Progress Falters

After a promising start in the 1970's, economic growth has been slowing
throughout the Communist bloc, and output in all the Comecon countries is now
seriously behind the targets set in their latest five-year economic plans. Most
of them run from 1981 through 1985.

Western analysts also believe Comecon leaders will want to discuss their
economic prospects in the light of Western trade sanctions imposed against the
Soviet Union because of its actions in Afghanistan and Poland. The group is also
expected to discuss Western moves to restrict the flow of strategically valuable
technology to the East.

The severity of Comecon's economic troubles is goading several of its members
into thinking about economic experimentation - perhaps relaxing centralized
state planning and encouraging more competition, along the lines of such reforms
in Hungary and Yugoslavia.

The new Soviet leader is known to be impressed by Hungary's economic
performance, especially in agriculture, and apparently he has given some
encouragement to reformers in the Soviet Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESSMEN FIND OPTIMISM AT HOME ON ECONOMY BUT NOT FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 5


When Representative George E. Brown Jr.  talked to the home builders in his
southern California district a year ago, the meeting was like a funeral. But
when the Democratic lawmaker met with the same group last week the gathering was
a ''swinging party,'' he reported.

Many lawmakers returning to Washington this week from the Easter recess report
similar evidence of growing optimism about the economy. ''People are reading
signs and hoping for the best,'' said Representative Vic Fazio, Democrat of
California. ''They want to believe we're coming back.''

But if the voters are expressing renewed confidence in the economic outlook, the
legislators also detected concern about the Administration's foreign policy,
particularly in Latin America.

''Usually foreign policy is not very much on people's minds,'' said
Representative James M. Shannon, Democrat of Massachusetts.  ''But this Central
American stuff has people really concerned. They see a Vietnam parallel, and
they're afraid of inching toward a quagmire in Central America.''

10 Days to Sample Mood

These are two of the main impressions gleaned by more than a dozen lawmakers
from both parties over the last 10 days as they traveled through their districts
tapping the mood of the electorate. In interviews they generally agreed the
voters were sending ''mixed signals'' about the Reagan Administration, usually
positive on the domestic side but negative on foreign policy.

In addition, the legislators ran into storm warnings on the issue of withholding
taxes from interest and dividend income. The banking industry has been
generating a campaign against the concept, and the lawmakers found that
opposition to the idea was growing.

In his Florida district, Representative Bill McCollom said, withholding ''was
the issue people talked about most,'' and Representative Tom Harkin said the
same was true in Iowa.

''If all the members had the same experience I had,'' Mr. Harkin said, ''they
know that the opposition to withholding comes from more than just the banks.''

Another noticeable change in many districts is the dwindling concern about the
Social Security System. Congress passed a reform package just before the recess,
and legislators say most constituents seem satisfied.

'Actually Done Something'

''This is the first Easter recess where I've gone home and people were impressed
that we've actually done something in Washington early in the year,''
Representative Shannon said.

The Congressmen were generally struck by the upbeat mood at home.  The real
estate market is starting to blossom in Representative Toby Roth's Wisconsin
district, and tourism is up around Mr. McCollom's home base of Orlando.

''The cloud is lifting psychologically,'' Representative Fazio said.  This
shifting mood could have important legislative implications on Capitol Hill. The
lawmakers passed a $4.6 billion job package just before Easter, and
Congressional leaders promised more efforts to alleviate the unemployment
problem. But now those efforts will face a much tougher battle.

''There will be less of a push factor from the public for that type of
legislation,'' predicted Representative McCollom, the Florida Republican.

Recovery Seen as Fragile

At the same time, lawmakers caution that the recovery is still very fragile and
that unemployment will continue to be a problem.  ''It's more of a psychological
change so far than an economic change,'' said Representative Roth, a Republican.
''We do see some signs of recovery, but they're not nearly enough. If there is
no improvement in the unemployment picture this optimism could be shortlived.''

Representative William R. Ratchford worries that the new optimism could cause
Congress to lose interest in the deeper, long-range problems of the country's
aging industrial cities. ''In the core of my district, we have to re-shape the
nature of the industrial base,'' said the Connecticut lawmaker, whose district
is based on the steel, brass and copper industries.

On the foreign side, concern about the Administration's policy toward Central
America could stiffen resistance to Mr. Reagan's recent request for additional
military aid to El Salvador. For now, few voters know about the details of that
request or express a precise opinion about it. But Representative Shannon said
many constituents asked some version of the question ''What the hell is going
on? What are we doing?''

Nuclear Freeze is Backed

Representative Jim Wright, however, said many of his Texas constituents were
eager to avoid ''another Nicaragua or Cuba,'' a Communist takeover in El
Salvador. As a result, he said, some of them are willing to provide aid, if not
combat support, to the Salvadoran regime.

A number of lawmakers reported hearing strong support for a freeze on nuclear
weapons. And Mr. Harkin found that, to many voters, support for the freeze was
linked to opposition to the sort of military budget increase proposed by
President Reagan.

''There's no divorcing the two issues,'' the Iowa Democrat said.  ''There's a
feeling that we're spending way too much on the military.''

Representative Fazio discerned some doubts about the freeze resolution in
California. ''It doesn't take much to bring out negative feelings about the
Soviet Union,'' he said.

But even opponents of the freeze, he added, do not support the 10 percent
increase in the Pentagon budget advocated by President Reagan. ''The retired Air
Force officers in my district are convinced there's waste in the Pentagon,'' he
said. ''They know we can cut some more money.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT REBEL CAMP, HANOI'S THREAT IS A FACT OF LIFE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1275 words

DATELINE: AMPIL CAMP, Cambodia, April 6


Here at the military headquarters of anti-Vietnamese Cambodians loyal to Son
Sann, a former Prime Minister, all the camp's residents - 8,000 civilians as
well as several thousand soldiers -are aware that the settlement can be overrun
at any moment.

But the civilians remain, tending their gardens, eating rice supplied by the
United Nations and supporting their troops, most of whom are preparing for
possible attack by a nearby Vietnamese force.

The camp, which is made up of barracks and houses, administrative buildings,
hospitals and schools, is less than a mile from the border with Thailand, and
the red and yellow flags of what is known as Democratic Kampuchea fly from its
flagpoles.

That is the name of the Cambodian Communist regime of Pol Pot that Vietnamese
troops expelled from the capital, Phnom Penh, more than four years ago,
installing in its place a Communist regime headed by Heng Samrin.

But the Pol Pot Government is still recognized by the United Nations, and its
leaders were joined last June in an insurgent political coalition by both Mr.
Son Sann's Khmer People's National Liberation Front and a faction loyal to
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former head of state.

The Cambodians here seem cheerful but edgy. Thousands of Vietnamese troops
backed by tanks and heavy artillery have destroyed two similar insurgent bases
in the last week.

The first was a Pol Pot divisional headquarters straddling the border at Phnom
Chat, 10 miles southwest of here; it was overrun March 31.  The other was Prince
Sihanouk's military headquarters at O Smach, just inside Cambodia about 50 miles
to the northeast; it was taken on Monday.

Nearly 45,000 civilians living in and around the two camps have fled into
Thailand, and sporadic fighting has continued in both areas.

Brig. Gen. Thach Reng, one of Son Sann's chief officers, said in an interview
that the Vietnamese had been seen moving north and east from Phnom Chat toward
Ampil Camp. But he said confidently they were still 5 or 10 miles away, adding
that his scouts were patrolling as far as 7 miles from the camp.

Sitting on an office porch and wearing blue jeans and a blue denim shirt, the
general said he expected Ampil Camp to be attacked this month.

'We Control the Source of Water'

He said the Vietnamese had many troops, superior weapons and much ammunition.
But their weaknesses, he asserted, are poor morale and ''a water problem.''

''If they attack us,'' he said, ''they will be able to stay only a week. We
control the source of water.'' General Thach Reng was a commander of Cambodian
Special Forces during the regime of President Lon Nol, which fell to the
Communists in 1975. He joined Mr. Son Sann's force last July after living for
several years in Orange County, Calif., where he operated two outlets for a
donut chain.

Ampil Camp, which lies opposite the Thai village of Ban Sangae and is often
called Ban Sangae, is made up of a military base and six contiguous
''villages.'' The whole settlement resembles an unusually tidy and even
prosperous provincial town, with tall trees along its dirt roads, children
playing and new wooden construction going on even now.

Gates with signs reading, ''National Cadres Training Council,'' ''Art Center,''
''Inquiries'' and ''Special Forces Training Field'' lead to courtyards, neat
bungalows and buildings that look like ranch houses in American suburbs.

The settlement was begun in 1979, not long after the Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia, and has grown from a place of hammocks strung between trees. Ampil is
unlike any other refugee camp along the Thai-Cambodian border.

Strolling in Bermuda Shorts

The poor are still poor here; the well-off are still well off. One of the
affluent, Brig. Gen. Dien Del, who was relieved of his operational military
duties in a shuffle last October, strolled around the camp today in Bermuda
shorts and a T-shirt printed with a colorful map of Central America and the
Caribbean.

General Dien Del once commanded President Lon Nol's second division. ''I fled my
country the day of the fall of Phnom Penh,'' he said.

Many others here fled much later than that. Some have fled several times in the
last few months.  The sound of machine gun fire could be heard in the nearby
woods early this afternoon, and the security officer for the camp's Seventh Day
Adventist Hospital, one of two voluntary hospitals in Ampil Camp, said the staff
was packed and ready to leave if need be.

At 2:50 P.M., as General Thach Reng was describing the camp's prospects, two
artillery rounds were fired from the direction of the Thai frontier. The general
seemed to pay no attention.

Thai troops for miles along the border have intermittently directed artillery
fire at the Vietnamese since last week, when shells started landing inside
Thailand.

The Thais have also asserted that more than 100 Vietnamese troops have taken
positions on the Thai side of the border near Phnom Chat.  Thais have attacked
these positions with heavy guns and several bombing and strafing runs by two
American-built F-5E's.

A Shell Explodes Near Camp

Five minutes after the artillery fire was heard, an incoming shell exploded not
far from the camp. This time the general interrupted the interview to confer
with one of his officers.

Visits by reporters are rare. For the last several months the Thai Army has
forbidden them to cross anywhere into Cambodia. Army guards at checkpoints
usually stop people from driving the two-lane road that runs near the border,
and the Thais have been especially strict since the Vietnamese began their
current attempt to sweep insurgent forces from the border area.

Ampil's main defensive line is three to four miles east and south of here, and
the route south by jeep and motorcycle winds over dusty tracks that soon turn
into paths just a few inches wide. The area is also mined.

General Thach Reng led the way toward the defensive line on a motorcycle, with a
jeep lumbering over the track behind him. The track led through an area with
intermittent scrub, tall hardwood trees and stretches of grassland that had
yellowed under the dryseason sun. Like much of the border country for about 50
miles north of Aranyaprathet, the land here is also open enough for Vietnamese
tanks.

After 15 minutes, the general stopped to confer with half a dozen of his
soldiers camped in a field between Ampil and his southern line. Two miles away,
he said, the Vietnamese in recent days partly overran a position held by some of
the Pol Pot guerrillas at Prey Moan.

Salutes for the General

The general's soldiers, about half of them in green uniforms at this outpost,
saluted him. He is said by Thai and Western military analysts in Bangkok to have
improved discipline among the 10,000 troops that the Son Sann faction is
estimated to have, and to have made them more aggressive as well.

The general said he had two types of soldiers, ''with guns and without guns.''
The weapons they carried today were mostly Sovietdesigned AK-47 assault rifles.

For the rest of the trip, the members of the general's party transferred to the
backs of motorcycles driven by soldiers. They arrived 15 minutes later at an
outpost near Boeung Ampul, which is three and a half miles south of Ampil Camp
and just behind the main defensive line.

Troops at the Boeung Ampul outpost live among the trees in shacks built of posts
and thatch. Some lounged about quietly today in the heat. Many lacked uniforms.

Some soldiers demonstrated the loading of six 82-millimeter recoilless antitank
guns. The weapons were Chinese and looked fairly old. Their sights bore markings
in Russian.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Cambodian soldiers (Page A5)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. TO SPEED ARMS TO THAILAND

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 428 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 7


A State Department official said here today that the United States would speed
up arms deliveries to Thailand in view of the tense situation on the
Thai-Cambodian border.

The announcement was made at a news conference by Assistant Secretary of State
Paul D. Wolfowitz, who toured border areas on Wednesday. He left later for
Malaysia.

Vietnamese troops have been fighting since the end of last month to knock out
Cambodian insurgent bases along the border, and part of the fighting has
reportedly spilled into Thailand. Thai troops have exchanged artillery fire with
the Vietnamese, and two Thai F-5E fighter-bombers have attacked a small
Vietnamese force that was reportedly entrenched in hillside positions on the
Thai side of the border in the area of Phnom Chat early this week.

Mr. Wolfowitz quoted Gen. Saiyud Kherdpol, Thailand's military commander, as
saying Vietnamese soldiers had pulled back into Cambodia.

Airlift Could Be Employed

The official said he had discussed with Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda ''ways
to expedite'' scheduled deliveries of arms.  (In Washington, Reuters quoted
Defense Department officials as saying that the supplies included 155-millimter
artillery, ammunition and trucks and personnel carriers.)

Mr. Wolfowitz said in response to a question that an airlift was obviously one
way the deliveries could be speeded. The United States ran an emergency arms
airlift into Thailand in 1980 after an incursion into Thai territory by
Vietnamese soldiers.

Thailand is one of Washington's closest Asian allies, and the White House is
seeking $101.4 million in military aid to Thailand in the 1984 fiscal year.

Mr. Wolfowitz said the United States would continue to seek a political solution
to the Cambodian problem and would not send weapons to the Cambodian guerrillas.

The intensity of the attacks has eased in the last two days.  However, Thai
military officers reported sporadic fighting inside Cambodia between Vietnamese
forces and Cambodian guerrillas and said two Thai planes had been sent to survey
the border situation.

----

Hanoi Attack on Rebels Feared

Special to the New York Times

ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 7 - Thai military sources near this border town
said today that Vietnamese forces indicated through tank movements that they
were about to attack an insurgent base just inside Cambodia and across from the
Thai town of Ban Sangae. The base, named Ampil Camp, is manned by several
thousand troops loyal to former Prime Minister Son Sann, and is also home to
about 8,000 civilians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese Archbishop Excommunicated Again

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: ROME, April 7


The Roman Catholic Church has excommunicated for the second time a Vietnamese
Archbishop for consecrating bishops without papal authority, the Vatican said
today.

The Archbishop, Pierre Martin Ngo Dinh Thuc, brother of the late President Ngo
Dinh Diem of South Vietnam, was excommunicated along with six other followers of
a Spaniard who says he is Pope Gregory XVII.

The Vatican said Archbishop Thuc, 85 years old, had been excommunicated and
suspended from the priesthood because he consecrated three bishops - a French
Dominican, M.L. Guerard des Lauriers, and two Mexican priests, Moise Carmona and
Adolfo Zamora - in 1981 without papal authority. Archbishop Thuc refused to
recognize Pope John Paul II.

Father Carmona later consecrated two more Mexican bishops, Beningno Bravo, and
an American, Georges Musey, the Vatican said. All six were excommunicated and
suspended from the priesthood.

Archbishop Thuc was previously excommunicated on Sept. 17, 1976, for
consecrating priests in Spain but soon gained the Vatican's pardon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEEDIEST VETERANS WITHOUT V.A. HELP

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


To the Editor:

John Driscoll is correct in his Feb. 28 letter insofar as the Veterans
Administration is concerned: ''Being entitled to something doesn't mean that you
are guaranteed it.'' In fact, veterans who most need help are often least likely
to get it.

Congress has appropriated generous enough funding to ensure that no veteran need
be reduced to want and degradation. Yet the V.A.'s attitude results in adequate
help going to better-educated, more affluent vets who know how to negotiate the
benefit system, with little done to reach out to those former soldiers who are
least able to help themselves.

As a Louis Harris study in 1980 pointed out, vets with a college degree are 25
percent more likely to have contact with the V.A. than those who did not finish
high school.

The Veterans Administration has been particularly lax in reaching out to one
group of former soldiers: homeless veterans. Based on studies at city shelters,
I believe that some one-third of all homeless men in the city are veterans, with
many having served in the Vietnam War.

Although the V.A. has a variety of programs - including disability pensions and
veterans shelters - which could help these men get off the streets, few receive
assistance because the V.A. has done little to make them aware of the benefits
that are available and to reach out to bring the help to them.

The Veterans Administration should re-examine its priorities. It cannot justify
helping the most able, while ignoring those who are too sick or discouraged to
seek its support.
HARRISON J. GOLDIN, New York City Comptroller, New York, March 30, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN USE ON ARKANSAS RICE RAISES CONCERN ABOUT HEALTH

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1963 words

DATELINE: STUTTGART, Ark.


The agricultural miracle that permits this small town in Arkansas County to call
itself the rice capital of the world is about to begin again with spring
planting. But the chemicals that make the miracle possible may also pose a
health threat to the region's residents, according to doctors and scientists.

The so-called phenoxy herbicides 2,4,5-T, silvex and 2,4-D, used here to combat
aquatic weeds that can clog rice fields, are contaminated by dioxins, one of
which is the most toxic compound synthesized by man. Dioxins have been shown to
cause cancer in animals, although their effects on humans are still being
studied.

The Environmental Protection Agency banned the herbicides 2,4,5-T and silvex for
most uses in 1979. However, an exception was made for rice paddies and
rangelands, even though the agency said the pesiticides posed ''risks which are
greater than the social, economic and environmental benefits.''

Since 1979 there have been no detailed epidemiological studies of rice growing
areas, but figures from the department's Statistics and Epidemiology Office show
that in 1981 Arkansas County had a cancer mortality rate almost 50 percent
higher than the national average, or about 272 deaths per 100,000 population.

According to American Cancer Society statistics, the unadjusted national rate
was 183 deaths per 100,000 in 1979, the most recent year calculated. The rate
for all of Arkansas was 198.

The cancer statistics and preliminary studies of birth defects in the region
have led scientists in the state to believe that further epidemiological studies
are needed, although none is yet under way.

''I think it's desperately needed,'' said Dr. Marge Brewster, a biochemist at
Arkansas Children's Hospital in Little Rock, who is active in birth defect
research. The state's Developmental Disabilities Planning Council has asked her
to submit a research proposal.

Dr. Brewster said a worker with the handicapped in Desha County, which is
adjacent to Arkansas County, reported what appeared to be higher-than-usual
numbers of handicapped preschool children there, indicating a need for further
study of the rice-growing regions.  ''The fetus is ultrasensitive'' to chemical
exposure, she said, adding, ''I'm hoping within a year to have data on 2,4,5-T
exposure.''

''Sickness touches every family here,'' said Aileen Brasko, 46 years old, whose
brick ranch house four miles north of Stuttgart is surrounded by rice fields.
''People say they don't feel good all the time.'' Last year silvex was applied
to some of the Brasko family's acreage.

Mrs. Brasko said her husband, George, also 46, has suffered from severe
headaches and allergies. Their 17-year-old daughter has leukemia and once had a
brain hemorrhage, apparently from a birth defect. Another daughter, 20, has
diabetes. ''These things are rampant,'' she said, ''but nobody pays any
attention.''

Asked about whether the rice grown in the fields might be contaminated, an
official of the Arkansas State Health Department who requested anonymity said
that the state's rice had never been analyzed for dioxin, either in the field or
as a marketable grain.  The rice is sold in the United States and abroad. The
concern expressed here has been about the danger of being exposed to the toxins
directly rather than through eating rice.

Most Report Ailments

In an informal telephone survey of 20 rice farming families in the county, most
families complained of a year-round sinus condition that Mrs. Brasko described
as chronic nasal congestion.

Mrs. Louis Prislovsky, 52, said that some residents who suffered from the
condition ''look like they need an oxygen tent on their back all the time.''
Other families said allergies, kidney problems, diabetes and cancer seemed
prevalent in the area.

A search of diagnosis records at Stuttgart Memorial Hospital for 1977 through
1982 showed that 117 to 153 diabetes cases were admitted in any six-month
period, although some patients were admitted more than once. The records and
conversations with doctors also revealed six instances of Hodgkins Disease, a
cancer that one case-control study in Sweden suggested might be associated with
exposure to phenoxy herbicides.

Without epidemiologic analysis, it is impossible to draw conclusions from these
records. However, a physician at the hospital closely familiar with cancer
admissions, who requested anonymity, said that cancers of the colon and pancreas
were so frequent in the region as to constitute ''a remarkable observation.''
The physician reported seeing ''as many as three new colon cancers in three
weeks'' among patients less than 40 years old and as young as 16.

'Powerful' Studies Urged

In 1979, after studies in which test animals were exposed to 2,4,5-T
contaminated with varying levels of dioxin, the E.P.A.  noted, ''Cleft palate,
high incidences of fetal mortality, reduced fetal weight, and other indicators
of injury to the developing fetus have been reported.'' Some of these effects,
the agency said, were from chronic small doses of 2,4,5-T containing less than
0.5 parts per billion TCDD (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, which animal
tests have shown to be a powerful cancer promoter and the most toxic dioxin).

Concern about birth defects related to 2,4,5-T exposure led researchers at the
Food and Drug Administration's National Center for Toxicological Research in
Jefferson, Ark., to analyze facial cleft rates and concurrent use of the
herbicide in Arkansas from 1948 to 1974. They found a general increase in this
birth defect by race, sex and high or low exposure groups but concluded that
''more 'powerful' epidemiologic studies'' were needed to resolve questions of
cause and effect.

''It's very difficult to get anybody to fund epidemiologic studies,'' said a
scientist close to the project who requested anonymity. Asked why the state had
not scrutinized the phenoxy herbicide regions, he said: ''Arkansas is not real
forward-looking in cases like this. I can't explain it exactly; it has to do
with feeling a threat to government and economic interests.''

Dr. Linda T. Bilheimer, State Director of Health Statistics and Epidemiology,
said she was unaware of any epidemiologic studies of the area. ''One of the
things I'm trying to do here is establish a better data base,'' she said.

'Not Within Purview'

''Time and again,'' Dr. Brewster said, ''when we try to get funding for
reproductive health monitoring from Federal or state agencies, we hear 'That is
not within our purview.' They say that without any previous research base, they
will not fund data collection. I would like to dispel what I call the 'myth of
awareness,' the feeling that we know about something that seems so obvious.''

''To my knowledge,'' she continued, ''nobody is counting anything today in
relation to 2,4,5-T exposure. The biggest problem we face is that there does not
seem to be a strong demand for matching agricultural practices with health
effects.''

Carol Gray, a staff member in the office of the E.P.A.'s director of pesticides,
said, ''I really cannot answer why there are no more studies.'' She said she was
unaware of any environmental monitoring of phenoxy herbicide areas other than a
rangeland study in southern Arizona.

Since the last public hearing was held in March 1981 to consider a total ban,
she said, the E.P.A. has been ''negotiating in private with Dow Chemical
Company,'' a major 2,4,5-T producer and principal party in the agency's
discussions, ''to reach a settlement'' of the total ban.

Health Problems Denied

''We're tickled with President Reagan coming off of chemicals,'' said Howard
Hammans, chairman of the farm association in Arkansas County. Mr. Hammans has
been growing rice since 1950 and said he has been ''soaked in herbicides'' since
he was a teen-ager.

Mr. Hammans said his only health problems were leg cramps from walking through
his fields in the spring before they are flooded.  His wife, Martha, who said
she had been drenched with herbicides while working as a ''flagger,'' or
spotter, for the spray planes, also reported no health problems. They said their
three college-age children were healthy, too, except for ''bad allergies''
experienced by their son.

Scott Goetz, 25 years old, is another rice farmer who reports no health
problems, even though he has been exposed to herbicides for at least eight years
through mixing the chemicals, spraying them by hand or from a tractor, and
serving as a flagger. ''I've been soaked with it since I was a kid,'' he said,
mentioning that he sometimes had been able to taste 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T ''sort of
like having medicine in your system.''

''I heard about Agent Orange in Vietnam and got worried,'' he said, referring to
the 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T mixture used to defoliate jungles there. ''But you get
used to these things and, besides, we've got to have them here.''

He said his wife and the wife of a friend, both of whom are expecting children
soon, were worried by reports that birth defects could be transmitted by men
exposed to the herbicides.

Acute Exposure Avoided

The major difference between Vietnam-era 2,4,5-T and present commercial stocks,
according to manufacturers, is that TCDD contamination is much lower. Before the
National Academy of Sciences specified in 1971 that TCDD concentrations should
be less than 100 parts per billion, commercial 2,4,5-T often contained 50,000
parts per billion and more. In 1980, Dow Chemical Company told the E.P.A.  that
recent 2,4,5-T and silvex products contain less than 25 parts per billion TCDD.
Given the substantial dilution that occurs when the herbicides are sprayed on a
rice field (one and a half pints of chemical per acre is a standard amount),
acute exposure is nowadays avoided, most experts agree.

Nonetheless, the environmental agency noted as early as 1971 that ''there is a
possibility that even 'pure' 2,4,5-T is itself a hazard to man and the
environment.'' Dr. Roy J. Smith Jr., a research agronomist at the United States
Department of Agriculture's experiment station near here, estimated that about
10 percent of the 125,000 acres planted with rice every year receive a mixture
of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T and about 25 percent get either 2,4,5-T or other phenoxies
alone. The herbicide 2,4-DB, another member of the group, is also sprayed on
less than 1,000 acres of rice, he said, though this usage is illegal.

Dr. Smith introduced 2,4,5-T to the area between 1955 and 1957.  Before then, he
said, most farmers used 2,4-D, which can injure the cotton often grown next to
rice. ''It takes just a whiff of 2,4-D to damage cotton,'' Dr. Smith said.

Complaints on Spraying

Today, with cotton less prevalent in Arkansas County, soybeans are most often
damaged unintentionally by herbicide sprays. Although laws ban aerial spraying
within one-quarter mile of susceptible commercial crops, the state receives
dozens of complaints each year.

Files kept by Ralph Pay, director of the State Plant Board's Pesticide Division,
revealed dozens of complaints that in 1982 spray planes flew over houses and
that 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T drifted onto soybeans, cotton, vegetable gardens, fruit
and shade trees, and ornamental shrubs. In some instances, chemical analysis of
garden vegetables was positive for 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T.

Though the E.P.A. estimates that a ban on 2,4,5-T would result in cost increases
of less than 0.1 percent of United States rice production, farmers in heavy-use
areas such as Arkansas County adamantly oppose the move. Howard Hammans, who
said he was a ''millionaire on paper,'' explained that losing 2,4,5-T would mean
a substantial increase in his cultivation costs, which already take about $300
from the $500 gross income on an acre of rice in a good year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Arkansas (page 7) photo of herbicide containers
(page 7)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTH AFRICA TO GIVE RECOGNITION TO CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS

BYLINE: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, April 8


South Africa's Parliament has enacted legislation that recognizes for the first
time the status of conscientious objectors to military service.

Although the new legislation is not cast in racial terms, it would now apply
only to whites, for only whites are required to serve in the military. But it is
widely anticipated that the draft will eventually be extended to two nonwhite
minorities, the mixed-race coloreds and the Indians, if Prime Minister P.W.
Botha's plan to give them a form of franchise on racially segregated voters'
rolls is finally adopted.

The bill, which is due to be signed into law any day by the ceremonial head of
state, provides harsh penalties for those who refuse to serve for moral or
political reasons that fall outside its narrow definition of conscientious
objection. Essentially, to achieve the status a draftee has to contend that he
objects to all war on religious grounds and would refuse to bear arms for any
army anywhere.

Amendment Attempts Failed

The opposition Progressive Federal Party tried in vain to have the bill amended
to provide for conscientious objectors who took a pacifist stance in the same
universal terms on moral rather than religious grounds. It contended this would
be in accord with enlightened practice in some West European countries.

No one in Parliament took up the argument advanced by liberal church leaders in
South Africa that a draftee should have a right to selective conscientious
objection; that the law should recognize that there are deep divisions over the
political and racial system that the South African armed forces are called upon
to defend.

Under the existing Defense Act, conscientious objectors may apply for
noncombatant status within the armed forces, but those who refuse to wear a
military uniform or accept military discipline face jail terms of up to three
years and the possibility of being called up, jailed and convicted all over
again.

A spokesman for the armed forces said the number of conscientious objectors was
lower in proportion to the size of the army than it was in the United States
during the Vietnam War. But 3,000 to 4,000 young whites a year do not report for
training and most are presumed to have gone into exile to escape military
service.

Terms for Service and Jail

Religious objectors are now to be required to serve for six years in a form of
community service designated by the Government.  Phillip Myburgh, an opposition
spokesman, asserted that the Government was imposing a form of ''slave labor''
on religious objectors. But the governing National Party justified the length of
the community service requirement by comparing it to the heavy military service
obligations now shouldered by white males who do two years active duty and then
are liable to call-ups amounting to another two years, spread over the next 12;
after that, they are still liable to service in reserve units until the age of
55.

In fact, the draft bill presented by Defense Minister Magnus Malan originally
provided for eight years of compulsory employment on the Government's terms for
religious objectors and eight years in jail for moral or political objectors who
still refused to serve after being refused conscientious-objector status. But
when it was pointed out that rapists sometimes serve shorter terms in South
Africa, General Malan relented and reduced the jail terms as well as the
compulsory-service provision by two years.

No Conscription Until 1950's

Prime Minister Botha became enraged when an opposition speaker recalled during
the debate in Parliament that Mr. Botha and many other Afrikaners of his
generation had objected to South Africa's participation in World War II and had
not been forced to serve in the armed forces. ''That was a foreign war,'' Mr.
Botha snapped.

In fact, it wasn't until the early 1950's that South Africa had any form of
conscription and until 1968 that it was made compulsory for all white males.
Those who cite precedents argue that the absence of a draft before then
expressed a tolerant recognition of the clash of identities and viewpoints in
South Africa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN REBEL ACCUSES VIETNAMESE OF MASSACRING CIVILIANS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 8


Son Sann, the former Cambodian Prime Minister, charged today that Vietnamese
troops had massacred ''several hundreds'' of civilians, including women and
children, in overrunning a rebel camp Monday on the Cambodian side of the border
with Thailand.

Speaking before a crowd of more than 5,000 Cambodian refugees at Thailand's
Khao-I-Dang holding center, 20 miles north of here, Mr.  Son Sann said he had
seen ''the mutilated survivors of this deliberate massacre'' who had managed to
flee the camp at O Smach and reach a hospital in Surin Province on the Thai side
of the border. O Smach, the former military headquarters of forces loyal to
Prince Nordom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian chief of state, is 75 miles
northeast of Aranyaprathet.

Mr. Son Sann charged that Vietnamese troops at O Smach had herded civilians into
a trench and then ''threw hand grenades in there and finished them off with
bayonets.''

(He later put the number killed at more than 200, Reuters reported.)

'Liberate Our Country'

His statements were the first charges that there had been a massacre at O Smach,
which was also known as Sihanoukville. Several international aid workers who
have visited those who fled the camp Monday said the details of the Vietnamese
attack remained unclear.  The refugees are now being fed and cared for by the
United Nations Border Relief Operation and by the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

Mr. Son Sann, who was on a tour of border areas, urged any of his listeners who
wanted to fight the Vietnamese to join his forces or those of either of the two
other groups in his anti-Vietnamese coalition. He said he had but one goal, ''to
rapidly liberate our country.''

The insurgent leader, whose forces are allied with those of Prince Sihanouk and
Pol Pot, the ousted Communist leader, also paid a visit today to his military
headquarters at Ampil Camp, just inside Cambodia 40 miles northeast of here.
Vietnamese troops, who have overrun two major insurgent camps along the
Thai-Cambodian border since the end of March, are believed to be preparing to
attack Ampil as well.

When a reporter entered Ampil later in the day, Mr. Son Sann was sitting at a
long outdoor table with several of his officers. Two Thai officials who had
accompanied him across the border were also at the table.

Hundreds of Thai Soldiers

During the visit, two American-built Thai armored personnel carriers stood at
the border crossing with their guns pointed over the camp. On the trip from
Aranyaprathet to the turnoff to the Ampil Camp, hundreds of Thai soldiers could
be seen along with many camouflaged artillery pieces.

Thailand has reportedly reinforced its troops along the border after shells
began landing inside Thai territory. The Vietnamese opened their drive with the
capture on March 31 of Phnom Chat, a camp that straddles the border about 25
miles northeast of here. It was a military base for guerrillas loyal to Pol Pot.

A mimeographed statement from Mr. Son Sann's Khmer People's National Liberation
Front, dated ''Ampil, April 8, 1983,'' said the insurgent leader ''denounces
with the utmost rigor the atrocities committed by the Vietnamese troops against
the civilian population of O Smach, on April 4, 1983, particularly against the
women and children.''

Sihanouk Said to Plan Visit

Mr. Son Sann spoke at Khao-I-Dang one day after visiting the area in Surin
Province where refugees from O Smach had gathered.  International aid workers
recalled that Prince Sihanouk spoke at Khao-I-Dang last July, urging refugees to
return to Cambodia under the protection of rebel forces. The Prince appeared at
Khao-I-Dang soon after the announcement of a coalition government in exile
headed by himself as president and Mr. Son Sann as prime minister.

Aid workers said that more than 7,000 people had moved from Khao-I-Dang to O
Smach after the Prince's speech.  Prince Sihanouk, who is now in Pyongyang,
North Korea, was reported in today's Bangkok newspapers as having told an aide
in the Thai capital by telephone that he would visit the refugees from O Smach
in Surin Province later this month.

A few shells were heard exploding today near the border northeast of Khao-I-Dang
in an area of Cambodia that the Vietnamese took from Mr. Pol Pot's troops late
last week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS AIRLIFTING MISSILES TO THAILAND IN FACE OF VIETNAMESE THREAT

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 8


The State Department announced today that the United States would start an
immediate airlift of ground-to-air missiles, howitzers and other weapons to
Thailand to help the Government reinforce its border against any intrusion by
Vietnamese troops from Cambodia.

The State Department spokesman, John Hughes, said that in speeding deliveries of
American weapons previously ordered by Thailand, the United States was
responding to an appeal by Thailand ''for help against the Vietnamese border
attacks.'' Two days ago Thailand accused Vietnam of trying to provoke a showdown
with Thai forces through incursions across the border and said the Vietnamese
would have to accept the consequences of any Thai retaliation.

The incidents, which have been reported in areas where the border between
Thailand and Cambodia is poorly defined, have occurred since Vietnamese troops
began an offensive last week to clear the border area of Cambodian insurgents.
The rebels are opposed to the Communist Government of Heng Samrin that Vietnam
installed in Phnom Penh after its troops invaded the country in 1978.

Vietnamese in Thailand

Shells have fallen inside Thailand since the Vietnamese drive began last week,
and Thai gunners have reportedly been firing back. On March 31 the Vietnamese
overran a guerrilla base that straddles the border at Phnom Chat, about 25 miles
northeast of the Thai town of Aranyaprathet, and later about 150 Vietnamese
troops were found to have entrenched themselves on a nearby hillside claimed by
the Thais as their territory.

On Monday two Thai F-5E jets were sent to attack the Vietnamese, and Thai troops
subsequently fired at the hillside positions. On Thursday Thailand's military
commander, Gen. Saiyud Kherdpol, was quoted as saying the Vietnamese had
withdrawn.

Mr. Hughes said the first shipment of American arms - Redeye ground-to-air
missiles - would be delivered to Bangkok on Saturday.  He said other weapons,
including 155-millimeter extended-range howitzers and ammunition, would be
delivered Monday.

''These new howitzers were made available from America's inventory for its own
forces to underline U.S. support for Thailand,'' Mr.  Hughes said.

Ship Is Due April 19

He said a merchant ship, the Benjamin Franklin, was due to arrive in Thailand on
April 19 with more extended-range howitzers. Also on the ship, according to
State Department officials, are mortars, jeeps with recoilless rifles and ''tons
of ammunition.''

Mr. Hughes said $1.5 million was also being granted to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for emergency medical care and humanitarian aid for
victims of the fighting. He said the United States had also provided $3 million
to help Thai villagers affected by the conflict and the influx of refugees.

In Bangkok, a United States Embassy official told reporters that the airlift
would also carry armored personnel carriers, but a State Department official
said none were included in the airlift and sealift.

Mr. Hughes said the airlift to Bangkok was in ''in response to Thai requests for
speeded up delivery'' of weapons on order.  Thailand buys $150 million to $200
million in military equipment a year. The United States has allocated $66
million in military credits and grants for Thailand this year, Mr. Hughes said,
and the Administration is asking Congress for $25 million more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
A Gift for Liberty

BYLINE: By Laurie Johnston and Susan Heller Anderson

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 204 words


The children of Bridgeport Conn. -24,200 in public and parochial schools - have
collected $3,587 to help restore the Statue of Liberty. Yesterday, 50 of them
came to visit the statue and present a check at the Park Avenue offices of the
Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Centennial Commission.

''The rain and fog put a damper on some of it,'' said James A.  Connelly,
Bridgeport's Superintendent of Schools, in an unintentional pun. ''When we did
get out to the statue, our departure was delayed an hour and a half because the
boat was fogbound.''

''It was very big,'' said Stephen Dunwell, a fourth grader at the Multi-Cultural
Magnet School, ''and pretty.'' For Stephen and for Michael Disbrow, an eighth
grader at Blackham Elementary School, it was the first time they had seen the
statue.  ''It's still in good shape,'' said Michael, ''but it needs fixing up.
Kids in New York should give money too - it's in their city.''

For Josephine Nugent, a high school senior who came to this country from South
Vietnam seven years ago, the statue has special meaning.  ''It's one of the most
beautiful symbols of the United States,'' she said. ''It symbolizes freedom,
liberty and everything the United States stands for.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT SENATE PASSES A RIGHT-TO-DIE BILL

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. MADDEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 46, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD, April 8


Legislation allowing terminally ill patients to order the removal of
life-support systems was approved this week by Connecticut's State Senate.

The measure, which passed 27 to 8, now goes to the House of Representatives,
where its prospects are uncertain.  The legislation, which has become known as
the ''right to die'' or ''death with dignity'' bill, has been debated for at
least four years in the General Assembly. Last year it also was approved by the
Senate, but it was defeated in the House.

Under the bill, a person could make in advance a so-called living will,
instructing attending physicians not to use medical procedures and systems to
prolong life if the person became terminally ill and was unable to give oral
instructions.

Bill Would Protect Doctors

The bill would protect a physician who followed the instructions and
disconnected life-support systems from legal action.The measure has been
supported by organizations of retired people, but has been strenuously opposed
by right-to-life and Roman Catholic organizations.

Legislators said that two other states - Vermont and Virginia - had enacted
similar laws.  State Senator William F. Rogers 3d, Republican of Southbury, the
measure's sponsor, said some doctors had been reluctant to stop lifesustaining
procedures. ''Too much now we see that the emphasis is on quantity of life, not
its quality,'' Mr. Rogers said.

An opponent, Senator Regina R. Smith, Democrat of Northford, said that the
measure was ambigious and that it appeared to protect physicians more than their
patients.

There were these other legislative developments in Hartford this week:

Cigarettes

The House passed, 78 to 67, and sent to the Senate a bill requiring cigarettes
sold in Connecticut starting in 1986 to be selfextinguishing. The State
Commissioner of Health Services would adopt regulations requiring that
cigarettes, left unattended, stop burning after a specified period. Supporters
of the measure said it would reduce fires, but lobbyists for the tobacco
industry said selfextinguishing cigarettes were not yet technologically feasible
to manufacture.

Agent Orange

Gov. William A. O'Neill signed a bill extending the statute of limitations for
the filng of lawsuits by Vietnam War veterans who had been exposed to Agent
Orange, a herbicide that was used in Indochina. Under the measure, a person
suffering an illness stemming from exposure to the herbicide could file suit
against the manufacturer within two years after the illness was discovered.

Commuter Tax

The Legislature's Transportation Committee approved and sent to the Finance
Committee a bill imposing a tax on the incomes of residents of New York,
Massachusetts and Rhode Island who work in Connecticut. Some legislators want to
delay consideration of a commuter tax until a pending legal challenge to New
Jersey's commuter tax is decided. Mr. O'Neill vetoed a commuter tax last year
that would have applied only to New Yorkers working in Connecticut.

Public Power

The Senate passed and sent to the House legislation calling for a one-year,
$150,000 study of the feasibility of public ownership of the major electric
companies in the state. Advocates of public power contend that utilities owned
by a state or municipality supply electricity at lower costs than utilities
owned by stockholders.  Legislators said the study was needed because they did
not have enough information on the issue.

Gambling

The House defeated, 125 to 23, a bill that would have allowed 14-to17-year-olds,
accompanied by parents or guardians, to go to legalized gambling facilities,
such as jai alai frontons, dog racing tracks and offtrack betting parlors,
although they would not have been permitted to place bets. The current minimum
age is 18.  Opponents said the bill would expose youngsters to gambling and
liquor at too early an age.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISSILES AIRLIFTED FROM U.S. ARRIVE IN THAILAND

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 9


The first United States arms shipment to be rushed to Thailand to help counter
the latest Vietnamese military threat arrived in Bangkok today.

Four cases of Redeye antiaircraft missiles were unloaded at Bangkok's military
airport - delivered ahead of schedule to help Thailand repulse possible
Vietnamese incursions from Cambodia.

Nine days ago the Vietnamese forces, 180,000 of whom back President Heng
Samrin's Government, launched an offensive against Cambodian rebels who had been
camped inside Cambodia near the Thai border.

A United States Embassy spokesman said an unspecified number of shoulder-fired
Redeyes were flown to the Clark Air Base in the Philippines Friday and delivered
to Bangkok today on a four-engine, C-130 transport plane.

Two giant C-5 Air Force transports will deliver eight 155-millimeter howitzers,
ammunition and other military equipment to Bangkok Monday on a special flight
direct from the United States.  More howitzers will arrive by sea April 19.

Arrival of the arms shipment came a day after Vietnamese gunners shot down a
Thai Air Force jet near the Cambodian border.

----

Vietnam Condemns U.S.

HONG KONG, April 9 (Reuters) -Vietnam condemned American military aid to
Thailand today, saying it would aggravate the situation on the Cambodian-Thai
border.

Vietnam's official press agency quoted a Foreign Ministry spokesman as saying
the United States was coordinating with China to create a confrontation between
Indochina and the rest of Southeast Asia.

The press agency said the arms shipments followed ''repeated statements of the
U.S. State Department echoing the slanderous charge by the Thai authorities and
China that Vietnam has attacked Cambodian civilians and threatened Thailand's
security.''

----

Thais Report Finding Bodies

BANGKOK, April 9 (AP) - Thailand's military command said today that 12 bodies of
Vietnamese soldiers had been found inside Thailand, raising the number of
Vietnamese killed by Thai forces to at least 250 Vietnamese soldiers over the
last nine days.

Vietnam denies its forces have intentionally entered Thailand and has not
announced casualty figures.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of missile crates (page 1)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ART VIEW

BYLINE: By John Russell

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1407 words


A particularly welcome event in the current season is the return of the sculptor
Mark di Suvero, whose last New York exhibition was in 1975. His recent work can
be seen at the Oil & Steel Gallery, 157 Chambers Street, through May 7. The Oil
& Steel Gallery has one of the more spectacular locations for a dealer's gallery
in Manhattan.  It is at the far western end of Chambers Street, at a point where
the island seems to run out of island and there is nothing much to the west of
us but flat white sand, the Hudson River and the Jersey shore. If you are at all
high up, the light has an almost preternatural brilliance. Even with the shades
down, it has the texture of sparkling crystal. Both heat and cold are magnified,
likewise. So this is a place in which perceptions are heightened and we expect a
great deal of the art.

We also expect a great deal of the owner, Richard Bellamy. Ever since he founded
the Green Gallery in the 1950's, Mr. Bellamy has proved that when it comes to
finding and nurturing new talent he is one of the best people around. The
impersonal, industrial-sounding name of his present gallery contrasts with his
general persona, which is that of a small furry forest animal that is likely to
climb the nearest tree at the sight of an intruder. But it is just right for di
Suvero, who has long worked with industrial materials and industrial people and
got on conspicuously well with both of them.

If there were such a thing as ''a typical di Suvero,'' it would be a very large
and at first sight ungainly construction. Not so much built as added to, it
might include readymade elements in iron, steel, wood and glass. It would stand
high in the air like a huge and amiable diplodocus, and on closer examination it
would turn out to have parts that responded to our touch and swung slowly and
gently through the air. It would be powerful, but benign, and it would exert a
curiouslopsided magic.

That was the kind of piece with which he carried not only the Whitney Museum but
a series of outdoor sites throughout the five boroughs of New York City in the
summer of 1975. Such was the success of that show - and it was a success that
extended far beyond the ''art world'' -that di Suvero could have set up a
permanent camp in New York and been one of its most honored residents.

But he is one of nature's absentees, in that he is almost never where we might
expect him to be. Born in Shanghai of mixed French, Spanish and Italian ancestry
in 1933, he was reared in China. His father, a former Italian naval officer,
worked as an agent of the Italian Government until the outbreak of World War II,
when his Anglo-Saxon sympathies caused him to bring his family to the United
States and start a new life here.

Di Suvero was always of a thoughtful turn of mind.  But although he took a
degree in philosophy at the University of California in Berkeley, instinct told
him that he would be more likely to make an original contribution as a sculptor.
In 1957 he and a fellow artist, Charles Ginnever, drove across the country to
New York. Almost from the beginning, Richard Bellamy fostered his talents, and
in 1960 he had a one-man show at Mr. Bellamy's gallery (then called the Green
Gallery). It caused the art historian Sidney Geist to say that it was ''one of
those moments of which one can say that 'From now on nothing will be the
same'.''

It sounds like a classic ''good start.'' But just a few months before the show
opened di Suvero was caught in a runaway elevator and crushed between a load of
lumber and the top of the shaft. For most people, that would have been the end
of a career in sculpture. But di Suvero is not a man to be put off easily, and
in no time at all - as it now seems - he was back on the job. So far from
capitalizing, however, on his early success he left for a long period of
voluntary exile in Europe by way of protest against the war in Vietnam.

Wherever he went, he manifested an exceptional gift for involvement with the
local community. People put themselves out to make it possible for him to work,
and he in his turn initiated civic programs that made them aware - as perhaps
never before - of what it was like to have a major artist in their midst.

No one who toured the retrospective exhibition of 1975 in its entirety will ever
forget its cumulative impact. Not only did it dignify New York, but it resulted
from a collective effort of sympathy and cooperation on the part of many people
in the city.  (Seatrain allowed him the run of its shipbuilding yards in
Brooklyn, for instance, and the Tishman Construction Company gave the trucks and
cranes that were needed to transport and install the completed sculptures, many
of which were very large indeed.)

People loved that show, and there were many localities in which for the first
time living art was sensed as an invigorating presence.  Where other artists
expect us to keep a respectful distance from their sculptures, di Suvero is
delighted to have us get into bodily contact with his work. We can push and
pull, tap and twist. Sometimes we get to ride. And the sculptures almost always
respond to our touch - swinging this way and that, rolling over and over, or
waltzing around like pretty young women who had got bored with sitting still.
He could have stayed on in New York as an almost universal favorite. But, once
again, he decided to leave town. Other cities in other states came to know di
Suvero as he was once described by Thomas B. Hess - ''an artist-hero in the
noble lineage of Delacroix and Courbet -lion-maned, ox-eyed or fox-eyed
(depending on the occasion), given to temperamental gestures and
Delphicutterance.'' Eight years passed without a show in New York.  But then,
not so long ago, he slipped back into New York and began to work on a disused
pier at Hallett's Cove in Long Island City.  Never one to run out of ideas, he
worked on every kind of scale. (The current show at the Oil & Steel Gallery
includes, as if by accident, a small object that doubles both as a sculpture and
as a very comfortable stool.)

The biggest piece in the present show is called ''To Intuit.'' Completed this
year. it is on a monumental scale. Its main feature is a slightly lopsided
triumphal arch. On one side of that arch are mottled protrusions that look as if
they were made from the hide of a dinosaur that had joined the Industrial
Revolution. On the other side are two guardian shapes, each set at an angle to
the arch, and a steep and highly polished slide that would break the knees of
anyone who got to the top of it and essayed the trip down.

Put like that, it may sound ridiculous. But in reality it is a very good example
of di Suvero's skill at mingling disparate elements and getting them to work
together. Unlike his earlier pieces, it has no added color. It has the color,
that is to say, of the original ingredients, plus the color of wear and tear. It
has the ring of grandeur, but it also reminds us of the physical deterioration
that is our universal lot. And like almost all Mr. di Suvero's larger pieces it
has an underlying humor that saves it from pomposity.

In some of the other pieces in the show there are elements that we have not seen
before. There is a magnifying glass, for instance, that hangs by a thread. There
are pieces of mirror that change and redouble the given image. Letters and
numbers find a place here and there, as do spaces that echo neighboring solids.
There are pieces in which no one form quite matches any other and yet a family
likeness persists.

Di Suvero was always a shrewd observer of other people's work, and there is a
fleeting reference in this show to David Smith's way with scuffed stainless
steel. But the way in which the pieces tend toward collapse and yet always avert
it is specifically his own, as it always was.

It could be said of this show that there are pieces in which the artist is
making acceptable sculpture, rather than making a unique statement. It could
also be said that there are pieces that really don't need to move, and yet have
elements that ask to be rocked or swung or beaten like gongs. It will be an
important day when di Suvero makes a major sculpture that will insist on sitting
still forever. But meanwhile this is a most welcome return. As of an undisclosed
date in May, other very large pieces by di Suvero will be on view in Long Island
City. For the date and address, telephone the gallery (212 964-1567).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of ''9 Perspectives'' (Page 33) photo of ''Zar''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
East Bloc Plans A Summit Too

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


Soviet Leader Yuri V. Andropov has had a well-founded worry over economic
performance since he assumed power in November. Last week, he was reported to
have extended these concerns to the entire Soviet bloc by agreeing to the first
meeting in 12 years of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.

The meeting may occur about the time the seven biggest industrial democracies
make their annual try at economic coordination, in late May. The council, an
instrument for Soviet coordination with its East European satellites and other
allies such as Cuba and Vietnam, last met in 1971. It produced a program of
economic integration then, with each country specializing in certain categories
of production. But overall growth and output have not met their targets, except
possibly in Hungary. Poland's record, by its leaders' own admission, has been a
disaster. Now the talk is of less state planning and more incentives.

Moscow is said to have resisted past calls for a summit. But Mr.  Andropov has
shown concern that economic weakness is sapping the bases of Soviet power and
has been crusading for higher productivity. The Kremlin was reported last week
to have turned its attention to agriculture, the weakest sector of all. Grain
production is so embarrassingly low that statistics have not been published
since 1981. Mr. Andropov is reportedly planning a drastic overhaul of a state
apparatus that is overorganized and overspecialized.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Vietnam Steps Up War Next Door

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


Vietnam, which for four years has been trying to extend its writ to all corners
of Cambodia, last week stepped up its annual dry season offensive against some
of the estimated 45,000 anti-regime guerrillas. The attacks brought world
attention back to the Sovietsupported 180,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia - a
key obstacle to normalization of Chinese-Soviet relations. Indeed, it was a
Soviet official, Deputy Foreign Minister Mikhail Kapitsa, who issued a warning
that Vietnam would supply arms to insurgents in neighboring countries if they
continue supporting the Cambodian guerrillas.

Vietnamese ''volunteers'' seized a guerrilla camp straddling the ill-defined
Thai-Cambodian border, which was used by followers of Pol Pot, the deposed
Communist dictator. The Vietnamese then briefly took up positions that Thailand
said were 200 yards inside its territory. American-made Thai jets strafed and
dropped napalm on the Vietnamese, who later retreated into Cambodia.

In fighting at the Pol Pot camp and another for followers of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the pre-Pol Pot chief of state, the Vietnamese reportedly killed five
Thai soldiers. International relief officials said more than 200 civilians also
were killed and that more than 45,000 Cambodians had crossed into Thailand.

Washington said it would add $1.5 million to the $3 million in emergency medical
aid it is already providing through the International Committee of the Red
Cross. The United States also announced it would airlift ground-to-air missiles
and other weapons.  But Thailand said its army could handle the fighting
unaided.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME REMEDIES HAVE UNWANTED SIDE EFFECTS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 953 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When Congress passed the budget act in 1974, it was envisioned as an instrument
for restoring fiscal authority to the legislative branch. By setting its own
priorities, Congress would become ''a more respected institution and a more
effective partner in Government'' with the executive branch, argued former
Representative Al Ullman, the Oregon Democrat who was chairman of the Ways and
Means committee at the time.

Few foresaw that the budget would wipe virtually all other legislation off
Congress's agenda, as it did last year. Or that a President could use the budget
act, as Ronald Reagan did, to impose his will on Congress by lobbying through a
single package that repealed or amended more than 400 separate bills. This year,
with the job bill and Social Security rescue legislation done, the Federal
balance sheet is again expected to dominate. Last week, the Senate Budget
Committee gave Mr. Reagan half of the 10 percent increase in military spending
(after inflation) that he sought. But both sides said the battle was far from
over.

The history of the budget act underscores both the difficulties of trying to
predict economic, social and political terrain and the adroitness of those who
know how to exploit the system. It is a striking example of the unintended
consequences of legislation. Such results, often unanticipated by either
supporters or opponents of a measure, are cited by those who believe that
Congress should act slowly and deliberately. The sad truth is that they have
derived as much from legislation that took decades as from bills enacted
overnight. ''I tend to think of the launching of all programs as launching
unguided missiles,'' Herbert Kaufman, a political scientist at the Brookings
Institution, said. ''Legislation tends to take on a life of its own. If you take
a long enough view, everything has unintended consequences.''

An aide to the Senate Budget Committee put it succinctly: ''We never really know
what we're doing.'' How else explain the American Medical Association's
steadfast opposition to Medicare, which has come to enrich the nation's
physicians? Or organized labor's insistence that election law reforms not limit
the participation of political action committees, which have since become an
effective tool for business groups?

Cynicism and Myopia

Some unintended consequences can derive from naivete or cynicism.  Some are the
result of myopia. ''Reformers have their eyes on a specific evil, and have a
specific remedy,'' noted Austin Ranney, a political scientist at the American
Enterprise Institute. ''Talk of other consequences is regarded as 'scare
tactics' and antireform,'' he said. Representative James R. Jones, the Oklahoma
Democrat who is chairman of the House Budget Committee, added that the targets
of reform ''are usually savvy enough to move onto something else. It was
perceived that we had to do something about campaign financing, and the people
with savvy moved to the PAC's.''

Then too, legislation is oversold. The Kemp-Roth tax cut was based on a theory,
supply-side economics, according to which Federal revenues would increase as
taxes declined, because lower taxes would boost economic productivity.
Supporters argue more time is needed to prove their point. But the Congressional
Budget Office projects that the tax cut will cost $392.8 billion in revenues by
the 1986 fiscal year.

Legislation also is undersold, sometimes deliberately. The costs of entitlement
programs such as food stamps, Medicare and Medicaid, and black lung benefits,
far exceeded the expectations of their early supporters. The collective cost of
these programs more than doubled since 1976 - from $209.3 billion to $467.6
billion - in part due to the drastic effect of changes in the rates of
unemployment, inflation and interest. But had the initial projections been more
realistic, the programs would have encountered far more opposition.

A classic example of underselling was the Gulf of Tonkin resolution, passed in
August 1964, five days after an American destroyer was fired upon by North
Vietnamese PT boats. Floor debate indicates that Congress believed that it was
merely affirming President Johnson's order that American ships return enemy
fire.  Senator Richard B. Russell of Georgia, then one of the powers of the
Senate, told his colleagues: ''The resolution is intended to demonstrate that
Congress approves the retaliatory action that has been taken in defense of our
flag. What is involved is our right as an individual state to operate our
vessels upon international waters. Our national honor is at stake.''

The resolution was considered so uncontroversial that it passed the House 414-0,
and the Senate 88-2. It affirmed Congress's support of all United States
measures needed to repel armed attack against American forces, prevent further
aggression and assist nations protected by the Southeast Asia Collective Defense
Treaty. Although South Vietnam was not a party, it was included by protocol. The
resolution was then used by President Johnson as the basis for United States
involvement in the Vietnam war. (The use of the resolution itself produced a
string of unintended consequences, including the War Powers Act of 1973, which
some critics of increased involvement in Central America are talking about now.)

This year may have already produced its own classic in the genre of unintended
results: the $4.8 billion job bill enacted last month.  Proponents argued that
remedy for the recession was crucial; opponents noted that such bills take so
long to implement that they rarely bring relief in time. History shows that job
bills often prove to be pork-barrel. But perhaps that is what Congress intended
all along.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS EVERYWHERE MAY CATCH FALLOUT FROM CHICAGO

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1149 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


In the heavily Democratic Lincoln Park neighborhood one day last week, Bernard
E. Epton, the Republican mayoral candidate, dropped by the Seminary Restaurant,
a hangout for Democratic politicians. Outside a crowd of white men, including
many city employees who got their jobs through the Democratic patronage machine,
were chanting ''Ep-ton! Ep-ton!'' and taunting black passersby. ''I'm voting for
the white guy,'' a member of the crowd responded when asked whether he was a
Democrat or a Republican. Then, in the next breath, he pleaded not to have his
name published.

As this incident suggests, many whites in Chicago are candid, if somewhat
shamefaced about the racial animosity that has become more important for them
than party labels. Polls indicate that thousands of white city workers, police
and residents of ethnic neighborhoods -normally among the most dependable
Democratic voters in the nation - are abandoning Representative Harold
Washington, the Democratic nominee, who is black. For those who needed reminding
that Mr.  Washington would be the first black mayor, Mr. Epton offered the
campaign slogan ''Epton. Before It's Too Late.''

Because of this codeword campaigning, it sometimes appears that color is the
only force at work here. But there are complicating factors, some related to
race and some to Chicago's place in American political life. Another factor is
the character of the candidates themselves - a white man who seems stunned by
the possibility that he might become the first Republican in more than 50 years
to run the nation's second largest city, and a black man whose strategy
sometimes seems guided by self-defeating anger.

Since beating Mayor Jane Bryne and Richard M. Daley, the son of the powerful
late Mayor Richard J. Daley, in the February primary, Mr.  Washington has wooed
their white supporters only half-heartedly.  Meanwhile, Republican strategists
have skillfully - and cynically, according to the Democrats - offered whites an
excuse other than race to vote against Mr. Washington. In television
commercials, Mr. Epton has hammered at ''the integrity issue,'' pointing out
that Mr.  Washington was temporarily disbarred for failing to perform legal
services for which he was paid, and that he went to jail briefly for not filing
Federal income taxes for four years. Mr. Washington's defenders say this is
penny-ante stuff by Chicago standards. Even so, the ''integrity issue'' kept Mr.
Washington's campaign on the defensive and occasionally rattled the candidate.

From the beginning, the campaign has had national reverberations, for Chicago
has become a place where the political mentality of yesterday collides with the
political reality of tomorrow. The refusal of some white Democrats to support
Mr. Washington has caused national black leaders to talk of running a black
Presidential candidate to remind the party that it needs minority votes to win
the White House in 1984. Moreover, the indifference and anger that greeted the
white Democratic Presidential candidates who came here to campaign for Mr.
Washington underscored the party's lack of a commanding presence to offer next
year.

Any analysis of the mayoral contest must get back, of course, to the candidates
themselves. For the 60-year-old Mr. Washington, the campaign caps a lifelong
battle against ''the machine'' that for years has delivered the Democratic vote
and controlled municipal hiring. Had he been willing to promise to leave the
patronage system intact, it is almost certain that the white ward leaders and
aldermen would have lined up enough white votes to insure a Washington victory,
notwithstanding the ''integrity issue.'' But Mr.  Washington will not compromise
on the patronage issue, said Patrick H. Caddell, the candidate's strategist and
polltaker. ''He'll lose before he does that.''

Whether that decision is noble or self-destructive, Mr. Epton has taken
advantage of it, promising that as Mayor he would not disturb traditional
patronage. ''The motivation for the white machine Democrats is clear,'' said
Robert Teeter, Mr. Epton's pollster.  ''With Epton in there, the machine lives;
with Washington, it doesn't.''

Eight of 50 Democratic ward committeemen have endorsed Mr. Epton; others are
expected to help him behind the scenes. But even some Republican strategists
doubt that Mr. Epton, who is 61, a wealthy former state legislator, can convert
these advantages into victory.  The Republican National Committee regarded his
campaign as a quixotic indulgence until he got astride the thunderbolt of white
backlash.  Recently, his attacks on Mr. Washington's integrity have been
undercut by the disclosure that Mr. Epton omitted his history of psychiatric
treatment in a public report on his health. At mid-week, in one of the odd
statements that characterize his press conferences, he attributed his need for
counseling to ''violent'' family arguments over Vietnam.

The campaign has become such a battle of negative influences and ethnic forces
as to confound the pollsters. Mr. Teeter and Mr.  Caddell agree time is not on
Mr. Washington's side. The longer the campaign lasts the more the white vote
slips over to Mr. Epton. The question is whether, by Tuesday, Mr. Washington
will have enough white support left to give him the 15 to 20 percent of the
white vote that he must have to win.

Turnout is another critical factor. Most observers assume that blacks, who make
up 40 percent of Chicago's 1.6 million voters, will turn out heavily for Mr.
Washington. But Mr. Caddell is worried that the racial polarization may have
''heated up'' white turnout. If heavy white participation pushes the total vote
over 1.3 million, the numbers start working in Mr. Epton's favor.

The contest now seems to hinge on those white voters who will not automatically
vote against a black candidate. To win, Mr. Washington must get about one-third
of the whites who live in the liberal lakefront neighborhoods. Many of these
voters, like those among another critical bloc, the city's 240,000 Hispanic
voters, were still undecided at the end of the week. Among Hispanic residents
who had decided, however, a radio station straw poll showed Mr.  Washington had
a 63 percent to 37 percent lead over Mr. Epton.

For liberal Democrats along the lakefront there was an additional pressure: Many
of them are Jewish, as is Mr. Epton. In an effort to reassure white liberals
that his candidate was not pandering to racism, John Deardourff, Mr. Epton's
strategist, scrapped the ''Before It's Too Late'' line in a final round of
television ads.

Meanwhile, Mr. Washington was working the liberal whites with the charge that
Mr. Epton would be a Reagan Administration puppet. But if that sounded like
politics as usual, no one seemed in doubt about the real issue here. ''This
thing will get more racial,'' Mr. Caddell said. ''The genie is out of the
bottle.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Harold Washington and Bernard Epton

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TELLING DEBATE OVER WHAT SHOULD BE SECRET

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When President Reagan recently signed a directive ''safeguarding national
security information,'' White House officials expected critics to complain about
the increased reliance on polygraphs as a tool for investigating news ''leaks.''
Few of them expected the furor over another provision, requiring
''prepublication review'' of manuscripts written by employees and former
employees with access to highly classified information.

The critics, who include civil liberties groups, publishers and Federal employee
unions, consider prepublication review a euphemism for censorship. Proponents of
the new system say it will curb unlawful disclosures of classified information
that damage national security, but have never been successfully prosecuted.

The Presidential directive itself is so devoid of details that it is highly
ambiguous. ''All persons'' with authorized access to classified information must
sign a secrecy agreement, it says, and everyone with access to highly classified
data dealing with intelligence sources and methods - that is, ''sensitive
compartmented information'' - must submit manuscripts to the Government to
insure deletion of classified material. Each agency is to establish its own set
of rules.

Much of the alarm over the directive stems from the fact that it will extend to
tens of thousands of Government employees the same kind of requirements that now
apply to intelligence agents.  ''Prepublication review,'' warned Senator David
F. Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, ''can be used to delay or prevent
publication of embarrassing information, rather than real secrets.'' Gary Hart,
the Colorado Senator seeking the Democratic Presidential nomination, denounced
the order as ''an official secrets act.''

But Richard K. Willard, a Justice Department official who has taken the lead in
defending the new order, said that it ''equalizes the burden'' on those who
produce intelligence information and those who consume it. Both groups would now
be subject to prepublication review. Intelligence officials have long chafed at
the way in which State and Defense Department officials and White House aides
disclosed tidbits of secret information to score points in policy debates or
budget battles. As argument over the United States's covert activities in
Central America heated up last week, classified information, including a
document showing President Reagan's approval of covert activities, figured
prominently in the debate.

Following the C.I.A.

Mr. Willard said that the Justice Department would be the first to issue its
standards for prepublication review and that they would ''serve as a model'' for
other agencies. Only the Central Intelligence Agency has had extensive
experience with such a procedure. Its Publications Review Board has examined
more than 800 manuscripts containing a total of 70,000 pages since it was
established in 1977. C.I.A. employees sign a secrecy agreement promising to
obtain the agency's approval before publishing ''any information'' that relates
to the agency, its activities or intelligence activities generally. The
agreement has been stringently enforced by the agency, which requires employees
to submit works of fiction, book reviews, letters to the editor and magazine
articles, as well as memoirs.

Two House subcommittees will hold joint hearings on the President's new order
later this month. The harshest critics of the rule assume that other agencies
will follow the practices of the C.I.A. If that happened, they say, it would
stifle public debate on defense and foreign affairs. However, Mr. Willard said
the prepublication review procedure would not be so onerous for other Federal
workers because, in most cases, they did not deal with classified information
nearly so much as Central Intelligence Agency employees.

Steven Garfinkel, director of the Federal office that coordinates ''information
security'' throughout the Government, said he hoped to finish drafting the text
of three new secrecy agreements by the end of May. ''At their discretion,'' he
said, the heads of Federal agencies may require employees to sign a
prepublication review commitment if they have access to classified data, but not
to ''sensitive compartmented'' information.

The Supreme Court upheld the use of secrecy agreements in a case filed by the
Carter Administration against Frank W. Snepp 3d, a former Central Intelligence
agent who failed to obtain clearance for his book about the Vietnam War. Even
aside from his written agreement, the Court said, Mr. Snepp had a ''fiduciary
obligation'' to submit his manuscript, and in failing to do so, he violated the
trust placed in him by his employer.

In theory, any Federal employee might incur a similar obligation when given
access to classified information. But no one has defined the limits of the
Government power authorized by the Supreme Court in the Snepp case. Robert L.
Bernstein, chairman and president of Random House, which published Mr. Snepp's
book, described Mr. Reagan's new order as ''a legacy of the C.I.A.'s
determination to hide its blunders.'' Mr. Bernstein, who is also chairman of the
United States Helsinki Watch Committee, a human rights group, added: ''The
President's directive is clearly an attempt to keep still more information from
the American people, and it will have a sharply intimidating effect on America's
independent book publishers. It can tie up publication of any book by a
Government official indefinitely.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ROAD TO DISASTER

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: EUGENE, Ore., April 9


The most fateful foreign-policy choice since Vietnam now confronts this country.
Unlike Vietnam, the American public is on notice of what is happening before it
is too late. Will our political system work this time to avoid disaster?

The place is Central America, and no one with eyes to see can doubt what the
Reagan Administration is doing there. It is carrying on a secret war. It is
deepening our involvement in problems we cannot solve. It is identifying the
United States with oppressors and killers.

The results of such a policy are not hard to imagine. It will alienate the
center in Latin America and intensify anti-U.S.  feelings. It will strengthen
the hands of the most extreme elements in left-wing governments and give them an
excuse for further repression. In seeking military victory it will assure a
political debacle - for the region and for us.

The danger of the Reagan policy has been made clear by the clumsy covert war
being waged against the Sandinist Government of Nicaragua. Operations began
under President Carter, who was disturbed by Sandinist clampdowns on internal
freedom. But Mr. Reagan has stepped them up. And he sent as Ambassador to
neighboring Honduras an unreconstructed Vietnam hawk, John Negroponte, with the
evident assignment of running the anti-Nicaraguan activities.

Congress, alarmed, voted last December to prohibit the supply of U.S. arms,
training or advice to groups ''for the purpose of overthrowing the Government of
Nicaragua.'' But the activity has mounted, with substantial armed incursions
lately from Honduras.

Reports in The New York Times have now shown how deeply the Reagan
Administration is involved in the anti-Sandinist guerrilla operations. The
C.I.A. and the American military are engaged in arming and advising the
Honduran-based forces, making plans and providing them with intelligence.

All this is being done under National Security Decision Directive 17, approved
by President Reagan in November 1981. The policy objectives were further
expounded in a National Security Planning Group Paper of last April, which The
Times published. This amazing document reads as a primer in official folly.

The document said that one U.S. purpose should be to ''isolate'' Mexico on
issues of Central American policy - although Mexico is by far the most important
country in the region and the one whose interests we always say are of special
concern to us. It urged strong efforts to ''avoid Congressionally mandated
negotiations'' in El Salvador, ''which would work against our interests.''

In Guatemala, the document said, the recent coup by Gen. Efrain Rios Montt
offered good ''new possibilities'' - although that coup worked against the
democracy the United States has said it is trying to promote in the region. The
paper also called for resumption of U.S. military sales to Guatemala on credit,
which had been cut off because of human rights violations, although General Rios
Montt in fact soon began a murderous campaign against Indian villagers. The
covert war against Nicaragua is the most extreme example of a selfdefeating
policy in the lot. Consider what it can reasonably be expected to accomplish,
putting aside for the moment all considerations of law and morals.

The guerrillas coming from Honduras are associated with the hated regime of the
late dictator, Anastasio Somoza. They are likely to add to the legitimacy of the
Sandinist Government, not hurt it - to increase sympathy for the Sandinists in
Nicaragua and the region. And the attacks will strengthen the hand of those
inside the Government who want to intensify repression, instead of allowing the
pluralism we want.

But there are reasons of law, too. The effort to avoid the Congressional
restriction on covert action, to pretend that these guerrilla operations are
designed only to punish the Sandinists, not overthrow them, has already aroused
qualms in Congress and inside the executive branch.

And there is a deeper question of American character. We have become more
cynical about ourselves; it seems a century ago that a United States delegate to
the United Nations was embarrassed at being caught out by an official lie. But
this country is still not comfortable - and not effective - at the business of
secret wars.  That has not changed since the Bay of Pigs.

Over the last week I have been at the University of Oregon, where Wayne Morse
was dean of the law school before he was a senator. I have been reminded of how
he spoke out against the Vietnam War at the beginning, warning against its
dangers of law and policy. Senator Morse was irritating, but he was right - and
we paid dearly for not listening. What politician now will take on the difficult
but necessary duty? That is to speak out, uncompromisingly, against the
counterproductive policy of ever deeper intervention in Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
KEMP FOLLOWER

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1285 words


When my colleagues at the Washington bureau of The Times bring a political
figure in for lunch, they ask me along because they know I like to pick up
snippets of the latest lingo. Recently, Republican Representative Jack Kemp,
whose supply-side theories are looking much better with the economic recovery,
was the guest target, and the pickings were delicious. (The economist Herbert
Stein coined both supply-sider and Kemp follower.)

In discussing the Mexican debt (for which the acronym MEGO - My Eyes Glaze Over
- is especially apt), the potential President and former Buffalo Bills
quarterback was careful not to trap himself in a metaphor with a pejorative
connotation: ''I wouldn't say it was the domino theory, but economic problems in
Mexico would surely have a ripple effect.''

The domino theory - so deeply entrenched in the language that it has lost its
capitals - is now an attack phrase on those practical souls who argue that one
thing leads to another, in what historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. has called ''a
popular construction, or misconstruction, of the Munich analogy.''

The coiners of the domino theory were Joseph and Stewart Alsop, the great
columnists. Joe recalls: ''When we were kids, we used to play 'domino snakes'
under our grandmother's piano. You lined up the dominos on their narrow ends in
a curve around the piano leg, and when you pushed one, the whole line went down.
When we were looking for an image to describe the consequences of a policy, we
selected 'the domino effect.' Now, it's called 'the so-called domino theory,' or
the 'discredited domino theory,' but it certainly has not been discredited by
experience. On the contrary, it describes what's been happening all too
accurately.''

The popularizer of the phrase was President Eisenhower in 1954.  About a year
after the Alsops' column, he used the phrase to explain his decision to offer
economic aid to the Government of South Vietnam, and it became the central
metaphor of our involvement there through the next two decades. That is how it
picked up its negative connotation, and why Jack Kemp wisely turned to ''ripple
effect,'' from the concentric circles that move out from a pebble plunked in a
pool.

When contradicted by one of his questioners, the Congressman politely replied,
''I don't want to be disputatious, but ... .'' That word did not knock over my
domino. Disputatious is a good word, and perfectly correct, but it was not the
''right'' word in that informal circumstance. Argumentative would have been less
pedantic than disputatious, and more cerebral than quarrelsome; if he wanted a
more academic synonym, he might have tried contentious. But disputatious is at
once too long and too understandable: It tries too hard, as Ambassador Walter
Annenberg discovered with ''refurbishing'' to describe the way he was fixing up
his embassy.  It's the kind of word that James Fenimore Cooper might have used,
setting himself up for a Mark Twain savaging. A perfectly good word, even the
correct word, is not always the right word.

After the friendly disputation, the subject of the investment pool came up.
(When you drop an interest rate into the investment pool, you get a ripple
effect.) Representative Kemp, noting the odd rhythm of my note-taking (I
scribble furiously when nobody else is making notes, and stare at the ceiling as
Big News breaks), said, ''Consider the effect on savings. Savings is -'' he
caught himself - '' 'savings is' or 'savings are'?''

When eyes turned to me, I smiled mysteriously and made another note. This did
not satisfy one of my colleagues, who whispered to another, ''Doesn't he know?
Isn't he the one who's supposed to know?'' He was properly shushed.

I have long been saving up for a piece on savings. ''I wish the word saving as a
singular noun could have been saved,'' lamented Vernon Hoyt of Atlantic, Iowa,
who has been awaiting an answer to his letter since June 1980. ''We now read and
hear a savings of X number of dollars, or percent. The singular, it seems to me,
ought to be saving, as in daylight-saving time.'' Adds Louis Stone of
Shearson/American Express: ''Why do you continue to allow literate people,
including prominent advertisers, to keep saying 'a savings,' instead of 'a
saving'?''

This is an example of the Mad Dash Toward Pluralization, an intolerable
escapade. Last week, this department noted the tendency of White House writers
to turn money into monies, and of revenuers to turn revenue into revenues,
triumphs similar to that of an alchemist turning gold into lead. The same
needless stretch is happening to saving.

When you find a bargain in a supermarket, or when your missile's cost overrun is
smaller than expected, you have come across a saving. A saving is singular (and
a real bargain is singularer); when Altman's department store runs an
advertisement reading, ''How would you like your Sealy Correct Sleep Sofa
Savings?,'' it is in error: It should firm that mattress up to saving. Just as
what is served to you is your serving, the portion saved by you is your saving.

If you blow your saving on cotton candy or a MIRV-y new nose cone, the saving is
gone; on the other hand, if you set it aside for an acid-rainy day, the portion
you saved becomes your savings. It goes in a savings account in a savings bank
(or in a super now-wow moneymarket management system in a less-than-full-service
institution, but that does not serve for purposes of illustration).  Here comes
the only point you have to take away from today's harangue: A saving becomes
savings only when you decide to keep it.

Now to Congressman Kemp's question: Is savings singular or plural?  Savings is
or savings are? Usagists differ, but like the little broccoli-eater in Carl
Rose's classic cartoon, I say that ''savings is'' sounds funny, and if something
sounds funny I say to hell with it. (Grammarians call this ''the unerring
decision of the native speaker.'') Savings is a mass singular noun, not a true
plural -which is why we say ''much savings'' rather than ''many savings'' - but
takes a plural verb only because ''savings are'' sounds more natural.

As I was slowly turning this over in my mind, the Congressman had long since
passed his brief self-searching on subject-predicate agreement and was adroitly
fielding a question on growth rates. ''Oh, you'll see a spike of 6 percent in
'83,'' he observed, which shot me off in another direction: Spike is a hot new
word in three forms.

As a verb in journalism slang, to spike means ''to kill,'' from the action in
paper-copy days of sticking a piece of copy on a spike to hold rather than to
run in the paper. In this sense, ''The Spike'' was the title of a best-selling
novel by Robert Moss and Arnaud De Borchgrave about Soviet disinformation, and
''to spike'' is a favorite usage of Reed Irvine of Accuracy in Media, who
suspects that not every story written about left-wing causes gets into the
press.

As a noun, spike now figures prominently in the lingo of economists. It has
replaced peak in discussions of lofty upthrusts on charts. The earliest
Merriam-Webster citation is from the Nov. 10, 1944, issue of Chemical Abstracts,
describing a disturbing brainwave recorded on an electroencephalogram.

As an adjective, spiky means ''abrasive, quick to take offense, inordinately
disputatious.'' A possible source is from ''to spike a drink''; a better
possibility is from ''to spike someone's gun,'' meaning to ruin or punish him,
taken from the sabotage of driving a spike into a gun barrel; the most likely
source is from the image of a porcupine. Speculating on the etymology of spiky
is surely more interesting than forcing a luncheon guest to guess at the growth
rate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 102, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 181 words


The strategy Professor Ravenal propounds is deliberately obscure.  He provides
hypothetical cases in which United States forces would not be used but does not
tell us where and when they would be. From his examples, we can deduce that our
interests extend beyond the Mexican border but do not include Europe or the kind
of politicomilitary blackmail the United States presence in Europe is designed
to prevent. Although he denies that his views are isolationist, that is what
they are. The term ''noninterventionist'' constitutes rhetorical legerdemain,
which muddies the real difference between policies which mired the United States
in Vietnam and those which support our presence in Europe. While the former
-unilateral intrusion into a peripheral region - was misguidedly adventurous,
the latter - elements in a collaborative and voluntary effort by sister
societies - reflects the enduring truth that United States security cannot be
assured by means of Fortress America.
RICHARD W. MANSBACH, Professor, Department of Political Science, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New York Times Magazine April 10, 1983

SECTION: Section 6; Page 4, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


William Safire 14 On Language

Kemp Follower
Russell Baker 20 Sunday Observer

In the Majors
Andrew H. Malcolm 24 Chicago!

On the eve of a mayoral election, America's second city faces racial, economic
and social challenges.
Richard Holbrooke 30 A Foreign Policy for the Democrats and Harry McPherson
After the country's swings to the left and the right in response to the debacles
in Vietnam and Iran, the time is ripe, say two former Government officials, for
Democrats to initiate a move back to the ''responsible center.''
Eve Ottenberg 46 The Rich Visions of Cynthia Ozick

Throughout her writing, a dominant theme is what it means to be Jewish in a
largely hostile world.
D.C. Denison 48 Selling College in a Buyer's Market

A generation after the postwar 'baby boom,' the pool of potential students is
shrinking, and hard-pressed colleges are adopting sophisticated marketing
techniques to attract applicants.
Frank J. Prial 76 Wine

Things Past, Things to Come
June Weir 78 Fashion

The Private Label
Craig Claiborne 82 Food with Pierre Franey The Foreign Intrigue of Couscous
101 Puzzles

Answers, Page 86
102 Letters Cover:
Copyright 1980, The New York Times
for REAL
1. Lincoln Park Zoo and the city skyline looking southeast.  2. Democratic
mayoral candidate Harold Washington campaigning on the South Side before the
primary.  3. Wrigley Field, home of the Chicago Cubs baseball team.  4. The
Chicago El train leaving Merchandise Mart station.  5. Mix of old and new
architecture in the North Loop area.  6. South Side blues club, Theresa's
Lounge.  7. Sir Georg Solti conducting a Chicago Symphony rehearsal in Orchestra
Hall.
1,4,5: ROBERT FRERCK/CLICK-HERE'S CHICAGO; 2,3,6: MARC POKEMPNER; 7: BRIAN
SEED/CLICK-HERE'S CHICAGO
Copyright 1980, The New York Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ADVICE TO THREE WORLDS

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk; Leonard Silk is the economics columnist of The New York
Times

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1548 words


THE VOICE OF THE POOR Essays in Economic and Political Persuasion.  By John
Kenneth Galbraith.  88 pp. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $8.95.
JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH, who served as American Ambassador to India during the
Kennedy Administration, returned to that steamy land in the spring of 1982 to
deliver the Rajaji Lectures, honoring the memory of Chakravarti Rajagopalachari,
who served as Governor General of India between the achievement of independence
in 1948 and the establishment of the Republic in 1950. In his preface to ''The
Voice of the Poor,'' a collection of those lectures, Mr. Galbraith confesses his
love for India; a common problem at the State Department is what to do about the
excessive regard of ambassadors for the countries to which they are accredited.

Instead of padding his original lectures to make weight as a book, as a less
assured author might have done, Mr. Galbraith has reduced them to what, he
trusts, is ''a reasonably succinct set of essays, which are not, however,
without that hortatory and minatory tone a live and attentive audience
inevitably invites.''

Even this brief self-advertisement should provide readers with a guarantee that
all the familiar elements of the celebrated Galbraithian style are here: the old
one-two of demurral-assertion (''reasonably succinct''); the double-negativizing
(''not without'') of the academic gladiator skilled in the manly art of
self-defense; the elegant Latinate vocabulary and the persistent moralizing
which he gets away with by combining mock arrogance with simulated modesty,
blending insult to his professional peers with caresses for his lay readers (''a
live and attentive audience'').

Mr. Galbraith got off to a good start in Bombay by assuring his listeners that
there is little correlation, as is commonly assumed in rich countries, between
wisdom and wealth. In response to the classic American question, ''If you're so
smart, why ain't you rich?'' Mr.  Galbraith asks why, if the rich are so smart,
they are making such a mess of the world - threatening its very existence. He
suggests that they listen more attentively to the voice of the poor.

He tells us that the advanced industrial countries have forgotten how they
themselves got on the road to wealth. It was political and cultural development
that established the conditions for economic growth -through the American
Revolution, the French Revolution, the unification of Germany under Bismarck,
the Meiji Restoration in Japan, the Russian Revolution.

An advanced economy can emerge only in its season; Marx knew that well. That is
why he thought capitalism had to precede socialism.  Countries like Uganda or
Zaire are not ripe for effective socialism; they lack stable and predictable
political systems as well as an honest and effective bureaucracy. Most of all,
they lack an educated populace: ''Education is not something that economic
development allows; it is the experience of the older industrial lands that
economic development is what education allows.''

It is silly, Mr. Galbraith argues, to think that economic development can be
transferred from rich to poor by shipping them capital goods that they are
unprepared to use. They would do much better to use the tools appropriate to
their stage of historical development. That holds for both peace and war. The
Vietcong and North Vietnamese did so well because they were unencumbered with
modern arms. But the rich nations prefer to ship the poor countries expensive
capital goods and armaments, he writes, because those sales please the
manufacturers and the ''military-industrial complex'' in the home country. They
are engaged in a new sort of imperialism, for which Mr. Galbraith is prepared to
write a requiem.

He contends that true imperialism can rest only on a base of military power.
Whatever influence the United States and the Soviet Union now continue to have
in Western or Eastern Europe, he asserts, ''is not unrelated to the continuing
presence, welcome or unwelcome, of armed divisions.'' Is voluntary alliance
really the same as imperialism? The Europeans, except on the far left, have long
ceased to demand, ''Yanks, go home!'' They fear the threat from the East.  By
contrast, the Poles and other East Europeans would love to get the Soviets out.

In the Third World the new imperialism that followed decolonization after the
World War II is, says Mr. Galbraith, ''a pallid thing'' compared with the old
give-'em-thecold-steel imperialism. It now depends on the pliability of local
politicians. But the more pliable the politicians are, the more discredited they
become - whether in Afghanistan or Vietnam, Iran or El Salvador. Actually, there
has not been a ready supply of pliable politicians in many countries subject to
the American raj, and democracy lacks a certain viciousness, as compared with
Communism, in dealing with the unpliable.

Mr. Galbraith's basic point, however, is that the new imperialism is bankrupt,
on both the capitalist and Communist sides, and that Americans no longer need
worry about playing policemen against the would-be Soviet imperialists. No
rational person, he contends, would believe that India, having won its
independence from Britain, would now sacrifice it to the Russians. (He adds
charmingly that he finds it hard to imagine any catastrophe for Communism so
great as a Communist India.) Similarly, he contends that the fervent United
States embrace of Pakistan is a threat not to India but to the Government of Zia
ul-Haq.

The great powers, he suggests, are boobs. They act dangerously out of a fear of
seeming weak, as the United States did in Vietnam and the Soviet Union did in
Afghanistan. It would be nice if Mr.  Galbraith could convince the Soviet Union
that its imperialist policies are doomed in Poland and the rest of Eastern
Europe, but the Kremlin unfortunately seems tougher to convince than most of his
American, or Indian, readers. He maintains that the will to national
independence is the most powerful force in our time, a doctrine that flies
better in New Delhi than in Warsaw.

Mr. Galbraith attributes the unwillingness of the United States and the Soviet
Union to curb their perilous export of arms to the poor countries to the
economic interests of the arms merchants and the military-industrial complexes
in both the United States and the U.S.S.R. He pleads with the Soviet Union and
the United States to transcend their animosities in the interest of arms
control; but surely it is the animosities that necessitate arms control in the
nuclear age. And he urges the poor countries to reject the arms shipments of the
rich. ''Nothing,'' says Mr. Galbraith, ''could better prove that the flow of
wisdom is not associated with per capita income, that it can move and needs to
move from the new to the old, from the poor to the rich.''

It will be interesting to see how long it takes the poor countries to heed that
advice. It seems that the gun-slingers of this world, from the P.L.O. to Libya,
to Argentina, to El Salvador, to Iraq and Iran, and on around the globe, are
even more eager to buy arms than the capitalist and Communist suppliers are to
sell. The merchants are interested primarily in money, the buyers in blood and
power, commonly employing the arms against the poor in their own countries.  But
Mr. Galbraith argues that the arms trade is a form of exploitation of the poor
countries by the rich countries.  ''No other form of exploitation, imperialist
or otherwise,'' he says, ''has been so damaging or dangerous as this.'' Surely
there is more than enough guilt to go around for both the merchants and buyers
of death.

FINALLY, Mr. Galbraith maintains that the ''need to accommodate to historical
process'' is not the task of the poor countries alone but also of the rich. The
economic systems of the affluent lands, both capitalist and socialist, are
operating well below their potential.  He does not presume to instruct Moscow on
how to fix the Communist system, but he has advice for Washington: Stop trying
to control inflation by cutting back the growth of the money supply, since that
means putting the economy into a deep slump. Instead, he urges greater reliance
on fiscal policy - higher taxes, lower spending and smaller deficits - and on an
''incomes policy,'' or controls, to curb rising wages and prices.

He repeats the view he has spelled out so often that powerful corporations,
strong trade unions, ''well-wired'' farm organizations, the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries and other organized groups ''take power away from
the market and lodge it in the hands of those who produce the product or
service.'' Right now, the auto industry, the steel industry, the farmers and
even OPEC are all struggling to survive, ardently wishing they had the degree of
control over prices and markets that Mr. Galbraith ascribes to them.  In an age
when prosperity has given way to slump, the mighty are enfeebled. And the
market, in an increasingly interdependent world, with technology spreading
rapidly to the newly industrializing countries, is still there to discipline the
once self-righteous and arrogant. Perhaps it is time that Professor Galbraith
accommodated his analysis to the complex reality of the historical process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CATHOLIC LIVES

BYLINE: By Eugene Kennedy; Eugene Kennedy is a professor of psychology at Loyola
University of Chicago. His novel ''Queen Bee'' was published last November

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words


SEMINARY A Search.  By Paul Hendrickson.  330 pp. New York: Summit Books.
$14.95.
NUN A Memoir.  By Mary Gilligan Wong.  390 pp. San Diego and New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. $15.95.

AN odor of bittersweet sacrifice from simpler times rises from these two
recollections of seminary and convent life during the last stand of
self-confident Roman Catholicism in the late 1950's and early 60's. That
culture, marked by uncompromising spiritual and social demands, lives mainly in
memory these days, or in the current novels and plays that celebrate it. It
survives in sharp focus in these two books about a time when the highest ideal
of young Catholics was to abandon the world to pursue the life of religious
perfection as a priest or a nun. The authors are Paul Hendrickson, a former
seminarian and now a writer for The Washington Post, whose experience of
marriage-divorce-remarriage recapitulates that of many Catholics of his 40-ish
age group, and Mary Gilligan Wong, a former nun and now a psychologist, whose
very name symbolizes the transformation in the last generation of Irish-Catholic
family lines. These two authors look back not in anger but with a kind of
wistfulness at their spiritual adventure, which was sometimes wonderful and
often bizarre and which is curiously missing from contemporary Catholicism.

Mr. Hendrickson offers us an impressive piece of social history in re-creating
the atmosphere of the solidly Catholic neighborhood of his boyhood in Kankakee,
Ill., and the atmosphere of the seminary in Alabama that he entered at 14, to
the glory of his family and parish, to become a Trinitarian priest. He also
provides a description of his continuing search for his true self and of the
still unfulfilled spiritual quest inspired by the seminary, which he left at 21
and which, along with hundreds of other seminaries throughout the country, is
now closed.

Mr. Hendrickson is as sincere and earnest in his self-examination as he must
have been in 1958, when he first presented himself, along with 20 classmates,
for the priesthood. Now only one of them remains a priest, and Mr. Hendrickson
describes himself as an irregular churchgoer at best. Yet his fascination with
that relatively small order of priests and with the spiritual ideals of its
founder, the Rev. Thomas Judge, is evident in the understanding with which he
tells of his pilgrimage. A reader quickly gets to like this man who is still
trying to make sense of the mixture of experiences, some inspiring, others
confounding, that characterized his life in the seminary and the close and
affectionate bonds he has maintained with his former classmates, who are now
scattered across the country.

His description of seminary life during the period before the Second Vatican
Council rings as true as chapel bells on a windless morning. For one thing,
there was the imposition of a monk's style of life on a frisky herd of
adolescent boys; he captures the peculiar combination of unquestioned faith and
worldly innocence with which the enterprise was carried out. There were the
faculty members, as varied (except for their Roman collars) as those at any
preparatory school. Mr. Hendrickson, with great understanding and sympathy,
documents the seminarians' ''M*A*S*H''-like adjustment to the incongruities of
their lives. He is even gentle with the spiritual director who prepared them for
a life of chastity by systematic battle training against sexual excitement. Mr.
Hendrickson is, in fact, endlessly patient as he reconstructs that period of his
life, in which the noble ideals of these good men far outweighed the minor
absurdities.

This same attitude prevails in his search for the former seminarians and priests
of the Trinitarian Order. He finds one expriest, who won the Congressional Medal
of Honor as a chaplain in Vietnam, living in a transient hotel in San Francisco
and considers him freer now to be a Christian outside the priesthood than he was
within it. He finds the man's brother, a homosexual with two children who is
doing his best to make life work after a run of bad luck. He visits former
classmates who are now successful scientists, professors and businessmen; he
pays calls on aging priests, men he still sees as heroic despite such problems
as alcoholism. He is rejected only by one of them, a crusty old man who thinks
that Mr. Hendrickson is up to no good in writing a book that might cast the
Trinitarians in a bad light. At one point a former comrade, now a Washington
lobbyist, tells him, ''I think you're discovering that you never left.'' And
that, indeed, is the sense with which one closes the book. Mr. Hendrickson never
left - and probably never will leave - the world he describes here with such
sensitivity and sympathy.

*

Mary Gilligan Wong came from the same Illinois heartland, spent several years in
the convent and emerged in the great tide that flooded out of the religious life
in the late 60's. She tells of her life season by season as she passes from an
aspirant of high school age, through various stages of training, to her brief
period of teaching as a nun. She counts herself among the last group of women to
be formed by a system that has greatly changed since she left, at 25, to become
a wife, mother and psychologist. We find in her account a mirror image of Mr.
Hendrickson's adventures: procedures intended to rid the self of worldliness and
achieve sanctity, traditions hardened into trivial commandments, as well as an
imposing cast of nuns, some seemingly mad, some wonderful, all with shoulders
hard against the wheel of perfection but few realizing the human price they were
paying for their efforts.

MRS. WONG is an example of the survival of the healthiest of them, because the
system hardly touched the good instincts of the best candidates. Perhaps that is
why she has written with wide-eyed innocence a book that in many ways resembles
the diary of an adolescent encountering the problems of making new friends,
developing crushes, seeking the approval of teachers and finally finding within
herself a stabilizing sense of gravity. She does not bring to her task the depth
of feeling or the capacity for observation and human understanding that Mr.
Hendrickson does. While Mrs. Wong also has kept contact with members of her
former order, attending a 20th anniversary reunion to probe for further
information about those who stayed and those who left, she sticks more to the
surface of things. Indeed, she frequently seems naive about contemporary
Catholic history. She seems not to trust herself in these explorations, and the
result is a kind of artlessness that, while not unattractive, is not instructive
either.

What links these books, aside from their documentation of now remote ways of
life, is their generosity and guilelessness. Both Mr.  Hendrickson and Mrs. Wong
cannot forget something powerfully attractive at the edge of their memories,
something that they feel it is important for us to know about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN MARRIAGES

BYLINE: By Julian Moynahan; Julian Moynahan teaches in the English Department at
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J. He is the editor of the Viking-Penguin
''Portable Thomas Hardy.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


BLUE RISE By Rebecca Hill.  296 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co. $14.95.
JOE THE ENGINEER By Chuck Wachtel.  216 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co.
$11.95.

''BLUE RISE'' and ''Joe the Engineer'' are good first novels offering fresh,
realistic looks at comparatively unfamiliar social territory. ''Blue Rise''
takes in the milieu of lower-middle-class Baptist whites in a district of
northern Mississippi that is losing its family farms and becoming somewhat
urbanized. Except that its principal characters are Italian-Americans, ''Joe the
Engineer'' covers about the same lower-middle-class life in Queens that was
depicted in a formulaic, patronizing way by the television comedy series ''All
in the Family.'' At the very least, these books offer reliable information on
some diverse and interesting American behavioral phenomena that the people at
People Magazine never seem to get around to - ''Blue Rise'' on Baptist preaching
and child-rearing, meeting and sizing up country cousins, a Saturday night out
with fundamentalist swingers, motel sex in the Southern Bible Belt, among other
things; and ''Joe the Engineer'' on water meter reading, bar and grill crawling,
quickie extramarital sex, and funeral-going in what sometimes seems to be the
outermost of New York City's outer boroughs.

Both Miss Hill and Mr. Wachtel have listened effectively to the vernacular
speech of the places they bring to our attention. We may feel grateful for the
alternatives they provide to standard middleclass fiction - the predictable
round of pop's infidelities, mom's consciousness-raising and/or mental
alienation and the kids' struggles with pot, premature sex and college entrance
anxieties.

Although they have different settings and very different protaganists, both
novels are about unhappy and unraveling marriages. Jeannine Hinton of ''Blue
Rise'' is an exceptionally bright, college-educated escapee from her Southern
roots who comes back to the family farm at Blue Rise, after determining that her
10-year marriage to an even-tempered if somewhat manipulative Middle Western
businessman no longer satisfies her. Her idea is that spending a week at home
sans toddler daughter, visiting kin and childhood friends and airing her marital
disenchantment with her workaholic farmer mother, will help her decide what to
do next. But there is also the problem of wrestling with bitter memories of her
late father whom she remembers as a self-righteous patriarch who used to visit
brutal physical abuse on any family member daring to cross him.

Jeannine, the teller of her story, has advanced degrees in psychology and she is
sharp at spotting the behavioral games people play. She does a brilliant job on
her husband's family, an upperclass clan operating by a set of unspoken but
definite rules, including one that can be articulated, ''If you're functioning,
you're O.K.'' It works just fine for hangovers and for alcoholism denial.

Jeannine plays games of her own, and she may not be entirely aware that some of
them are games. One is the ''you fat, me thin'' game which she plays on an old
school chum far gone in corpulence and compulsive churchgoing, and on the
stodgy, fast food-addicted hometown crowd generally. And there is her game of
''waterworks,'' the simple rule of which is that you must burst into tears
whenever you find yourself in a tight spot: She cries when Cousin Raymond tries
to French kiss her, and she cries and cries when her mother attempts to discover
just what is so objectionable about her husband. I will confess I became curious
about that myself, especially after learning that he was faithful, had been
supportive of her pursuit of further education and had actually made it through
14 hours of Lamaze natural childbirth classes before the arrival of their child.

What it comes down to is that she finds him unattractive. When he touches her
intimately, she feels as if he were wearing rubber gloves. She describes his
fingertips as ''bald'' and ''blind'' - though who, even in this age of
monster-love, would want to be touched by hairy ones sporting little eyes? As
the Welsh, who know a good bit about love and about Bible religion too, might
say, ''She doesn't like him, see?'' But Jeannine cannot let it go at that, maybe
because of her deep-buried yet inextinguishable Baptist conscience.  All
marriage must be condemned, so that the troubling of her particular marriage
will not hang too heavily on her mind: ''It has nothing to do with choosing the
right man. Marriage is the womankiller, the long train of little deaths.
Marriage by the rules.  Innovators try to come in and open them up. Not with two
people who are alive. If there is one live person and one dead person it will
work. My mother demonstrated that.''

BY contrast, Joe Lazaro of ''Joe the Engineer'' will not step outside Queens and
Brooklyn, except under protest, or educate himself up from the class and
cultural environment into which he was born. He shows a sort of dogged loyalty
to his origins that drives his wife, Rosie, wild because she thinks it's
misplaced and partly faked. When he graduated from Richmond Hill High, Joe's
hero was John A.  Roebling, designer of the Brooklyn Bridge, and he might have
gone on to study engineering in college. Instead, he went into the Vietnam War
and now at 27 - the time is 1977 -makes his living as a water company meter
reader, visiting the cellars of Richmond Hill, Howard Beach and Jamaica. Off
work he hangs out in Mary's Bar and Grill consuming endless beers and wrangling
with his fellow meter reader, Joe Flushing Avenue, before going home to a
carefully chosen program of the most mindless shows and reruns he can locate on
evening television.

No doubt this rebellion against American ideals - or are they pretenses? - of
class and cultural mobility has a valid point to make. For one thing, it's a way
of keeping faith with the dead buddies who left their hopes of ''making it''
back on the battlefields of Vietnam. But it leaves Rosie stuck in a Manhattan
waitress job when she really wants and feels she has a right to return to Queens
College, where she had been an English major before she was married. And so the
couple quarrel, move emotionally apart and then separate, even though there is
residual love and physical attraction between them. Where their plight comes to
resemble Jeannine's of ''Blue Rise'' is in the strong distinction they draw
between love, which everybody wants, and marriage, which gets harder to put up
with the longer it continues. Almost at the end of the book, just after they've
come back together temporarily for a very satisfying session of lovemaking,
Rosie says, ''It's like lovin somebody has nothin to do with bein in a
relationship with em,'' and Joe is made to reflect that ''there's been enough
banging his head against the wall. Enough fighting things as they really are.''

THESE gifted new novelists may take the same dim view of the marriage relation
because they belong to the same generation, people now in their 30's who
carefully memorized the intricate lyrics of the Beatles's ''All You Need Is
Love'' and went on in the 70's to run up new records for separations, desertions
and divorces. One suspects their deeper rebellion is against the onward sweep of
time itself, since there's nothing like a long marriage for reminding us that
the essence of life is running on and running down.

There is a glossy painting by Rene Magritte that shows a beautiful room interior
completely filled by a single enormous boulder. It appears to have grown there,
gradually pushing everything else out.  The painting's title is ''The
Anniversary.'' Miss Hill's and Mr.  Wachtel's characters haven't the patience
for a Magritte. They are off and away as soon as they find a pebble in their
shoe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BLOOD AND GUTS, EASTERN DIVISION

BYLINE: By JACK SULLIVAN; Jack Sullivan is the editor of "Lost Souls," a
forthcoming collection of English ghost stories

SECTION: Section 7; Page 29, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 923 words


THE ANGKOR MASSACRE By Loup Durand.  Translated by Helen R. Lane.  476 pp. New
York: William Morrow & Co.  $16.95.
BLACK HEART By Eric Van Lustbader.  544 pp. New York: M. Evans & Co.  $16.95.

LOUP DURAND'S grim, apocalyptic novel about the Cambodian holocaust is
dangerously charged with stifled or displaced emotions. When Kutchai, the
stunned Cambodian protagonist, watches his home blaze up in the stillness of the
jungle and smells ''the first whiffs of roasted flesh,'' he finds the spectacle
''disappointing.'' Having expected a ''great funeral pyre befitting the end of a
world,'' he finds the death agony ''quiet, almost mute.'' Lara and Lisa, the
French and American characters trapped in Cambodia during its Gotterdamerung,
are similarly addicted to stony silence or ''indifference,'' which can suddenly
turn into tears, rage or laughter at chillingly inappropriate moments. In a
powerful symbolic scene, Lara, who has spent his life in Cambodia, helps Kutchai
destroy thousands of delicate, intricate Cambodian artifacts, an expression of
''hopeless rage'' at the coming annihilation of their country.

What Mr. Durand takes on in ''The Angkor Massacre,'' which was a best seller in
France, is an agony too big to be expressed directly.  Like the stony, ''blind''
faces on the Angkor temple of the book's title, the author detaches himself from
the suffering of his characters and presents a stark overview, beginning with
the languid fragrance and charm of Phnom Penh in 1969, moving into the
countryside over mounting corpses, which begin to clog the rivers with ''the
senseless obstinacy of dead things,'' and concluding with a double climax
comprising first a shellshocked account of the sacking of Phnom Penh and finally
a hallucinatory chase scene through the jungle. Although the characters are
drawn carefully and credibly (aided by Helen R. Lane's lucid English
translation), Mr. Durand seems less interested in their plight than in the
larger catastrophe that overwhelms and reduces them to dots of pain on a huge,
nightmarish canvas.

Mr. Durand, who witnessed the civil war in Cambodia during a sevenyear stay
there, sees these horrifying events as analogous to the ''fantastic and
irrepressible digestion'' of everything by the jungle. In one scene, a member of
the Khmer Rouge realizes with a ''grave, fierce joy'' that the moment of victory
is near: ''And suddenly an entire shadow theater began to move beneath his
eyelids, thousands and thousands of mute, implacable combatants, slowly emerging
from the mother forest as from a womb, dressed in black, irresistibly advancing,
pursuing and crushing everything in their way.''

''The Angkor Massacre'' sometimes loses its momentum or stops altogether. It
tells us more about Cambodian history than the narrative can bear, and the story
of the love that develops between Lara and Lisa is disappointingly bland.
Nevertheless, Mr. Durand's subtle and commanding sense of place make this novel
considerably more than just another Far East thriller. In this novel, Cambodia
is a heartbreaking tragedy, not an occasion for exploitation.

Like ''The Ninja,'' his 1980 thriller, Eric Van Lustbader's ''Black Heart'' is a
lurid mixture of crime, espionage and sadistic sex. This time the plot -
involving Oriental assassins, exotic killing techniques and a conspiracy to
control the American Presidency - is more grandiose, but the formula is the
same. Instead of bloodthirsty Japanese, ''Black Heart'' offers bloodthirsty
Cambodians and Vietnamese, one of whom has picked up refined techniques of
butchery from a Japanese martial arts master during the Vietnam War (a war that
seems to have revived, with a vengeance, the Yellow Peril motif in film and pop
fiction ).

The opening scene, which gets the carnage under way, serves notice that Mr.
Lustbader is raising the ante a bit: Not only is the assassination more gruesome
than its counterpart in ''The Ninja,'' involving, as it does, a ''steel needle
of peculiar design,'' but the victim is engaged in sex at the time. The problem
is that Mr.  Lustbader has rather a hard time outdoing the cruelty of this scene
later on in the book and must constantly make his hackings, shreddings,
skinnings and decapitations more elaborate and perverse.  After hundreds of
pages, one ceases to care whose spleen is being ruptured, whose face is being
smashed, whose groin is being crushed.  ''Black Heart'' makes a thriller like
Thomas Harris's grisly but carefully calibrated ''Red Dragon'' seem almost
reticent, without generating a fraction of its terror.

Mr. Lustbader is especially fond of torture scenes, but the real torture lies in
getting through his sentences. His philosophy seems to be that two cliches are
better than one: ''The jungle through which they passed seemed ancient, lush,
fecund - primeval, even.'' If one metaphor is bewildering, mix it with another:
''Like a rush of wind in his ears, he was buffeted by currents he had barely
glimpsed before.'' Sometimes these sentences come with an apology: ''But it was
her face which drew Lauren's attention. It was sleek and sensual, with much of
the - for want of a better term - animal in it.''

Mr. Lustbader's brand of pop Orientalism has none of the inventive nastiness or
comic book humor of Richard Condon's ''Manchurian Candidate'' or Sax Rohmer's Fu
Manchu series. One rarely knows whether those books are intentional camp or not,
which is surely part of the fun. But ''Black Heart'' is too wordy, ponderous and
repulsive to be any fun at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMER PLACES AROUND THE WORLD

SECTION: Section 10; Page 15, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 4692 words


Suggestions for holidaymakers from all parts of the globe: Foreign
correspondents of The New York Times were asked to select a favorite vacation
spot in their part of the world. Here are 14 of their choices, ranging from some
of the familiar pleasures of Europe to the more exotic outposts of Asia and
Africa. The delights of Rome in August (despite the trash and traffic) and an
unlikely oasis of luxury (with a French accent) in Cameroon are merely the
beginning.

ITALY Spruced up for Holy Year Rome plans to be at its best this summer. This is
Holy Year, and Catholics will need no further inducement to come; others will
have an opportunity to witness the pageantry with which the church celebrates
special occasions, which will be frequent. And for all, there is the promise of
this great but tarnished city to dress in its finest, to sweep its streets and
to make a special effort to protect those who use them peacefully against the
predators who prey upon them.

As a resident, I look forward to August. To walk the streets of this city and to
bask in the sunshine on its major and minor squares is a joy at any season, but
one that is not unmitigated. The streets are dirty, the traffic horrendous - a
special problem in a city whose loveliest streets have no sidewalks. Byways are
rampant with petty crime.

August attenuates the traffic, as the cars that clog the city fan out to spread
havoc on the highways of this country and its neighbors. And the Holy Year has
brought promises that something will be done about the trash and the thieves.
Nothing is certain in this volatile country, but the mayor of Rome has said he
will find the funds to make it possible.

So Rome this August should be better even than in other Augusts for those who
want to see at their own pace the splendors that architects from antiquity
through the Baroque have bestowed. Moreover, they will be able to witness the
solemn rites that will be a daily occurence in St. Peter's and in the other
basilicas of the Vatican, the Sunday masses celebrated by Pope John Paul II or a
cardinal acting in his stead and the Friday afternoon devotions at the Stations
of the Cross on St. Peter's Square.

One caution - Holy Year places special stress on hotel and other lodging
facilities, so reservations should be made early.  Henry Kamm

BRITAIN Kent and its environs the height of the English summer -providing, of
course, that you are clever enough to find an English summer that has a height -
there are few pleasures greater than choosing a county and exploring it.  The
classics, I suppose, are Devon, Cornwall, Cumbria (the Lake District) and
Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire (the Cotswolds and a good deal more);
inevitably, they are also terribly crowded. So why not Kent, the compact,
scenically soothing and historically rich southeastern corner of the country, so
easily reached from London?

The student of the past can visit the battlefield where William the Conqueror
conquered in 1066 (it is at Battle, not Hastings, no matter what the schoolbooks
say) and Chartwell, the home of Sir Winston Churchill. The lover of architecture
will find castles at Deal and Dover and Rochester, as well as churches of great
distinction, from the vast Gothic cathedral at Canterbury to the tiny church at
Barfreston, a little-known gem of the Romanesque. No county is richer in great
houses; Kent has Penshurst Place, with its soaring, timbered Great Hall, and
baronial Knole, whose furnishings have come down almost intact from the times of
James I and Charles I, and moated Ightham Mote, probably the best remaining
14th-century manor house in England. Kent also has Sissinghurst, the enchanting
garden created by Harold Nicholson and his wife, Vita Sackville-West. The north
is flat, but farther south lies the lovely rolling country of the Weald.

A good base, at the upper end of the price scale (double rooms with breakfast
range from about $82.50 to about $142.50), is Eastwell Manor near Ashford, a
magnificent stone house set among fields where sheep still graze. Ian McAndrew,
the chef, produces fine meals of a modern French character, which are served at
tables overlooking well-kept formal gardens. A more modest alternative (double
rooms with breakfast are about $42.75) might be the simple but atmospheric
Falstaff Hotel at Canterbury. In any event, try to have lunch or dinner at the
Duck Inn, a pub on a country lane just south of Canterbury, where John Laing is
the heartiest of hosts and his wife Ulla makes wonderful brandade and delectable
soups and desserts.  R.W. Apple Jr.

One would hardy expect much change from slaking an African thirst with
airfreighted Moet et Chandon, served in a dew-beaded, silver ice bucket. But it
has a special value. It is the only place of its kind for hundreds of miles, a
hybrid of Africa and Paris, an escape from the rigors of hard travel, a place
with a pool where the batteries recharge at their own pace.

You will remember such things as a candlelit dinner on a terrace and quiet
conversation, set to a counterpoint of chirruping crickets - if, of course, you
happen to be a traveler to or from Chad and are not too worried about spending
$100 or more for a night's rest and revitalization.  Alan Cowell

CAMEROON Paris on the road to Chad

For those who relish the out-of-the-way, the sudden and delightful discovery,
there is an unlikely place in northern Cameroon, in the town of Maroua on the
road that leads to Chad, called Le Motel le Sare.

My liking for it dates to an assignment last year when, in the way of things, my
baggage got lost on the way to Maroua and I spent a week or so in N'Djamena,
Chad's capital, in a hotel room with a bucket for a bath and no change of
clothing.

The motel (a misnomer, for this is no place of neon-lit cabins and squealing
tires at 3 A.M.) was my savior. When I arrived there, a friend had located my
suitcase and it lay on the bed in a thatchroofed, cottagy room hung with
trophies and hides. The water was hot and abundant and came in a bath, not a
bucket. The host and hostess, a smiling French couple, were welcoming.

Perhaps the preceding week had heightened the contrast, but that was not the
only factor that formed my impression, for Le Motel le Sare (named after a river
in the town that seems to be dry most of the year) has a style that is truly
elegant without being ostentatious. The surroundings are simple and unadorned,
the service is attentive without being obtrusive, the cuisine firmly rooted in
those traditions of French kitchencraft that pre-date nouvelle cuisine (and will
survive it).

The place does not, of course, come cheap - one would hardy expect much change
from slaking an African thirst with airfreighted Moet et Chandon, served in a
dew-beaded, silver ice bucket. But it has a special value. It is the only place
of its kind for hundreds of miles, a hybrid of Africa and Paris, an escape from
the rigors of hard travel, a place with a pool where the batteries recharge at
their own pace.

You will remember such things as a candlelit dinner on a terrace and quiet
conversation, set to a counterpoint of chirruping crickets - if, of course, you
happen to be a traveler to or from Chad and are not too worried about spending
$100 or more for a night's rest and revitalization.  Alan Cowell

HONG KONG One of the quieter islands an Tao is an hour's ferryboat ride -and
worlds apart -from the Hong Kong that most people think of as Hong Kong, the
bustle and glitter of Hong Kong Island. While motorists swelter in traffic jams
in the city's financial district, paved roads are scarce in Lan Tao.Instead, the
craggy island, whose Cantonese name means ''broken head,'' offers quiet walks
through areas that have been set aside as nature trials and placid old
monasteries, both Buddhist and Christian.

Lan Tao is the largest of the so-called outlying islands. It is twice the size
of Hong Kong Island yet has only a tiny fraction of its population (30,000, as
opposed to more than one million). It is a theater of rural ways of life, mostly
fishing villages that have continued little changed for centuries. And, since
plans to build an airport on Lan Tao were recently shelved, things will not
change much anytime soon.

A modest hotel with 78 rooms, the Silver Mine Beach Hotel, is being built, and
should make it easier for visitors to stay more than one day. But more
adventurous overnight guests can stay at the Po Lin monastery. For less than $10
a night, you can sleep in appropriately spartan quarters on the compound and
partake of the vegetarian fare served by the monks.

Once so fortified, the climb up to the top of the nearby Lan Tao Peak, the
island's highest point, is recommended. The view of the South China Sea and of
the island's peaceful, rugged dignity leave little doubt why Lan Tao is the home
of so many monasteries.

To stay at Po Lin or one of the other monasteries, arrangements must be made in
advance. Information is available from the Hong Kong Tourist Association, 548
Fifth Avenue, New York 10036 (212-869-5008).  Steve Lohr

FRANCE The Riviera (no kidding) It's far too flip to say, and said too often,
that steering people toward the French Riviera in summer is like recommending
Far Rockaway in mid-August. Sun and tar, O.K.; endless cars, yes; the bodies,
their press, the miasma of exhaust fumes, sun-tan oil, and salt, sure. But the
view from Beach 108th Street, the Atlantic in its lumbering directness, really
isn't serious competition for coming into Nice on the coast road from the west,
regardless of the traffic.

The sea's curve of blue and green and purple against the white and red and
orange of the shore, a smear of wild color fitted against a loop of space as
perfect as a lasso: It's seraphic, and not for nothing called the Bay of Angels.
Twenty minutes back into the hills behind Nice, there are the same perspectives
and colors, and a richness of smell, a combination of pine, earth and flowers
that I don't know elsewhere. Putting down the Cote d'Azur seems to me to be
blindman's work, resourceless, dumb.

If you take the area as running from St. Tropez to the Italian border, including
the hills of the back country, there is an extraordinary variety of things to do
that excludes only the search for solitude. I grant the detractors that much:
Whatever you undertake in these parts, you are unlikely to be entirely alone.

The best approach is getting to places early or very late. Find a beach away
from a roadway - if people can't see it, there will be fewer of them - and leave
by 11:30 A.M. Get into the hills for lunch. Look for a field, sleep under a
tree. Go back to the beach at dusk, and eat very late with the French, who will
be around in greater numbers this summer because of the government's foreign
travel restrictions. That's good. They won't stand for lousy service, and with
more people on their toes in restaurants and hotels, everyone should benefit.
John Vinocur

SPAIN The unspoiled Costa Brava then Salvador Dali first settled in Cadaques, it
was a sleepy fishing village. Today, the tourists have found it, as they have
every village along Spain's Costa Brava, but they have not yet altered its
character, architecture or skyline.

Cadaques has been saved in part by its bad access road. From Barcelona, the
mountain road that parallels the ''Wild Coast'' passes high-rise apartment
complexes and supermarkets overlooking crowded beaches. But after Rosas, the
road narrows, twists and curves around cliffs and sheer drops. The sun-washed
village of Cadaques appears around one narrow pass - first the steeple of the
severe hilltop church, then the red-tiled roofs and white facades of the houses
and the blue-green waters of the Mediterranean, breaking around the port.

The village appears today much as it looked 50 years ago. There are only a few
small hotels and rooming houses, so most visitors rent houses nestled in the
steep hills, reached by narrow cobbled streets. There is a lively weekly market
where you can buy everything from fruit and vegetables to pottery, toys and
clothing, several chic shops and traditional dancing in the town square every
weekend.

There is a museum run by one of Dali's former secretaries with works by Dali,
Picasso and others. Or you can sit in one of the many cafes overlooking the
water and sip sangria, or eat in any of the fresh seafood rstaurants along the
coast. For swimming, you can rent a motorboat and take a five-minute ride to one
of several coves whose rock slab beaches are approachable only by sea. Beaches
are topless and sometimes bottomless. Wind surfing and water skiing can be
arranged.

In the summer months the main street has a carnival atmosphere, complete with
shooting galleries and cotton candy. Like everywhere in Spain, Cadaques town has
a lively and late night life. Try to avoid August, which is the most crowded
holiday month in Spain.  Nina Darnton

ARGENTINA Skiing in the Andes Head really south for a different way to pass the
summer -all the way to Argentina, where it is winter and the mountain peaks are
covered with snow. Bariloche, an Andean resort about 1,000 miles southwest of
Buenos Aires, is a popular haven among South American ski buffs. It has 20 ski
runs of great variety, providing ample training opportunities for the novice and
challenge for the expert.

The setting is awesome: You ski overlooking Nahuel Huapi and several smaller
crystal blue lakes surrounded by evergreen forests.  The slopes are dotted with
all sorts of coffee shops and there are also places where you can rent all the
equipment you want for about $30 a day. The official season is from the
beginning of July to the end of September, though August and early September are
the best times. The windy upper slopes almost always have very good snow all
winter, but the lower ones can be iffy.

There are many hotels near the runs in a charming alpine village.  The Bariloche
Ski Hotel is one, and you can also rent bungalows.  Others can be found in
Bariloche or around the lake. Or treat yourself to real linens and fine food and
stay at one of the best hotels in South America, the Casco, with its views of
the lake (price for a night is $207 double). Bariloche itself has discos and
bars that stay open till very late, yummy chocolate shops and Swissstyle
tearooms.

Argentina is a cheap place to travel nowadays, since the exchange rate greatly
favors foreigners. You can get to Bariloche daily plane from Buenos Aires and
then rent a car.  Edward Schumacher

GERMANY Off the beaten autobahn The trick on a clever European summer vacation
is to figure out where everybody else is going, and then go somewhere else.
There is no autobahn steering the hordes to Tubingen, and so they don't hit it.

The second advantage of Tubingen is that it is deep in southern Germany. It is
this correspondent's conviction that as one goes farther south in Germany, the
people become friendlier, the weather gets sunnier and more dependable and the
food more subtle. (The German they speak down south is impossible, but it's a
dying language anyway.) The Swabians, which is what the people around Tubingen
call themselves, are among the most hospitable and amusing of Germans.

Off the beaten track on the Neckar River, Tubingen, with a population of 75,000,
is, as the guidebooks say, an ancient university town of steep hills and tiny
streets. The poet Friedrich Holderin went slowly mad 150 years ago in a yellow
house by the banks of the river, where students today loll about under willow
trees, paddle in punts, or cram for exams. Unlike American students, they're
still there until the second week of July.

It is perhaps the university's domination of the town - and its isolation - that
have prevented Tubingen, a medieval gem, from being overrun by the sellers of
kitsch and other trinketry. (Heidelberg was probably once as lovely, but the
kitsch people and the proximity of the United States Army have made their
inroads.) Tubingen is, quite simply, a tranquil, beautiful place. Its
asymmetrical market square and pastel-painted Rathaus compose one of the most
lovely settings in Germany. The surrounding countryside, the Swabian Alb, is
packed with castles, spas and hiking paths and is great for kids.

If I were sneaking off to Tubingen, I would stay at the Krone Hotel near the
river (doubles with breakfast are about $55 to $85).  If I were having dinner in
Tubingen, I would eat a trout at the Weinstube Forelle. Then I'd write a nasty
postcard to my friends on the teeming Costa del Sol.  James M. Markham

THAILAND Medieval haven in the hills In the mountains of northern Thailand there
is a valley surrounded at sunset by dark violet hills, and in the valley stands
the old walled city of Chiangmai. It is growing fast and getting a bit junked
up, yet it is still a town of great and soothing charm.

Chiangmai, 500 miles north of Bangkok's sweltering lowlands, was a crossroads of
trade among Burma, China, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam.  Today, its graceful
civility, its medieval limits and measure (so different from the ugly sprawl of
Bangkok), its relative coolness even in summer, when the rain pours down but
often stops, make it a kind of holiday retreat for people already on vacation.

Chiangmai is said to have been built by 90,000 draftees who worked night and day
for four months on the spot where King Mengrai happened to see two while elk,
two barking deer and a family of white mice.  The city today has a considerably
less frantic population of 100,000.

Virtually all of the old city wall remains, a splendid, moated, red-brick square
that shelters a living community and several Buddhist monasteries. It's a
delightful place to walk among crumbling mouments and rose gardens and do some
quiet shopping - it is a center for handicrafts (lacquerware, silver painted
bamboo umbrellas), and Thailand's best copies of old Thai and Chinese celadon
come from its Mengrai kilns.

There is a considerable expatriate community. At the Chalet Restaurant, try the
Belgian proprietor's terrine de canard -after lunch, he'll offer to sell you
antiques from the attic of his 70-year-old restaurant. There are also a bearded
former British consul, some of the world's last hippies, lots of Protestant
missionaries, a crowd of ex-tobacco-planters from ex-Southern Rhodesia, and who
knows what else. Outside town, there are elephants besides. Colin Campbell

MEXICO Taking the waters Mexico's classic spa resort, Ixtapan de la Sal, lies in
the foothills of the Sierra Madre, 70 miles southwest of Mexico City. Already
popular in Aztec times (Montezuma, according to legend, paused here with his
court), its mild, steady climate - the average temperature is 70 degrees - makes
it suitable for rest and exercise all year round, but its location at 5,240 feet
makes for cool summer nights.

There are several hotels outside the typical Mexican peasant village, but the
Hotel Ixtapan is by far the most comfortable and complete. Its sprawling
compound embraces a wide range of sports facilities, including golf, tennis and
horseback riding. (For children, there is a large playground, horse-drawn
carriage rides and a 460-foot-long water slide.)

But the radioactive thermal waters are the thing. They contain 13 different
minerals that, according to resident doctors, stimulate the metabolism and
circulation, act as a general tonic for stresses and strains and are good for
arthritis, rheumatism, gout and high blood pressure. Besides the spring-fed
hotel swimming pools, private Roman baths, with massage and cooling rooms, are
available for $2.70 an hour. There is also a health and beauty program, which
includes diet, gymnastics, mud packs and scalp treatment for $112.50 a week.

For sightseeing, there are various archeological sites within a 30-mile drive,
among them Malinalco and Teotenango. The Indian market in Toluca is about an
hour's drive to the north, and the town of Cuernavaca an hour and a half to the
east.

Rates at the Hotel Ixtapan range from $47.50 to $51.50 for two, with all meals.
In the United States, reservations are handled by Distinguished Hotels, 711
Third Avenue, New York 10017 (212-661-32100. There is daily minibus service from
Mexico City.  Marlise Simons

CANADA World's largest log cabin Chateau Montebello, a former sports club for
millionaires that lies on the Ottawa River an hour and a half west of Montreal,
provides a setting of hedonistic rusticity suitable for either escape or
escapade.

The hotel commands a 17th-century seigneurial estate that once stretched the 80
miles to Montreal but has since shrunk to 65,000 acres. Despite the attrition,
this expanse, with its walking trails, riding paths, woods and lakes, remains
sufficiently large to protect the sense of bosky solitude even when all the
resort's 204 rooms are filled. Many of these rooms are situated in a 53-year-old
building that is often referred to as the largest log cabin in the world.

This structure sprang from the fancy of a Swiss American millionaire named H.M.
Saddlemire, who, in his hurry to establish a plutocratic club in the wilderness,
had 3,500 men working night and day to finish the construction in three and a
half months. In 1970 the whole complex was taken over by Canadian Pacific and
converted into a luxurious hotel. Saunas and an indoor swimming pool were added,
but the basic eccentric charm of the log castle were retained. An earlier
building, the 1850 manor house, is also carefully maintained and is open to
guests as a historical site.

Chateau Montebello, which was the site of the 1981 summit meeting of Western
leaders, lies on the north shore of the Ottawa River, 40 miles east of Ottawa
and 80 miles west of Montreal. The resort can accommodate 50 power boats or
sailboats and each year a number of visitors come by boat from New York, making
the four-day trip up the Hudson through Lake Champlain and canals to Montreal
and then through locks and lakes to the Ottawa River.

Summer rates, which go into effect on May 15 and last through Oct.  14, are
about $100 a day for single occupancy and about $140 for double occupancy,
including three meals. Breakfast and lunch are buffet style. The dinner menu
changes daily. The management will deduct for meals missed by guests who might
want to explore the restaurants and inns of such nearby Laurentian villages as
Montebello and Papineauville. The phone number is 819-423-6341.  Michael T.
Kaufman

TURKEY Up and down the Bosporus Zigzagging up and down the Bosporus by
ferryboat, along the winding waterway that separates Europe and Asia, is one of
the world's great cruises. And, at about $2 a head, it's also one of the
cheapest.

The traveler sets out at Istanbul's Eminonu Pier, by the bustling Galata Bridge
on the Golden Horn. There are two ferries daily, leaving at 11:05 A.M. and 1:35
P.M. The trip takes about two and a half hours each way; with a stopover at
Rumeli or Andalou, perhaps for a lunch of fresh sea bass or turbot (about $7.50
a person) in a seaside restaurant, it usually adds up to a day's excursion.

From the deck, you see the Istanbul skyline at its best - all the majestic
mosques and minarets, the towers and palaces and then the stately Bosporus
Bridge. The 18.5-mile stretch from the Sea of Marmara to the Black Sea then
unfolds in a panorama of modest fishing villages, fashionable resorts, royal
parks and gardens and splendid monuments. There's the vast marble Dolma Bagtche,
for example, the residence of the last Ottoman sultan; the imperial pavilions
and gardens of Yildiz, the charming litle Beylerbeyi Palace and its lavish
garden, built, it is said, by a sultan for Empress Eugenie, wife of Napoleon
III. And finally, just before you get to the Black Sea, there are the impressive
fortresses of Rumeli Hisari and Anadolu Hisari.

But perhaps the most exciting thing is the water traffic, with all kinds of
pleasure boats, river launches, Greek or Bulgarian merchant ships, and ships
from the Soviet, American and Turkish navies almost rubbing shoulders.

Most Istanbul travel agencies offer the same Bosporus tour, going one way by
ferry and returning by bus, as a half-day excursion for about $12.50 a person.
There are also weekend cruises by private motorboat, if you find the ferry
overcrowded.  Marvine Howe

INDIA Houseboat in Kashmir Soon the plains of India will turn into one vast
oven, and most of the tourists who came to savor the country's exotic flavors in
moderate winter temperatures will have fled. That's when one's thoughts turn to
Kashmir. In both climate and ambiance it is South Asia's answer to both the
Rockies and New England. Renowned as a summer retreat since before the days of
the British, Kashmir today is a place where you can ride, trek in the mountains,
shop for Kashmir rugs and prowl wonderfully cluttered, pungent bazaars. You can
come back in the winter and ski. But to some tastes, the main attraction lies on
and in Kashmir's waters.

You start by flying from Delhi to Srinigar, the capital of Kashmir. Indian
Airlines has daily flights at a round-trip cost of about $110. Once there, you
look for a houseboat on Srinigar's Dal Lake or Nagin Lake. There are about a
thousand of them, many of which were built during the days of the British. (The
Maharajah of Kashmir welcomed Britons there on holiday, but wouldn't let them
build villas on his land.) Some of the boats are truly sumptuous, with verandahs
for relaxing and sunbathing, and finely furnished living and dining rooms, often
in Victorian style. And they are a bargain. The most expensive houseboat rents
for about $35 for two people. This includes meals prepared by a chef who lives
on an adjacent boat, and servants. Small, slim boats called shikaras, Kashmir's
counterpart to Venice's gondolas, bring goods to the boat and provide
transportation to the shore.

The fisherman can venture forth to several kinds of trout streams, from big,
broad, rivers to small dry-fly brooks. Fishing with both wet and dry flies is
preferred and, indeed, required on some stretches, but spinfishing is done on
others. Only a limited number of fishermen are allowed on a given stretch of
stream, or ''beat,'' at a time. This is the European system, and while it
guarantees an exclusive shot at the fish, it is said to result sometimes in
having to wait in line for the necessary daily license. The total daily cost of
the license, rod and equipment rental (if necessary) and the compulsory guide,
or ghillie, at last report amounted to between $10 and $15 a day .  William K.
Stevens

EGYPT Bucolic torpor in Aswan Because of the heat, it won't be to everyone's
liking. But Aswan, situated near the Nile River's First Cataract, is a summer
attraction if one is looking for peace and quiet, clean air and clear blue
skies. The town, which has more of an African flavor than any other place I have
been in Egypt, is normally a winter resort, with a peak season running from
October through April. In summer, it drowses in temperatures that can reach 115
degrees. But the climate is dry, and during a July visit I was far less
uncomfortable than I am during a humid summer heat spell in New York.

Most winter resorts have cut-rate summer prices. Aswan is no exception. Good
hotels, such as the Oberoi and the Cataract, both with swimming pools, lower
their prices by 15 to 20 percent. So do the more modest hotels in Aswan. At this
writing the summer rates have not been announced, but travel agents should know
soon.

Wander about in the market and baazar and walk along the Nile early in the
morning and then have a swim and a siesta. In the late afternoon, when the light
softens into mellow pastels, hire a felucca, those ancient boats with huge
sails, and cruise along the river silently, through waterways filled with birds.
You will catch the breeze and be lulled by the solitude.

In Aswan, unlike most tourist areas in Egypt, hawkers and pitchmen, who can be
annoying, are rare. In summer, the town has two speeds - slow and stop. For
those who wish to lapse into a bucolic torpor for a few days, I recommend it.
William E. Farrell

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A FOREIGN POLICY FOR THE DEMOCRATS

BYLINE: By Harry McPherson, and Richard Holbrooke

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5800 words


Harry McPherson, a Washington lawyer, was Special Counsel to President Johnson.
Richard Holbrooke, vice president of Public Strategies, a Washington-based
consulting firm, was Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs during the Carter Administration.

The successive shocks of the last 15 years, from the collapse of the American
position in Indochina to the humiliation of the Iranian hostage crisis, have
greatly weakened the self-confidence and power of the moderate consensus that
played the dominant role in American foreign policy in the decades after World
War II. As a result, more extreme tendencies of the American political spectrum
- the far left and the far right - have each had opportunities to capitalize on
the weaknesses and failures of the center. The influence of the left swelled
when the passions aroused by the Vietnam

War brought huge numbers of Americans for the first time into active opposition
to their Government. The pendulum swung to the right when events in Iran and
perceptions of a leadership crisis at home combined, in 1980, to give the nation
its first authentically right-wing Administration.

The disaster that befell the centrists was not entirely undeserved. But the
combination of the Democrats' swing to the far left in the early 1970's and the
Republican swing to the far right in 1980 increased public confusion over
America's foreign policy as successive teams of ideologues sought unsuccessfully
to force the real world into molds shaped by their own myths and rhetoric. Yet
the defeat of the center may have been the necessary precondition to its
renewal. It may be that American moderates had to suffer a virtually complete
loss of power in order to be forced into the kind of stocktaking that is
essential to their political revival.

Such a revival is vitally important for America and the world. The nation's
interests cannot be served by a series of flirtations with ideologically based
foreign policies that do not represent the views of most Americans and that
leave other governments baffled. There is pressing need for a return to a
foreign policy based on enduring national interests and values and rooted in the
realities of international life.

The elements for reassembling a centrist consensus on American foreign policy
are now well within reach. The challenge is to redefine this consensus as more
than simply the midpoint of the political spectrum, and to re-establish it as
the organizing principle for a steady, coherent and popularly supported foreign
policy.

Moderate Republicans have an important role to play. But with the executive
branch in thrall to the far right, Republicans of centrist views cannot voice
their disagreements with the Administration too openly, for fear of dividing
their party and weakening their access and influence. Thus, it is up to the
Democrats, no longer reeling from the electoral disaster of 1980, to initiate
the search for a realistic foreign policy for the 1980's.

But first, the Democrats must recognize something about themselves. During the
past generation, their party has often straddled a wide ideological spectrum.
Having opened their doors to almost every tendency in American political life,
having stood for almost everything, Democrats have seemed sometimes to stand for
virtually nothing. This intellectual open house, while often stimulating, is no
longer tenable for a party that seeks responsibility for guiding the nation.
With the first important tests for the 1984 election - labor endorsements and
straw votes - less than six months away and the national convention 15 months
off, Democrats need to end the confusion that still exists in the public mind
over what they stand for in foreign policy and national security.  From roughly
1947 until 1981, the foreign policy of the United States was conducted almost
entirely by leaders, whether liberals or conservatives, who shared the centrist
consensus. There was always a far left and a far right during those decades, but
although noisy, these extreme tendencies played almost no part in the policy
process, and relatively little in the policy debate. Before the days of op-ed
pages, they could rarely get their views into the establishment newspapers and
magazines, and their Congressional spokesmen were usually more colorful than
influential.

McCarthyism, to be sure, set a high-water mark for a certain kind of extremism
from roughly 1950 to 1954, but its ugly power to injure and intimidate was
focused less on foreign policy than on the search for domestic scapegoats. More
typical was the 1960 campaign, when John F. Kennedy and Richard M. Nixon argued
over the missile gap, Cuba and two obscure islands off the Chinese coast.
Stylistic differences between the two men were quite real: Nixon was in fact
more conservative than Kennedy. But although foreign policy dominated their
debates, they shared certain basic centrist values, and their relatively minor
campaign differences soon faded into historical footnotes.

During most of our history, the fringes in American politics have sought power
through third parties, always without success. Like most romantic lost-cause
campaigns, recent third-party efforts -Henry A.  Wallace's in 1948, George C.
Wallace's in 1968 and John B.  Anderson's in 1980 - have had little lasting
significance. Far more important is that three times in the last two decades,
the party out of power has nominated a candidate from the fringes of its
membership.

The Republican nomination of Barry M. Goldwater in 1964 and the Democratic
selection of George S. McGovern in 1972 were put down as aberrations when both
candidates were buried in the election results. After each debacle, the losing
party regrouped to select a more moderate candidate four years later - and each
time it won. Yet a trend was developing, and in 1980 a man undeniably from the
far right of the Republican Party won the nomination and went on to take the
biggest prize of all.

Many things contributed to Ronald Reagan's victory, including inflation, growing
doubts about United States policy toward the Soviet Union and, above all, the
humiliation Americans felt over the Iranian hostage crisis. The weakness of the
Democratic foreign policy consensus, which Reagan exploited so shrewdly in the
campaign, had its roots in the 1960's. It was the agony of Vietnam that gave
political momentum and power to the fringes, and it is the aftermath of Vietnam
that still gives them such strength and staying power today. Vietnam did more
than temporarily divide us; its cautionary lessons provided both the far left
and the far right with selfjustifying myths.

Vietnam was the first great indisputable failure of American foreign policy
since the end of World War II. There had been blunders, like the handling of the
U-2 affair and the Bay of Pigs.  But nothing had called the fundamentals of
policy into question as Vietnam did - not just the tactics and methods of
intervention but its wisdom; not just the deployment of our military power in a
distant third-world country but its efficacy in any conflict similarly
prolonged; not just our strategic purposes but our motives - indeed, our
national character.

It is 15 years since the Tet offensive stunned the nation, a decade since the
P.O.W.'s came home, eight years since the last Americans were lifted by
helicopter off the roof of the American Embassy in Saigon. As a paradigm of what
was seen by many on the left as a global policy of neo-imperialism, Vietnam has
lost much of its force, buried under the rush of more recent events: Soviet
brutality in Poland and Afghanistan, ''re-education centers'' in Vietnam,
bloodbaths in Cambodia, American humiliation in Iran. Yet the bitterness has not
disappeared from the political debate.

The Democratic Party was saddled with most of the legacy of Vietnam, and, in the
war's harsh afterlight, Democrats were shown to be no longer the unified party
that had once rallied to President Kennedy's inaugural call for resistance to
tyranny anywhere. They were, instead, divided into three more-or-less distinct
groups.

First, there was the far left. The members of this faction saw in Vietnam an
ominous precedent for investing American resources in almost any third-world
conflict. They believed that such investments inevitably favored reactionary
governments and interests and flowed from a dark fault in the national psyche.
Indeed, in the late 1960's, it was not unusual to hear, especially in academic
and intellectual circles, that the United States bombed and burned villages in
Vietnam because Americans were inherently a violent people.

The second grouping was that of the liberals, who concluded that the decision to
intervene in Vietnam had been a blunder. Not a ''war crime,'' which implied
unsavory purposes, but a tragic mistake in judgment, an overreaching spawned by
an undifferentiating commitment to cold-war ideology. This view was shared by
quite a few Republican moderates.

Finally, there were the ''neo-conservatives,'' who had become so restive by 1980
that they openly or tacitly hoped for a Reagan victory. They believed that the
war had been lost not in the paddies and mountains of Vietnam but at home - on
campuses, on television, in editorial conferences and in Congress; and because
it had been fought within arbitrary limits established by timorous politicians.
Losing did not imply an error inherent in the principle of containment but a
failure of nerve on the part of liberals in securing it. Many Republicans of a
conservative bent were of like mind.

The most important difference between liberals and conservatives was perhaps
more psychological than strategic. It derived, again, from the experience of
Vietnam. Though a conservative Republican, Richard Nixon, used brutal and
devious tactics in prosecuting the war, the original blunder of Vietnam had been
a liberal one. It exposed liberals to unanswerable attacks from the far left,
within that left-center grouping of which liberals and leftists were uneasy
members. Although a policy based on self-doubt, on the fear of recapitulating
the Vietnam experience, was no policy at all, the sense of guilt persisted.

In domestic terms, the need to prove to the Democratic family that the bitter
lesson had been learned helped pave the way for the nomination of Senator
McGovern in 1972. Four years later, it helped produce a candidate and ultimately
a President who suggested during his campaign that American ground troops should
be withdrawn from South Korea; who, during his first year in office, warned
Americans against an ''inordinate fear of Communism,'' and who, late in his
term, expressed astonishment that the Russians would invade their neighbor
Afghanistan.

To be sure, the Carter Administration began as a kind of coalition of post-
Vietnam moderates and some representatives of the far left.  Yet within months
of Jimmy Carter's inauguration, confused signals began to emanate from the White
House over just what our policies were, especially toward the Soviet Union.

The Carter Administration achieved several notable successes in American foreign
policy, including the Camp David agreements, the Panama Canal treaties and
normalization of relations with China. But it often seemed transfixed by the
difficulties and ambiguities of world events. During his last 18 months in
office, an intelligent, dedicated President could not master the situations
created by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the hostage crisis and the
Senate's intransigence on the strategic-arms treaty (SALT II) reached with
Moscow in 1979. He seemed, in fact, to have lost the capacity to provide
effective leadership either to the nation or to the free world. Justly or
unjustly, America at the end of the decade conveyed a message of drift and
weakness.  Indeed, the hostage crisis brought the country's simmering
frustrations to the boiling point. Burning helicopters in the desert symbolized
America's inability to achieve even so limited a purpose as freeing its citizens
from the control of a hostile third-rank nation. It was another catastrophe, and
it gave great strength to a longstanding argument of the far right: Only radical
measures - massive rearmament at any cost and the vigorous, uncompromising
assertion of American purposes everywhere - could avoid a continuing series of
Vietnams and Irans.

For the right end of the political spectrum, the events of the late 1970's
crystallized a long-growing sense of crisis: The Republic was in mortal danger
because its values, as well as its strategic interests, were being sacrificed as
a result of liberal guilt and weakness. It wasn't only people like Senator Jesse
Helms and his cohorts who felt this way. Aligned with them in this regard were
two nonreactionary groups -Democratic foreign-policy conservatives like Senator
Henry M. Jackson and Republican conservatives like Henry Kissinger and Richard
Nixon.

This temporary alliance of conservatives and the far right in 1980 did little to
reduce the suspicion with which the latter regarded the former. The restrained
policies of the center-right were no answer in the far right's eyes; they were,
in fact, only marginal improvements over the ideas of the liberals of the Carter
Administration and their siblings on the left. The far right felt that
conservative Republican Presidents like Nixon and Gerald R.  Ford, and their
conservative Secretary of State from Harvard, had dulled the edge of
anti-Communism with trade and arms-control agreements with the Soviet Union and
with rhetoric about a ''generation of peace''; had begun the process of moving
toward Communist China and away from Taiwan; had spoken of nuclear war, in
''liberal'' terms, as unwinnable, thus giving away the West's major trump card;
and, in their search for an accommodation with the Russians, had begun to
abandon fundamental Western values. All these trends the far right considered at
best the product of wishful thinking, at worst a betrayal of American interests.

These differences were submerged briefly during the 1980 campaign.  But once
Reagan was in office, it was inevitable that the nastiest battles within the
Administration would be between traditional conservatives and the far right,
tasting power for the very first time.

Of course, to the dismay of many early Reagan supporters on the far right,
Reagan the President has not always behaved as promised by Reagan the candidate.
Like all his predecessors, he has found the management of foreign policy quite
different from making speeches about it. His reflexive rigidities have moderated
somewhat in practice. In Winston Churchill's phrase about the responsibilities
of office, he has been ''softened in royal jelly.'' Secretary of State George P.
Shultz's calming style has added another moderating influence. Nonetheless,
movement toward the center has been erratic and reluctant, fought over
internally every step of the way.

The ferocity of this struggle within the right-of-center family during a
Republican Administration mirrors, in a way, the conflicts between liberals and
the left during the Carter years. Those conflicts were made even more complex by
the fact that a conservative point of view, as well as liberal and leftist ones,
had spokesmen within the high councils of the Carter Administration.
Unfortunately, the President often tried to incorporate all three elements into
a single policy, thus confusing people as to his real position and causing him
to appear not so much well-balanced as vacillating, not so much wise as weak.

Once the party of a positive, internationalist foreign policy, the party that
had led the nation to meet its world responsibilities, the Democrats by 1980 had
become identified with indecision, retreat and apology. In the eyes of most of
those who participated in the last two Democratic Administrations, this picture
is not justified by the record of those years. But the fact remains that the
final year of each of the last two Democratic Administrations -1968 and 1980 -
was one in which the nation seemed to stumble badly, leadership seemed
beleaguered, and the voters rejected the Democrats as a result.

This is the legacy that the Democratic Party, notably its liberal core, must
dispel before it presents itself to the voters in 1984.  Can it be done? What,
in the post-post-Vietnam era, should the Democratic foreign policy look like?
There are many hopeful signs. Although the far left still carries a weight
within the Democratic Party that substantially exceeds its importance in the
electorate, the shadow of Vietnam is losing its authority over other
foreign-policy issues. While it retains its cautionary power - vividly felt by
both Republicans and Democrats as the Reagan Administration seems to edge toward
military intervention in Central America - Vietnam's legacy is evolving into
what it should be, a grievous lesson to be remembered, not a crippling wound
that disables thought and action. Thus, those in the Democratic center -
liberals in the tradition that began with Woodrow Wilson and that was elaborated
under modern conditions by Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, John Kennedy
and Lyndon Johnson - can begin to think afresh about America's appropriate task
in world affairs.

They can begin with a reaffirmation: The United States is not a pariah, as the
far left would have it, an insensate brute whose aggressive instincts must be
controlled for the sake of world peace.  It is an imperfect but free democracy.
Its military power, though no longer virtually omnipotent, is the most important
bulwark of freedom for the nontotalitarian world. If it erred in Vietnam, that
error does not make legitimate efforts to resist aggression any less essential.
As the strongest free nation, the United States must shoulder the main burden of
leadership for the non-Communist world.  Yet it must also be ready to adjust to
its allies' exigent needs.

The Reagan Administration has strained America's relations with most of its key
European allies and with Japan without compensating benefit to ourselves. By
proclaiming unilateral American positions, inadequately coordinated with our
European friends, on such issues as trade with the Soviet Union, the
Administration has worked against its own stated objective of strengthening the
Western alliance, and ultimately it has had to back down. Nothing was achieved
but to annoy the other alliance members, give them every reason to doubt
American sensitivity to their problems, and - as new American grain trade
agreements with Russia were announced - provoke harsh comments about American
hypocrisy.

Reagan is not the first President to weaken vital alliance relationships while
proclaiming their importance; it happened in the last Democratic Administration
as well. The Democrats, next time around, must do better.

On China, the Democrats once followed in Nixon's footsteps, expanding on his
historic achievement. But now that the Administration has all but abdicated on
the issue, Democratic leadership is needed to rebuild the momentum of
Sino-American relations. For despite the efforts of the former Secretary of
State, Alexander M. Haig Jr., to prevent a major crisis, and Secretary Shultz's
attempt at repair during his February 1983 trip to Peking, the historic progress
made under three Presidents - two of them Republican - from 1971 to 1981 has
been halted by an extraordinarily inept performance on the part of an
Administration deeply divided over the value of Sino-American relations.

In spite of the endeavors of out-of-office conservatives like Nixon, Kissinger
and the former Defense Secretary James Schlesinger, the relationship with China
was almost wrecked by the Administration's sentimental and nostalgic desire to
''do something'' for Taiwan. A skillfully crafted joint communique in August
1982 averted the worst, but the immense strategic and political value of the
Chinese connection has been greatly diminished. The Chinese have begun talking
to Moscow again, with a new tone if not yet a new policy, and the American
advantage in the triangular diplomacy between Moscow, Peking and Washington -
perhaps Nixon's and Kissinger's greatest legacy to their successors -has been
needlessly threatened.

Here, clearly, is an area where the Democrats should articulate and support the
centrist position advanced by leaders of both parties in the 1970's. Taiwan's
legitimate concerns for its own security, prosperity and stability can be
protected, as they were in the Carter years, without undoing the historic
achievements of the last decade. Democrats should identify themselves
unambiguously in favor of resuming the path of progress in Sino-American
relations.

Above all, Democrats must deal wisely with the problem that has been central to
our foreign policy since 1945 -relations with the Kremlin.

The Reagan Administration approached the Soviet Union as it did China and Europe
- divided by a bitter internal battle between the moderates, supported by the
career bureaucracy, and the ideologues of the right. Containment, in one form or
another, had been the strategic hallmark of Presidents since the late 1940's;
Reagan's men have ricocheted between thoughts of ''rolling back'' the Russian
Empire (it has not been made clear how) and of continuity with the past. There
has been the same dichotomy on arms control, and here, too, the Reagan
Administration's policies have been marked by confusion and internal dissension.

Watching the Russian threat since 1947, Americans have experienced swings from
unrealistic euphoria and hope (notably in 1972) to wildly irrational, almost
paranoid fear. Yet throughout this long period only three men - Joseph Stalin,
Nikita S. Khrushchev and Leonid I.  Brezhnev - led the Soviet Union, and despite
their differences as men and as rulers, they were consistent in their basic
foreign-policy objectives. There may be some adjustments in Soviet policy under
Yuri V. Andropov, but United States-Soviet relations are destined to continue
for the rest of this century in that gray middle range between a true relaxation
of tensions and war.

Though it was a Democratic President - Harry Truman - who drew the line against
Soviet expansion, the Democrats have conveyed an uncertain message in recent
years. As with China, the spectacular Nixon-Kissinger diplomacy toward Russia
left liberal Democrats with little choice but to support ''detente.''
Thereafter, an assault on ''business as usual'' with the Russians was led by
Senator Jackson and other conservative Democrats in 1976. Though aimed at
Kissinger, the assault came to be targeted, by the late 1970's, on those in the
Democratic Party, like Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, who shared Kissinger's
hopes for detente. And the far right, by then, was at the forefront of the
attack.

The Soviet Union is a dangerous and opportunistic adversary, especially in the
third world, where it can often be the beneficiary of local unrest. When
Democrats have been perceived as ''weak'' on the Soviet issue, they have
suffered politically. Yet they should not try simply to emulate Ronald Reagan's
rhetorical flourishes and swollen defense budgets. To deserve and win public
support, Democrats must find spokesmen who are credible in their desire both to
strengthen our national defense and to conduct a serious search for ways to
reduce tensions with the Russians. This process ought to include, in addition to
arms-control negotiations, cultural and political exchanges that, despite their
frustrations, can improve the climate between the two superpowers.  Let us touch
briefly on three other critical issues on which a moderate, centrist position
can be established and sustained.  First, the Middle East. Perhaps because it is
the most explosive issue in the world today, perhaps because of the special
weight that domestic American politics places on anything related to Israel, the
Middle East is, paradoxically, the area where the greatest degree of consensus
already exists within the Democratic Party. But there is a growing tendency
among some on the left, angered by the present Israeli Government, to turn
against Israel itself, even to equate Israel with various repressive rightist
regimes. This is matched by some on the far right whose longstanding preference
for oil-rich Arab states has always formed a hard knot of anti-Israeli
sentiment.

Both extremist tendencies are dangerous. Israel, for all its faults, is still a
unique historic responsibility for the United States, and still strategically
important, and we do ourselves no good when we weaken Israel by comparing it
with countries whose values are antidemocratic and who seek to destroy it.
American policies cannot be dictated by Jerusalem, and Israel must take our
concerns into account in its actions, but United States policy must not be built
on pillars that sound ominously pro-Palestinian or anti-Israeli. Democratic
policy should build on the Camp David agreements and on elements of President
Reagan's recent proposals -firmly urging an Israeli response that would meet the
legitimate needs and aspirations of the Palestinian people, while just as firmly
insisting that the Arab states accept Israel's right to exist within secure
borders.

Second, Central America. This, in our view, will be the most difficult area in
which to establish a successful centrist consensus. The area is of clear
strategic and political importance to the United States, but the debate over
policy is bound to be extremely complicated. It is tempting to deny military aid
to unsavory regimes like the ones now in power in El Salvador and Guatemala on
the basis of the human-rights provisions in United States law, given the
inexcusable and repulsive bloodletting by rightist military elements. Every
ounce of leverage available to the United States must be used to stop these
grotesque and obscene abuses.

Yet to stop American aid would be to deliver - yes, deliver - El Salvador into
the hands of a guerrilla movement that is divided internally, allied externally
with America's adversaries, and capable itself of the greatest brutality. Here
the cautionary lessons of Vietnam apply both ways - and leave Americans with a
tortuous dilemma. The situation is unclear, but abandonment is an option the
Democrats should reject. Instead, they should be prepared to look for
alternatives to the stark choices now facing Central America. In the meantime,
they should encourage sustained support for those forces within the region that
seek to build or maintain progressive governments, for whom popular support will
be the best defense against terrorism on the left and the right.

Finally, that most abstract - and hence the most emotional - of all issues,
human rights. To many conservatives, it is a vacuous manifestation of
mushy-headed liberalism, irrelevant to strategic concerns. To the far right, it
is a rhetorical weapon to be used against Communist and other left-wing
governments. To the left, it is a justification for pressure against right-wing
regimes.  Democratic policy should reject all these simple-minded formulas.
Contrary to the dismissive Realpolitik attitudes of conservatives like Nixon and
Kissinger, human rights is an essential part of a hardheaded foreign policy. It
is in our interests to stand internationally for the values that define us at
home. At the same time, we cannot ignore areas where, despite the abhorrent
nature of the Soviet regime and its allies, we can reach agreements in our own
interests and in the interests of reduced tensions worldwide: The far right's
citing of human-rights abuses within the Soviet bloc is often no more than a
pretext to avoid a genuine search for solutions.

On the far left, on the other hand, there are those who, in their zeal to atone
for real or imagined transgressions, seek to replace one form of American
intervention with another. They would have no agreements with nations that do
not follow the free electoral and judicial systems that are the glory of the
West; they acknowledge virtually no need to temper criticism of such nations in
order to obtain practical strategic advantages from dealing with them. In so
doing, they would willingly jeopardize America's perceived security interests
when these conflict with liberal principles.

The one vivid exception to this purist view involves relations with the Soviet
Union and its Cuban ally - an exception that is probably grounded as much on the
dim prospects of affecting their behavior as on the need to preserve the peace
with our nuclear adversary. On the rest - authoritarian or merely insensitive to
the rights of internal dissidents - the far left would impose its own standards
or condemn them to outer darkness.

This is a key question on which true liberalism must define itself. The
uniqueness of what the sociologist Daniel Bell has called ''American
exceptionalism'' must not be betrayed overseas, lest it weaken and destroy us at
home. The protection of human rights abroad must remain an integral part of our
foreign policy, but not its sole object. It is one - though only one - of the
ingredients of a foreign policy based on national interest. We should never be
reluctant to pursue and promote our values.  To restore a strong Democratic
voice will require of both liberal and conservative Democrats a willingness to
suspend the personal bickering, animosity and distrust that has divided their
party since the Vietnam War. It will require recognition on the part of both
camps that they have much more in common with one another than they do with the
far left and the far right. Both centrist groups must abandon some positions
they have been sharing with their more extreme neighbors.

This will require a firm and forthright rejection by the liberals of the
apologetic politics of the far left. Many of the far left's values and positions
were born of an understandable and very American desire to redress old mistakes,
but their underlying tone of anti-Americanism is neither justified nor
politically acceptable.  Americans, who for four decades have provided the human
and material resources to resist aggression and to help sick economies the world
over, will not and should not go hat in hand to the rest of the world,
apologizing for their country.  Those on the center-left who care about making
American foreign policy an effective reflection of what the nation stands for at
home should recognize that justice is not incompatible with strength. Nor is
patriotism a monopoly of the right. It is not necessary to become jingoistic or
respond to every criticism of American actions abroad with defensive anger. What
is necessary is that the foreign-policy debate be based on an acceptance of the
fundamental integrity of America's purposes in world affairs.

Those on the center-right who seek to build a coherent and successful foreign
policy should recognize that opposition to the Vietnam War was not synonymous
with treason; that advocates of arms control or of the nuclear freeze are not
being manipulated by the Soviet Union; and that talking to the Russians about
our potentially explosive differences, and making agreements with them, is not
evidence of weakness.

The rebuilding of the center also requires of those disillusioned liberals who
turned left in the 1960's and 1970's a recognition that a stable world needs a
proper degree of American military commitment and presence. And it requires of
other former liberals, who turned right, an acknowledgment that their goals can
be achieved in the moderate center, that it is not necessary to embrace a
confrontational policy in order to preserve the free world's security.

We seek a reborn liberalism, sobered but not enervated by the lessons of
Vietnam, mindful of the damage caused to the Democratic Party in the 1970's by
the perceived weakness of its leadership. We seek a consensus of men and women
of the center that calls for an adequate defense budget and serious negotiations
with the Russians, thus rejecting both the far left's opposition to an adequate
defense and the far right's opposition to negotiations. We seek a renewed search
for a foreign policy that would be true to our human values and principles
without trying to reshape the world in our image.

If this kind of policy seems familiar to readers over a certain age, it should.
It is, with updating, in the tradition of centrist Presidents since World War
II. To some it may seem unexciting, lacking, for example, new ideas for ending
the confrontation with Russia. But that confrontation cannot be wished or willed
away by a unilateral retirement from the field or by a high-risk assault on the
Soviet system; it is with us for the foreseeable future, and we must accept the
burdens it imposes.

Those of an apocalyptic bent, impatient with the ambiguities and pace of
history, may wish for something more dramatic or definitive.  They may see this
middle-road policy - if they view it from the far left - as an instrument of
generals, bankers and corporate executives. If they view it from the far right,
they may regard it as a call for more striped-pants muddling through, more
compromise with profane causes and notions. From the vantage point of both
extremes, the centrists could be charged with having blundered once, in Vietnam,
to tragic effect, or with having failed, on other occasions, to respond with
either sufficient magnanimity or sufficient firmness to global challenges.

But past shortcomings do not automatically condemn the objectives and motives of
a strategy that, with its commitment to deterrence, has had more successes than
failures, has prevented a world war for almost 40 years, and has assured the
freedom and prosperity of nations from Western Europe to Japan. It is the
strategy best fitted to serve both American interests and the cause of world
peace.

Liberalism may have become a tainted word for some when it was appropriated and
redefined by the New Left during the Vietnam War and attached to policies that
seemed defeatist and self-flagellating. And the term conservative may have been
appropriated by some highly unconservative groups advocating extreme policies
quite inconsistent with classic balance-of-power conservative strategy. Yet,
precisely because the rise of the far right has mirrored the earlier rise of the
far left, there is a need and opportunity for the center, if it can shake the
legacies and poisons of the last 15 years. Now is the time for genuine liberals
- joined, we hope, by genuine conservatives - to regain their bearings and
self-confidence, define what they stand for, and reassert their claim to the
responsible center in American foreign policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of American soldiers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

VIETNAM'S TROOPS SAID TO THROW GRENADES AT CAMBODIAN CIVILIANS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1748 words

DATELINE: KAP CHOEUN, Thailand, April 10


Vietnamese soldiers herded Cambodian civilians into bunkers last week and threw
hand grenades at them, according to Cambodians who said they had been victims or
witnesses of such attacks.

These statements, made in interviews today by 13 Cambodian civilians at a Red
Cross hospital near this border town, were the first accounts supporting recent
charges by a Cambodian insurgent leader that Vietnamese troops had deliberately
attacked civilians in their drive against rebel forces near the Thai-Cambodian
frontier.

The civilians said the grenade attacks took place over three days, beginning
April 3, at O Smach, a camp on the Cambodian side of the border. That was the
day the Vietnamese fought their way into the camp; they completed its capture on
April 4.

No Figures on the Dead

Those interviewed did not give figures on the total number of civilians killed
but said most of the victims they knew about had survived. The insurgent leader
said last week that ''several hundreds'' had been killed.

Six of the civilians interviewed said they themselves had been victims of
grenade attacks. The seven others said they had witnessed such attacks or had
helped pull survivors out of rubble, or had heard of the incidents from others
while still in the O Smach area.

Five hospitalized Cambodian civilians - two of them women and three children -
said in interviews today that they were wounded in one of the bunkers by grenade
blasts on April 3.

With them was a 3-year-old boy, whose left eye and much of his body were covered
with bandages. The civilians said the child, who could not speak, had lost the
sight of his left eye in the grenade blasts.  The boy's father, who was also in
the hospital, said he had been in the bunker but had not been wounded.

The bunker attacks were said to have taken place in three different parts of the
camp and at several different times of day during the three-day period.

The civilians said the uniformed Vietnamese soldiers who had herded civilians
into bunkers numbered as few as three or four at some places and as many as
seven at others. They said the groups of Cambodians instructed to enter the
bunkers were as small as 3 to 5, and as large as 19.

Son Sann, a leader of an anti-Vietnamese Cambodian insurgent coalition, visited
the hospital near here last week and charged afterward that Vietnamese troops
had massacred ''several hundreds'' of civilians, mostly women and children, in
capturing O Smach, also known as Sihanoukville. The camp was the military
headquarters of insurgent forces loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former
Cambodian chief of state.

Mr. Son Sann made his charges on Friday in a speech to Cambodian refugees at
Khao I Dang, Thailand's holding center 20 miles north of the Thai border town of
Aranyaprathet. He said Vietnamese soldiers had pushed the victims into trenches
and then ''threw hand grenades in there and finished them off with bayonets.''

While those interviewed today also spoke of grenade attacks, they made no
mention of bayonets.

Other Patients Saw No Attacks

Three other patients who were wounded during the fighting at O Smach said they
had been serving as soldiers in the forest outside the camp when they were
wounded and had seen no such attacks as those described by people inside the
camps.

Two other patients at the hospital who were wounded at O Smach were unconscious
and could not be interviewed. The medical charts of most of the remainder of the
hospital's total of 66 patients indicated that they had been admitted before the
Vietnamese attack.

Nearly all the people seen in the bunkers were women and children, witnesses
said.  Doctors working for the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other Western staff members at the hospital expressed surprise and concern at
the patients' statements today. The Red Cross workers said also that their main
concern since the Vietnamese attack on O Smach had been to care for the wounded,
and that none of the patients had been interviewed by them at length.

They added that, as far as they knew, the only other Cambodians to have visited
the hospital were in a group last Thursday headed by Mr. Son Sann. They said
there had also been some brief visits by Thai army officers.

No Contact With Other Reporters

The hospital's director, Pierre Pont, said that no other reporters had spoken to
the patients and that, as far as he knew, no intelligence officers of any
nationality had spoken with them either.

Every patient interviewed today was asked if he or she had discussed the grenade
attacks with any visitor or hospital staff member. All replied that they had not
talked about the attacks with anyone. They said they had not spoken with Mr. Son
Sann.

Before last week, the population of O Smach was estimated by the United Nations
border relief operation and other groups at about 30,000 Cambodians. Most of
them were civilians.

The camp's soldiers, who were estimated by Western embassy sources in Bangkok at
more than 1,000 and possibly several times as many, were loyal to Prince
Sihanouk, now president of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea,
which is recognized by the United Nations as the Government of Cambodia. Vietnam
supports the Government of Heng Samrin, installed in Phnom Penh after the
Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1978.

Thai officials have not allowed reporters to visit the Nong An camp where 23,000
refugees from O Smach have settled. None of them, therefore, has been
interviewed by journalists about the details of the Vietnamese attack.

About 5,000 other refugees from O Smach are said by international relief
officials to have moved away from the overrun base and to have settled at a
place called Tatum, just south of Nong An and across the border in Cambodia.

Survivor Recalls Attack

At the hospital run by the International Red Cross north of Kap Choeun, Ngach
Mov, who is 34 years old and originally from Ratanakiri Province in northeastern
Cambodia, said that he had been herded with his family into a bunker in the
western part of O Smach on the morning of April 3.

He said 19 Cambodians were in the bunker, nearly all of them women and children,
when the Vietnamese threw two hand grenades inside.  His wife, Sok Nang, 31
years old, said that no one was killed by the explosions. Several other victims
of the attack, she said, were later brought to the hospital with them, and had
already been treated and discharged.

She added when questioned that she had seen no other Cambodians ordered into
bunkers and subjected to grenade attacks either before or after her own family's
ordeal.

There were about 10 Vietnamese soldiers in the group that ordered them into the
bunker, Mrs. Sok Nang said. They carried rifles but did not fire into the
bunker. The incident took place at about 9 A.M., she said.

Her husband sat on a nearby hospital bed with their 3-year-old boy, Mov Soka,
while she was interviewed.

Two Girls Tell Similar Stories

Two girls with the couple - their daughter Van Pen, aged 12, and a relative
named Lok Ngoeut, aged 11 - were with them in the bunker and were also wounded.
Both girls told stories like Mr. Ngach Mov's and his wife's.

Lok Ngoeut said a grenade fragment had been removed from her side under her
right arm. Van Pen was wounded in the left elbow. The mother of the family was
wounded in many places.

Another of their daughters who was at O Smach - Mora, aged 7 - is missing, Mr.
Ngach Mov said.  He said he and his family had lived at O Smach since November
1982 after moving there from the Khao I Dang refugee camp in Thailand.  The
interview was conducted through an interpreter provided by the hospital's
Western staff.  Across the hospital aisle from Mr. Ngach Mov's family, a
26-yearold Cambodian named Tuan Kuong told how he had helped dig the family and
other wounded out of their blasted bunker.

Helped Victims Out of Bunker

He did not see the bunker filled with people and attacked with grenades, he
said, but he helped the victims out soon afterward, and they told him their
stories.

Mr. Tuan Kuong said that he himself had been wounded by a shell explosion the
following day, April 4. He was wounded on his left shoulder, right bicep and
right leg. He said he had moved to O Smach in 1980 and had been a soldier in the
camp. Mr. Ngach Mov said he had not been a soldier.

In another ward, a 10-year-old boy named Kong Loeun, who was admitted April 3,
said that about 10 Vietnamese soldiers had told 8 to 10 Cambodians to get into a
bunker in the middle of the camp.

The soldiers then threw in a hand grenade, which severely injured his feet,
right elbow and abdomen, the boy said. His mother and father, also in the
bunker, were unhurt, he said, and no one with him was killed.

The hospital's director, Mr. Pont, who listened in on the interview with Kong
Loeun, commented that he found it hard to imagine that the boy's story had been
fabricated.

Mr. Pont had said earlier that he strongly doubted that Mr. Son Sann's charges
concerning grenade attacks on civilians were true of any of his hospital's
patients. But Mr. Pont said later, when questioned, that none of his patients
had been interviewed about the precise circumstances of their wounds.

Many Steel Fragments Removed

A Western doctor at the hospital said he had removed many steel fragments from
the hospital's patients, but in the press of surgery had not identified the
fragments as coming from one or another patient.

One of the patients, Klord Ang, aged 24, said she was wounded April 5 and
brought to the hospital the same day. She said she and some others had been in a
bunker in the middle of the camp when the Vietnamese arrived. She said the
attackers sent other Cambodians, including eight children and some women, to
join them from a nearby bunker before they tossed grenades in. Six people were
wounded in her bunker, she said, but no one was killed.

A 26-year-old soldier named Noen Chin, from Kompong Cham Province, said he had
seen 50 to 60 people sent into bunkers and attacked with grenades. He said in
reply to questions that he had looked inside four or five bunkers and seen five
or six dead people. Mr. Noen Chin said he was wounded April 4 by a mortar shell.

Red Cross officials at the hospital said they had often heard their patients say
they had been wounded by hand grenades. But in some cases the hospital staff had
written down ''shell'' or ''rocket'' on the patients' charts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 5, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article April 11 on the wounding of Cambodian civilians incorrectly
attributed several statements to Pierre Pont, a representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross at a Cambodian hospital. The statements
were made by another member of the hospital's staff.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

China Accuses Vietnamese Of Increasing Border Attacks

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 10


China accused Vietnam today of increasing incursions and provocations along
their common border and warned the Hanoi Government it would suffer ''grave
consequences'' if the incidents continued.

The Chinese also accused the Vietnamese of killing or wounding 14 Chinese in
border attacks in March.  The protest, handed to the Vietnamese Embassy. said,
''The Chinese Government today warned the Vietnamese authorities that if they
let the trend of armed provocations against China's border continue to develop,
they must be held responsible for the grave consequences.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, APRIL 11, 1983

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 846 words


International

Jordan said it would not participate in the American-sponsored Middle East peace
talks on the basis of the Reagan plan. Jordan accused Yasir Arafat, chairman of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, of backing out of a draft agreement that
he and King Hussein reached last week. The draft accord, a Cabinet statement
said, might have enabled Jordan to take part in American-sponsored peace talks.
(Page A1, Column 6.)

Peace in the Middle East will still be pursued through President Reagan's
inititative, Mr. Reagan said, despite the apparent refusal of Jordan to join any
negotiations. Jordan's unwillingness to participate was ''an impediment,'' Mr.
Reagan said, but he was ''very hopeful'' that progress could still be made. He
said that his telephone conversations with King Hussein and King Fahd of Saudi
Arabia indicated that they had not abandoned peace efforts. Mr.  Reagan said
that the latest problem in the negotiations was the fault of ''radical
elements'' in the P.L.O. (A1:4.)

Israel officials were undisturbed by Jordan's announcement that it would not
enter neogitations with Israel on the future of the West Bank. They said that
they had never expected King Hussein to participate in the talks and that he had
effectively killed the Reagan peace plan. (A13:1.)

A gunman killed a Palestinian envoy who was attending a meeting of the Socialist
International in Albufeira, Portugal. The killer escaped. The envoy, Dr. Issam
Sartawi was a roving envoy for the P.L.O. who advocated recognition of Israel.
He frequently advised Yasir Arafat. (A1:5.)

Cambodian civilians described a Vietnamese attack on them. Two women and three
children in a Red Cross hospital on the Thailand side of the border with
Cambodia said they had been wounded by Vietnamese soldiers who herded them into
a bunker and then tossed in hand grenades. (A1:2.)

A meeting on Central America and its conflicts has been postponed indefinitely
by Latin American nations, diplomats in Mexico City said, because of doubts that
the meeting would serve any useful purpose. (A1:3.)

National

The homes of 25,000 people were in danger near Slidell, La., a suburb of New
Orleans, Civil Defense officials warned, as the Pearl River, swollen by days of
rain, rose above the record level set in a ''100-year flood'' of 1979. Some
streets were under 15 feet of water and officials said the worst was to come.
The Pearl River was expected to crest at about 22 feet, twice the flood stage, a
civil defense spokesman said. (A14:1.)

Opposition to double-trailer trucks on Federal Highways in several Southern and
Western states has surprised Reagan Administration officials. Georgia, Alabama,
Idaho and California have joined Northeastern states in protesting that Federal
highway officials ignored their recommendations and permitted the double-trailer
rigs on many roads that cannot accommodate them. (A14:1.)

Higher taxes for school improvement would seem to be accepted by most Americans,
according to a national poll. By large majorities, the poll found that the
public was convinced that the schools needed more emphasis on science and
mathematics, and on developing job skills. (A18:1.)

One of the country's major papers is USA Today, which six months after its
initial run in September has become the sixth largest selling newspaper. More
than 800,000 copies of the paper, described by its publisher, the Gannett
Company, as ''the nation's newspaper,'' were sold last month in 14 metropolitan
areas. (A20:1.)

Chicago's Hispanic vote in tomorrow's mayoral election has taken on added
significance because of the deep division between whites and blacks. (B8:3.)

Metropolitan

Losses of teachers will be curtailed in New York City because the Board of
Education will get as much as $150 million more than it had expected for the
next school year, Deputy Mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr.  said. He made the statement
the day after his election as Schools Chancellor by the Board of Education. He
said the allocation of the money to the schools was unrelated to his election.
(A1:1.)

No successor at City Hall to Deputy Mayor Wagner is planned by Mayor Koch. Mr.
Koch said Mr. Wagner's duties would be divided between the two remaining
deputies, Nathan Leventhal and Kenneth Lipper. The Mayor began his
administration with seven deputies. (B4:5.)

Connecticut Indians lost a chance to reclaim part of a reservation that was sold
by the state in the mid-1800's. President Reagan vetoed a bill that would have
provided $900,000 to buy 800 acres of the old reservation. The President said
the price was too high and Connecticut's contribution too low. The original
reservation was established for the Mashantucket Pequots, who once dominated the
New London area. (A1:1.)

Efforts to end the Metro-North strike were resumed by the union and the commuter
railroad's management in the longest negotiating session since the strike began
five weeks ago. The mediator said that the meeting was constructive, but that
there was no ''breakthrough.'' (B3:5.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REP. PHILLIP BURTON, DEMOCRATIC LIBERAL, DIES ON VISIT TO CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 10


Representative Phillip Burton, an important figure among Democratic liberals in
the House of Representatives, died here early today a few hours after being
stricken in his hotel room on a visit to his Congressional district.  He was 56
years old.

Boyd Stephens, the San Francisco Coroner, said Mr. Burton was pronounced dead at
St. Francis Hospital at 1:44 A.M. today. The coroner said Mr. Burton had
complained of chest pains and collapsed just after midnight at the Sir Francis
Drake Hotel, his home when he was in the district. An autopsy will be conducted
Monday.

As a member, a one-time chairman and a driving force behind the House Democratic
Study Group, Mr. Burton in his two decades in Washington led agitation for rules
changes that brought greater influence to younger members while diminishing the
power of committee chairmen, who were generally more conservative than Mr.
Burton.

Soon after arriving in the House as winner of a special election here on Feb.
18, 1964, he began to attack the House Un-American Activities Committee, and
then to oppose the Vietnam War. He became recognized as an expert on welfare
legislation. He pushed through creation of the Redwood National Park along the
Northern California coast, and of the Golden Gate Recreational District
stretching along both sides of the entrance to San Francisco Bay.

'A Caring Man,' Mondale Says

Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale said today that Mr. Burton was ''a warm
and caring man, a gifted servant of the people of California, a fighter for
social justice, and a national leader in the Congress.''

Mr. Burton reached the peak of his formal power in the House in 1976 when by one
vote he lost a race for majority leader to Representative Jim Wright of Texas.
Some House members had expected Mr. Burton to again challenge Mr. Wright, this
time for the post of Speaker, should the current Speaker, Representative Thomas
P. O'Neill Jr. of Massachusetts, retire.

Probably the truest description of Mr. Burton's politics was his four-word
definition of himself delivered after winning his House seat when he was 37
years old: ''I'm a fighting liberal.''

He was elected to the California Assembly in 1956 when he was 30, the youngest
member then of the Legislature. In his years in Sacramento, as he was later to
do in Washington, he became known as a deal maker, a good friend, a bad enemy.
After his election to the House, he said he expected then-Assembly Speaker Jesse
M. Unruh would be glad to see him go.

In Washington, Mr. Burton was helpful to many new Democratic House members.
''He was a political godfather to a lot of us,'' Representative Tony Coehlo,
Democrat of California, said after learning of Mr.  Burton's death. Another
California Democrat, Representative George Miller, said, ''He was like a father
to me,'' .

'A Young Curmudgeon'

When a House vote approached on an issue that had his interest, he worked the
House floor for votes like a bird dog nosing out quail.  He made arrangements
that were surprising, such as getting the Conservative Wayne L. Hays of Ohio to
support him for House Democratic Caucus chairman in 1974.

''A young curmudgeon,'' a reluctant admirer called him after he became caucus
chairman. He was a tall, heavy-bodied man, who leaned forward impatiently in his
rumpled suit as he hurried along; a chain smoker with seemingly endless energy,
Mr. Burton's intensity sometimes made others uncomfortable. A Sacramento
political writer once said everyone opposed Mr. Burton but the voters.

His strength in his Fifth Congressional District got its sternest test last year
when the Republican party fielded its top San Francisco vote-getter, State
Senator Milton Marks, against him.  Although his personal prestige was at its
lowest ebb because of criticism of a state redistricting that he ramrodded, Mr.
Burton defeated Mr. Marks 58 percent to 40 percent.

Mr. Burton was high on the list of Democratic House members that the Republican
party wanted to beat. The reason was the Burton redistricting plan for the
California delegation, the House's largest. Those district lines let Democrats
win 28 seats to 17 for Republicans, as against a Democratic edge of 22-21 in a
smaller delegation the previous election. ''My contribution to modern art,'' Mr.
Burton once said of the reapportionment. A new districting bill is in the works,
but the new Democrats will now be running as incumbents.

A District for His Brother

One aspect of the Burton redistricting that caused eyebrows to rise was the
creation of the serpentine Sixth District for his brother, John, who had
squeaked by with 51 percent of the vote in 1980. The new John Burton district
ran through parts of four counties to expand the Democratic registration
majority. A San Francisco Examiner editorial was titled ''Burton: The Arrogance
of Power.''

In a decision vastly disappointing to Phillip Burton, John Burton decided not to
run for re-election last year. Democrats carried the district anyway.

Gov. George Deukmejian, a Republican, will call a special election to fill the
vacancy. Thanks to its late incumbent's redistricting plan, the Fifth District,
covering the western two-thirds of San Francisco, is 62 per cent Democratic.
Under the nonpartisan labels they wear in local elections, most San Francisco
officials are Democrats and a stampede to succeed Mr. Burton will likely begin
after his funeral.

Phillip Burton was born in Cincinnati, June 1, 1926, the son of a physician. He
graduated from high school here, and from the University of Southern California
in Los Angeles. He earned a law degree from Golden Gate Law School here. He was
a veteran of World War II and the Korean War. He is survived by his wife, Sala,
and a daughter, Joy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Phillip Burton

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 605 words


Go-it-alone Quebecois find allies in the Walloons A2
Brazilian says foes of liberalization were behind riots A3
U.S. sees Latin talks as best route to peace A3
Around the World A4
Glemp leads mass honoring Jewish fighters of Warsaw Ghetto A6
China accuses Vietnam of stepping up raids across border A8
Anti-P.L.O. faction says it killed Palestinian in Portugal A11
Text of Jordan statement on refusing to join peace plan A12

Government/Politics
A trucker demonstrates a double- trailer rig A14
New York Legislature to face key issues as it reconvenes B1

Washington Talk
Congress: Heavy weather for Republicans facing re-election A16
A museum whose building is the star of the collection A16
The Calendar A16
Briefing A16

Energy
Investigation cites partial failures of six nuclear reactors B2

General
Around the Nation A14
United States and Britain compared at forum in Boston A18
New York City area endures sixth straight sodden weekend B1
Colleges finding financial benefit in campus video-game arcades B1
Gov. Cuomo denounces oil companies and real estate interests B2
Sportswear puts New York on the world fashion map B3
N.J. Transit riders slow in returning to trains after strike B3
Defendant is relaxed as appeal is made in Stouffer's fire B3

SportsMonday
Baseball: How the Yankees' payroll breaks down C1

Yanks' Rawley stops Blue Jays, 3-0 C4

Mets send Rajsich to minors and add Bradley C4

Pirates rally to top Astros and remain unbeaten C5

Rangers, down by 7-0, defeat Red Sox, 9-7 C5
Basketball: 76ers set back Knicks' playoff hopes, 113-97 C6
All-star games a test for high school players C9
Boxing: Frazier outpoints Broad in heavyweight bout C6
Columns: Dave Anderson on ''agonizing with Arnie'' C7

George Vecsey on the bicycle races in Washington C3
Features: Sports World Specials C2

Question Box C9
Football: Generals lose 5th game; Walker gains 184 yards C8
Golf: Stadler and Floyd share Masters' lead by a stroke C1

Miss Lopez wins second straight at Las Vegas C7
Hockey: Islanders beat Capitals, 6-3, and win series, 3-1 C1

Rangers satisfied about eliminating rowdy Flyers C6

Bruins, Stars, Flames and Black Hawks oust playoff foes C6
Horse Racing: Marfa wins Santa Anita Derby by 3 lengths C3
Outdoors: The joys of surf fishing C9
Tennis: Miss Navratilova wins final, extends streak to 32 C2

Health/Science
NASA officials find Challenger in ''clean'' condition A17

Arts/Entertainment
''Elba,'' with James Whitmore, at Manhattan Theater Club C20
Bruce Adolphe's ''False Messiah'' at the 92d Street Y C21
Asian Dance Theater and Lyric Dance Ensemble perform C22
''The Other Man,'' reviewed C23
''Colette Collage'' by Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt C23
Lester M. Crystal talks of plans for ''MacNeil-Lehrer Report'' C24
CBS program on private lives versus a public press C24
Wagner's ''Siegfried,'' a capitalist-worker version, on PBS C25

Style
Relationships 22
Stranger's stare: Baleful or Beckoning A22
The special relationship of women and their mentors A22

Obituaries
Rep. Phillip Burton, a leading Democratic liberal B6

Features/Notes
New York Day by Day B3
Going Out Guide C20

News Analysis
Thomas L. Friedman on the killing of a top P.L.O. moderate A10

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A24

Losing on defense Build on the P.A.'s success Guilty as not charged Topics: Hot
dogs, hot snakes Letters A24
William Safire: Ozymandias O'Neill A25
Flora Lewis: Warning - danger in space A25
Li Jianguo and Zhang Xiaoying: Infanticide in China A25
Daniel Callahan: Supporting parents A25

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


THE OTHER MAN. Conversations with Graham Greene. By Marie-Fran,coise Allain.
Translated from the French by Guido Waldman. 176 pages. Simon and Schuster.
$13.95.
ASKED why he continues to write, Graham Greene gives a reply that makes him
sound very much like one of his own afflicted heroes: ''A neurosis brought on by
habit rather than by despair, an irresistible urge to pinch the abscess which
grows periodically in order to squeeze out all the pus.'' He goes on to point
out that he has been ''a bad husband and a fickle lover,'' that he ''can't
remember ever having been at peace with myself, except for brief spells,'' that
he has ''inherited some bad genes.'' He is loath to probe too deeply into the
workings of his unconscious, worrying that such probing might somehow damage the
magic of creativity; and he so dislikes reviewing his past that he keeps his old
books locked up in a cupboard instead of displayed in a bookcase. Indeed, the
portrait of Mr. Greene that emerges from this series of interviews - cautious,
weary, and blessed with a prankster's sense of humor - is very similar to the
one left in the wake of his novels.

As he explains in a prologue to ''The Other Man,'' Mr. Greene consented to be
interviewed by Marie-Fran,coise Allain because she is the daughter of Yves
Allain, an old friend and colleague in espionage, who was murdered in Morocco
nearly 20 years ago. Miss Allain's questions demonstrate that she has carefully
studied Mr.  Greene's work, but her observations often take on a gratingly
insistent tone that makes one understand why so many authors hate to be
interviewed.

''One has the impression, listening to you, that you are suffering more
painfully than some the burden of a fate which appears to be investing us with
its dark forces,'' she says at one point. ''Do you feel you are being crushed by
what Cardinal Newman, whom you often quote, calls 'this terrible original
calamity'?'' Or: ''At least admit that you are aware of the incredible sense of
anguish which is found in your novels. How do you explain it?''

Mr. Greene, on his part, is cordial and polite, sometimes earnest and almost
always reticent when it comes to discussing the details of his personal life. He
prefers to use the impersonal term ''one'' instead of ''I,'' and parries
questions he'd rather not answer by recounting his adventures in such troubled
areas of the world as Vietnam, Malaya, the Belgian Congo and Panama.

Certainly, it's interesting to hear Mr. Greene's voice in conversation, for his
superb gift for storytelling, employed with such grace in his fiction, shines
here in his recounting of tiny anecdotes. And yet, we really don't learn
anything new. The reader interested in seeing how the author's experiences have
been translated into art is better off reading Mr. Greene's essays - soon to be
reissued by the Viking Press, which is publishing a uniform edition of his work
- and his two volumes of autobiography, ''A Sort of Life'' and ''Ways of
Escape.''

The games of Russian roulette that Mr. Greene played as a teenager, his
alienation as a student in public school and his love of cloak-and-dagger novels
- novels that left him with a craving for adventure and an acute awareness of
evil - were described, in more detail, in ''A Sort of Life'' and in his famous
essay ''The Lost Childhood.'' His manic-depressive moods, his fear of boredom
and his methods of writing fiction are also familiar territory, covered in
''Ways of Escape.''

Two themes, familiar to readers of the memoirs, recur throughout these
interviews as well. The first is Mr. Greene's continual need to ''escape'' from
himself: travel to doomed, exotic places provides one palliative; writing,
another. In the course of living with his fictional creations, he says, ''one
simply forgets one's own existence.''

The second theme has to do with Mr. Greene's sense of being a ''double agent.''
It is a sense, he says, nourished during his school days at Berkhamsted, where
he was both a student and the headmaster's son - an anomalous condition of
divided loyalties that he would later put to good use in depicting such
characters as the priest in ''The Power and the Glory,'' Scobie in ''The Heart
of the Matter'' and Sarah in ''The End of the Affair.''

Like Browning, Mr. Greene's interest has always been ''on the dangerous edge of
things,'' and this sense of just how precarious that boundary can be between
loyalty and treason, belief and doubt, love and renunciation, not only informs
the author's flirtations with Roman Catholicism and leftist politics, but also
invests his fiction with moral resonance and passion. In the end, in fact, Mr.
Greene is probably right when he declares, in response to one of Miss Allain's
questions, ''I doubt whether anything I, or anyone else, could say or write
about me would reveal as much as my books.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Graham Greene

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN TROOPS ACCUSED OF GRENADE ATTACKS ON REFUGEES

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 11


Cambodians who witnessed a Vietnamese attack on a border settlement last week
say Cambodian soldiers as well as Vietnamese threw hand grenades into bunkers
containing women and children.

This account appeared to add a new dimension to recent charges that a massacre
of civilians by Vietnamese troops took place at O Smach, also known as
Sihanoukville, a military and civilian camp loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
the former Cambodian head of state.

The witnesses, who were interviewed soon after the attack, said that in their
area of O Smach - the extreme southern part of the camp, inhabited by a group of
recent arrivals - most of the invading soldiers appeared to be Cambodians. It
was the Cambodians, they contended, rather than the smaller numbers of
Vietnamese soldiers in the area with them, who were seen ordering civilian
residents into bunkers before apparently trying to kill them with grenades.

More than a dozen other hospitalized Cambodians said Sunday that in their areas
of the rebel camp, only Vietnamese soldiers had herded civilians into bunkers
and thrown grenades in after them.

Six Tell of Being Wounded

Six of the patients said they themselves had been wounded in such attacks, and
an injured 3-year-old boy, too young to be questioned, was said by his parents
to have been wounded in their bunker when two grenades were thrown at them.

The account of the Cambodian soldiers was reported by an experienced analyst of
the Thai-Cambodian frontier disputes who has good access to the border camps and
is respected by foreign journalists for the accuracy of his reports.

He gave no details on the names of those he had spoken with or on how many
incidents of grenade attacks on women and children in bunkers they had said they
witnessed. He said only that they had mentioned ''many'' such attacks. Some of
the invading soldiers, he said, spoke fluent Khmer, the language of the
Cambodians, when they ordered residents into bunkers.

All but one of the people wounded in O Smach who were interviewed Sunday at the
hospital of the International Committee of the Red Cross near Kap Choeun said
they had been in the same part of the camp during the attack and the only
invaders they had seen were Vietnamese.

Refugees Left Another Camp

Another wounded man, however, said he had seen Cambodian as well as Vietnamese
soldiers. He was the only Cambodian patient interviewed on Sunday who said he
had settled in O Smach last month with a group of thousands of refugees from a
camp at Nong Chan after Vietnamese troops destroyed that camp in early February.
Nong Chan is about 20 miles from the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet.

All of the half-dozen O Smach refugees who told the analyst last week they had
seen more Cambodians than Vietnamese had also arrived last month from Nong Chan.
The new arrivals all lived in a ''village'' of their own about 500 yards south
of the main area of the camp.

Apart from the one patient who had seen Cambodian troops fighing alongside
Vietnamese, all the patients interviewed Sunday were in the main part of the O
Smach camp during the attack, which started April 3. They said they had been
near its north entrance, in the middle of the camp and in the west.

The half-dozen interviews reported by the analyst tonight were conducted at Nong
An, described as a makeshift campground about three and a half miles inside
Thailand and about nine miles east of O Smach.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 13, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE UNIT VOTES AGAINST MORE AID FOR EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 12


A House Foreign Affairs subcommittee dealt a blow to Administration policies on
Latin America today, voting to reject a request for additional military funds
for El Salvador and to prohibit United States aid to Nicaraguan rebels in the
absence of a joint resolution of Congress.

In a spirited session punctuated by a series of voice votes along party lines,
the group rejected President Reagan's supplemental request for $50 million in
military aid for El Salvador; reduced from $86.3 million to $50 million the
military aid request for fiscal 1984 and 1985, and voted to make United States
aid conditional on further assurances that American advisers be limited to 55
and that Salvadoran democratic procedures be strengthened.

The subcommittee also adopted a proposal to prohibit any United States aid to
Nicaraguan rebels ''directly or indirectly'' unless specifically requested by
the President and approved by both houses of Congress. The measures now go to
the full committee.

Majority Said to Approve

Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland and chairman of the
Western Hemisphere Affairs subcommittee, said repeatedly that the actions
reflected the views of a majority of the Congress.

But Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, said that in a single
day ''we have rendered vulnerable the democratically elected Government of El
Salvador and protected the Marxist Government of Nicaragua.''

Meanwhile, Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, chairman of the
Senate Intelligence Committee, said today, after his committee was briefed by
William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, that he was convinced the
C.I.A. was not violating ''the letter or the spirit'' of legislation barring the
agency from trying to overthrow the Sandinist Government in Nicaragua.

Operating Within the Law

''There has been a good deal of confusion and misinterpretation in the press
recently regarding the issue of whether the C.I.A. is operating within the
constraints of the law,'' Mr. Goldwater said in a statement. ''I am convinced
that no such activities are being undertaken by the United States Government for
the purpose of overthrowing the Government of Nicaragua or for provoking a
military exchange between Nicaragua and Honduras.''

In other developments, Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the
United States had warned the Soviet Union and Cuba against sending advanced
fighter aircraft to Nicaragua. He said the Administration had notified Moscow
and Havana that ''a serious situation'' would develop if they increased their
military assistance to Nicaragua with the introduction of the fighter aircraft
or Cuban combat troops.

Attending the House subcommittee session, James H. Michel, Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, declined to give assurances that
the Administration was abiding by the charter of the Organization of American
States, which prohibits intervention to undermine the government of a member
state.

Mr. Michel insisted that ''the intelligence committees are the appropriate
forum'' for a discussion of the United States role in Nicaragua. But he added
that ''the United States is not acting in violation of U.S. law, to the best of
my knowledge.''

Operations Called Illegal

Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, replied, ''The O.A.S.
charter is a treaty and is the law of the land.'' ''The covert operations are
about as covert as this markup session,'' he said, adding, ''In addition to
being illegal, inept and unnecessary, it's doomed to failure.''

Mr. Studds said that such operations were doomed ''because they were out of
character for the American people.'' But Mr. Hyde countered: ''If America stands
for one thing, it ought to be freedom. It ought to provide a glimmer of hope to
people in prisons in Cuba and Poland, to the Vietnam boat people, to the people
fighting with sticks and stones in Afghanistan.''

Meanwhile. addressing the Senate committee, Mr. Enders said that ''it is
conceivable that Cuba or the Soviet Union could be tempted to escalate the
conflict'' in Nicaragua by ''introducing modern fighter aircraft or even Cuban
combat troops.''

''Clearly a dengerous situation would then develop,'' he said, ''unacceptable
not only to Central America but to the American nations as a whole. We have
communicated to Moscow and Havana how dangerous such a move would be.''

Sandinists Are Criticized

In the past the Reagan Administration has reported that Nicaragua, with Soviet
and Cuban assistance, was improving and extending airfields to accommodate
advanced Soviet fighter planes. The Administration has also said that Nicaraguan
pilots were receiving advanced training in Bulgaria and Cuba.

In his testimony, which focused on Nicaragua, Mr. Enders sharply criticized the
Sandinist Government for what he said was its failure to pursue negotiating
proposals made by the United States and other Central American nations.

Charging that Nicaragua has rejected four different attempts to arrange
negotiations about regional conflicts, Mr. Enders said, ''The Sandinistas have
made their contempt for genuine dialogue - for real negotiations -quite clear.''

Mr. Enders also defended anti-Government forces in Nicaragua, saying they
enjoyed broad-based support within Nicaragua. While refusing to comment on
whether the United States had provided covert support to the rebels, Mr. Enders
said the anti-Government forces ''are Nicaraguans to the core.''

Mr. Enders also provided the committee with new information about arms shipments
that the Administration asserts the Soviet Union and Cuba have sent through
Nicaragua to guerrillas in El Salvador.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 13, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NON-CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN SCHOOLS GROWING FAST;
GRADING THE SCHOOLS

BYLINE: By Judith Cummings

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1748 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 12


Parents unhappy with the public schools, especially in the West and South, are
turning in increasing numbers to church-related schools other than those of the
Roman Catholic Church. At the same time, enrollment in Catholic and nonsectarian
private schools is falling along with public school enrollment across the
country.

New York City has bucked this nationwide decline in Catholic and nonsectarian
schools, and non-Catholic Christian schools have grown only slightly. (Page
A22.)

Much of the growth nationwide is in Christian fundamentalist schools, part of a
movement born in the early days of public school desegregation. Today these
schools cater to an expanding number of people who say they are seeking a
religion-based value system in classroom instruction and an escape from the
social problems of the public schools.

''People around my neighborhood, they're into pot, and I'm not,'' said Bill
Davis, a 17-year-old from Canoga Park, giving his reason for attending Los
Angeles Baptist High School. The school is one of many Christian schools in the
sprawling bedroom communities of Los Angeles's mostly white, mostly
middle-class, mostly conservative San Fernando Valley.

''It was mainly the busing, too,'' said a schoolmate, Philip Dixon. ''My parents
wanted to get away from all that. They would have been taking us down to East
L.A. and the Negro schools. Only it wasn't that so much as how far it was.''

James O'Leary's daughter Julie is a 10th grader at the same school. He and his
wife, Connie, had been nonreligious people, he said. But they decided on a
Christian education for their two children when Julie reached the age of 3,
''hoping they would get a better start, educationwise and religiouswise.''

He said they intended to place Julie in a public school next year for the wider
choice of elective courses and what he said would be a better chance at a
college scholarship.

In the decade from 1970 to 1980, enrollment in non-Catholic church-related
schools increased 47 percent in the Northeast and 49 percent in the
North-Central region, according to figures collected by the National Center for
Education Statistics. But in the West enrollment in such schools doubled in the
same period, and in the South it quadrupled.

The expansion is all the more significant because in the same decade enrollment
in all private schools, from expensive preparatory schools to big-city parochial
systems, declined to 4.2 million from 5.1 million, and total public school
enrollment fell to 38.8 million from 43.2 million as the country's birthrate
declined, according to the Census Bureau.

In 1970, 3.9 million pupils were enrolled in private elementary schools and 1.6
million in private high schools. By 1979, private elementary schools enrolled
only 3.1 million and high schools 1.1 million. The percentage of high school
students in private schools declined to 7.4 in 1979 from 9.8 in 1970, and the
percentage of private elementary students declined to 11.2 from 11.5.

Catholic Schools Feel Brunt

The biggest share of the decline came in a shift away from Catholic parochial
schools.  In 1964, when enrollment in Catholic schools peaked, 84 percent of all
private school pupils were in Catholic schools, in contrast to 67 percent by
1979 and an estimated 63 to 64 percent in the current school year, according to
estimates by the National Catholic Educational Association. Catholic educators
attribute the drop to the movement of white Catholic families to the suburbs
while school buildings remained in the cities and to parents' dissatisfaction
with liberal changes in Catholic schools, particularly the shrinking
availability of teachers from religious orders.

The decline has not abated. This month the association reported the largest
decline in students since 1972 as Catholic enrollment fell by 68,000 this year.

Even some of the most competitive prep schools in the country, which normally
have more applicants than they accept, say there has been a drop in demand this
year. These schools, with tuition as high as $9,000 or more, are finally
starting to feel the effects of the national economic downturn, according to
admissions officers.

'They Didn't Come Back'

Some education officials, religious and otherwise, acknowledge that the flight
by white parents from school desegregation was the initial spur for the demand
for many church-schools. But they maintain that today many parents turn to
church schools instead as a haven from what they consider the public schools'
permissiveness, financial instability, lowered academic standards and serious
social problems, such as drug abuse and teen-age pregnancy.

Los Angeles, with the country's second largest school system behind New York
City, is cited as a case in point. Richard Ferraro, a conservative member of the
city's board of education, said that more than 77,000 pupils fled the public
schools as a reaction to the mandatory busing program that began in 1978 but
that only about 8,000 came back after a Federal court ended busing in 1981.

''Parents said, 'Well, there is still this problem of vandalism and violence,'
and they didn't come back,'' Mr. Ferraro said in an interview.

Racial Motivation Questioned

Dr. Donald A. Erickson, a professor of education at the University of California
at Los Angeles who is a specialist in private schools, said that several studies
had tried to determine whether the movement into fundamentalist schools was
racially motivated but that reliable data were lacking. He added that such
evidence as was available suggested ''that the movement wasn't what we typically
mean by white flight; it's that the parents view the public schools as hostile
to their religious beliefs.''

Not all of the religiously affiliated schools are Christian. Last month the
American Jewish Committee sponsored an interfaith conference in Los Angeles on
the absence of instruction in discipline, character and moral values in the
public schools and the link to the flight of pupils to religion-based schooling.
Officials of the organization said they supported Jewish families' switching
their children from public to Jewish schools for the sake of transmitting
cultural and moral values.

Dr. Neil Sandberg, western regional director of the committee, said Jewish
parents were voicing greater concern over discipline and drug problems and
reduced curriculum standards, although they worried that by sending their
children to Jewish schools they would risk isolating them from other racial and
religious groups.

Degree of Dissatisfaction

The degree of dissatisfaction with public schools was measured in a New York
Times poll of 1,503 adults nationwide in February.  While 53 percent said they
would send their children to neighborhood public schools even ''if cost were not
a factor,'' 37 percent said they would choose a private or parochial school.

The survey found that people with high incomes were the more interested, at 42
percent, but that even among those with incomes under $10,000, 32 percent would
choose private schools.

More than half the respondents, 51 percent, said there was no private or public
school within commuting distance of home where their children would get a better
education than at their present public school. Thirty-six percent said there was
a better school nearby, and nearly all of them identified it as private or
parochial.

The country had 16,792 private elementary schools in 1980 and 5,678 private
secondary schools, according to the National Center for Education Statistics.

Economy Affects Applications

Although many public high schools, especially in the cities of the East, are
struggling to find their path, the most exclusive prep schools are not seeing a
bumper crop of extra applicants.

With 3,100 candidates for 436 places next year, applications at Phillips Academy
in Andover, Mass., are down about 5 percent, Joshua Miner, dean of admissions,
said. ''It's the first bellwether we've had that anything is wrong,'' he said.
Tuition for boarding students will be $8,900 in September.

In contrast, the average tuition for the country's Christian schools, according
to the American Association of Christian Schools, is $850.

''When you take a look a literacy scores falling off, whether it's from
television or from the schools, that produces a panic and there's a flight from
public schools among people who can afford it,'' Mr. Miner said. ''But tuitions
have doubled in five years, and in certain parts of the country the economy has
become critically impaired. Both things have gone beyond anybody's
expectations.''

Background of Teachers

Dr. Arno Weniger, executive vice president of the American Association of
Christian Schools, said the reason for the popularity of the schools was that
''Christian parents were finding their moral values were being belittled by
teachers'' in the public schools, who, he said, could no longer be counted on to
believe in God.

''There was just a new breed of teacher,'' he said. ''They came through the
Vietnam rebellion, the struggles of the 60's, they were involved in panty raids
and the very amoral atmosphere on college campuses, and they became the teachers
in our grade schools.''

Los Angeles Baptist High School, with 775 students, a tuition of $1,700 and a
tough academic reputation, was founded in 1962 and is one of the most
established Christian schools in Los Angeles.

The enrollment is overwhelmingly white, with 2 percent black students, 3 percent
of Hispanic origin and 6 percent Asian. The principal, Gary C. Smidderks, said
the school had tried to recruit more blacks and Hispanics but found too few were
academically qualified.

Mike Broadaus, 13, is one of the few black students at Baptist. He said he
enrolled after the principal made a recruitment visit to the Baptist church
where his father is minister.

''It's not only for whites or blacks,'' Mike said. ''We're all going for one
goal, to get to heaven. Race is important, but you have to look on not worldly
but Christian things.''

Public Facilities Often Better

Ronald M. Berz, the principal of James Monroe High School, a public school with
2,700 students, a few blocks from Baptist High, said he had no quarrel with the
education provided in the area's Christian schools.

''They do an excellent job of educating their youngsters,'' he said. ''One of
the reasons is they have a select clientele, while we're educating people from
all walks of life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Fourth of five articles on elementary and secondary education in America

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of students at Los Angeles Baptist High School
(Page A22) Table, by region, of where religious schools are appearing (Page A22)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 13, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Claims Victory In Offensive in Cambodia

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 12


Vietnam claimed victory today in its 13-day-old offensive against Cambodian
guerrillas and blamed Thailand for a series of border clashes between Thai and
Vietnamese forces.

Calling its actions along the Thai-Cambodian border ''necessary
counterattacks,'' Vietnam said its forces and Cambodian Government troops had
routed guerrillas loyal to the ousted regime of Pol Pot.

''The Vietnamese-Kampuchean joint forces made accurate and highly effective
attacks on bases of the Pol Pot clique and other reactionary groups on
Kampuchean territory,'' the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry said in a memorandum
delivered to the Thai Embassy in Hanoi. Kampuchea is the name used by the
Cambodians for their country.

The contents of the memorandum were reported in a dispatch of the Vietnamese
press agency received in Bangkok.  Military sources in the Thai border town of
Aranyaprathet said fighting along the frontier had died down in the last three
days but was continuing in the interior of Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIANS TELL OF HORROR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 243 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 13


It is still impossible to say how many civilians died this month at O Smach, a
Cambodian refugee and guerrilla camp that was shelled and overrun by Vietnamese
troops. It is also not known with certainty how they died.

Former Prime Minister Sonn San of Cambodia charged last week that hundreds were
slain when Vietnamese soldiers herded people into trenches and threw hand
grenades at them. Some witnesses said Cambodian soldiers also threw grenades at
civilians.

Part of the problem of obtaining information is that most of the refugees now in
Thailand have been isolated by the Thai Army.  But six civilians from the camp,
speaking April 10 at the International Committee of the Red Cross Hospital near
Kap Choeun, said they were in bunkers that Vietnamese soldiers attacked with
grenades.

Ngach Mov, 34 years old (top right photo, center rear), and his wife, Sok Nang,
31 (far left), said seven soldiers herded them into a bunker April 3. They said
their daughter, Van Pen, 12 (foreground), was wounded in the elbow; Lok Ngoeut,
11 (right), a relative, was wounded in the right side. Their son, Mov Soka, 3,
was blinded in the left eye.

Klord Ang, 24 (lower right), said she and 5 of 14 other people in a bunker were
injured by a grenade.  A grenade seriously wounded Kong Leon, 10 (top left), in
the abdomen, feet and elbow. He said four or five others in his bunker were also
hurt. His parents were in the same bunker but were not injured, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Cambodian refugees map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Greenville, N.C., to Strike 'Colored' From Memorial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

DATELINE: GREENVILLE, N.C., April 13


A Vietnam veteran has persuaded Pitt County officials to remove the designation
''colored'' from a monument listing those killed in the nation's wars.

County Manager H. Reginald Gray said Tuesday that the Pitt County Board of
Commissioners has authorized a private company to do the work.

The memorial, which lists county residents killed in both World Wars and the
Korean War, singles out nonwhites killed under the heading ''colored.''

Glenn Maughan, a student at East Carolina University who is white, saw the
monument while on jury duty and petitioned officials for the change.

''A grave disservice has been done in the construction of this monument,'' Mr.
Maughan wrote. ''Not only are blacks and whites separated by color, but the
added degradation of the word 'colored' furthers the racist tone.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S DILEMMA PITS SUCCESS AGAINST PURITY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 13


As illustrated by the sea of troubles now confronting President Reagan, the
central dilemma of his third year in office turns on the choice that many
politicians believe will define his Administration for the voters in 1984:
whether to go for political purity or political success.

In the spirit of pragmatism, the President initially seemed bent on success by
inaugurating 1983 as a year of bipartisanship in his State of the Union Message.

But in practice, this has been a limited bipartisanship of specific deals,
rather the formation of a steady bipartisan partnership with House Speaker
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. and Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader, that
would pave the way for regular compromises on the main business before Congress.

Indeed, the President has been in a scrappy mood lately, determined to face down
Congress on military spending, the nuclear freeze issue, more military aid to El
Salvador and putting forward the wellnurtured notion of conservative military
planners, a futuristic national defense against nuclear missiles.

The President's partisan flashes have touched off a Newtonian reflex in an
assertive Congress that has dealt him several strong rebuffs and created the
sense among many politicians that in spite of a reviving economy, the political
tide is now running against Mr.  Reagan.

'Pure Reagan' Discerned

''This is the Reagan his advisers hid away in the 1980 campaign,'' said Richard
Neustadt, the Harvard scholar on the Presidency. ''This is the guy that Jimmy
Carter wanted to campaign against, but Reagan didn't oblige. This is pure
Reagan, the guy who believes we can spend the Soviets into the ground in an arms
race and who believes that when American science puts its mind to something, it
can do anything including a 'Star Wars' defense scheme.''

In large measure, the President's alternating tactics reflect contradictory
advice from two groups of counselors, the pragmatists led by James A. Baker 3d,
his chief of staff, along with senior aides such as Richard Darman and Kenneth
L. Duberstein, and a more hard-line group led by Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger and William P. Clark, the national security adviser.

The pragmatists see the President scoring successes from compromises on Social
Security and the modest job bill, and from his own move to disarm the rising
challenge on arms control by showing flexibility with a new proposal at the
European nuclear arms talks.

Political strategists such as Mr. Baker and Richard Wirthlin, the President's
pollster, point to survey evidence that the President's leadership and job
ratings rise when the public sees the two branches of a politically divided
Government working together. This faction has also worried lately that hard-line
Presidential speeches attacking a nuclear freeze or the Soviet Union are
reviving public nervousnes about what some call the President's ''warmonger
image.''

Missile Talks and Adelman

In Congress, pro-Administration Republicans such as Senator Richard G. Lugar of
Indiana add that if the Senate finally confirms Kenneth L. Adelman as Director
of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, his cause will have been aided by
the President's recent, more flexible negotiating stand in the medium-range
missile talks.

The shift, Mr. Lugar suggested, helped rebut the Democratic effort to make the
Adelman nomination a symbolic test of Mr. Reagan's arms control policies, by
''making it clear that ''it isn't the President who is foot-dragging but the
Russians.''

After resounding defeats on the MX missile in the past two years, the White
House has now floated a compromise through a bipartisan commission that borrowed
Democratic ideas and tuned down Reagan rhetoric, but it is unclear whether this
retreat has come soon enough to carry the MX in Congress this year.

So far, when the President has pursued a harder, purer conservative line on
military spending, the nuclear freeze, aid to El Salvador and backing rebel
actions against the Sandinist Government of Nicaragua, he has run into
skepticism and open rebellion. Most stunning was the revolt in the Senate Budget
Committee on military spending after the President heeded his hard-line
counselors and refused to compromise.

'He Tried for Purity'

''The White House played for high stakes and came up losers by insisting on a 10
percent increase in military spending,'' a Senate Republican leadership aide
said. ''The decision was to let Reagan be Reagan and he lost. He tried for
purity. Now it's going to be interesting to see if he tries for success.''

Licking his wounds, Mr. Reagan has backed off and belatedly ordered his
pragmatic lieutenants to seek a bargain with Congress.  Equally critical is the
political firestorm aroused by the Administration's request for $110 more
military aid to El Salvador and covert American backing for Nicaraguan rebels
harassing Sandinist forces in Nicaragua.

To conservatives, the Central American policy is a crucial and needed measure of
Mr. Reagan's toughness. ''If the Sandanistas can be rolled back, it will be a
tremendous plus for the President and for the country,'' said Allan H. Ryskind,
Capitol Hill editor of the conservative weekly, Human Events. But in Congress,
angered Democrats and worried Republican moderates are cutting or rejecting aid
requests.

Some legislative battles have not been of the President's choice.  His backers
contend that the Democrats, riding a comfortable majority, made the nuclear
freeze resolution a vehicle for partisan assault on the Administration's arms
control policies. ''The President had no choice. He had to fight it,'' said a
top House Republican aide.

At bottom, Representative Dick Cheney of Wyoming, a former White House chief of
staff, observed, this President like four predecessors confronts a Congressional
assertiveness born of the Vietnam era. ''Reagan,'' he said, ''has inherited a
nasty situation in terms of the role that Congress sees for itself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE ARTILLERY SHELLS BARRICADES OF VIETNAM'S ARMY

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 16


China said its gunners shelled Vietnam's northern border barricades today in
retaliation for Vietnamese bombardments that killed or wounded at least 15
soldiers and peasants planting spring crops.

Chinese and Vietnamese frontier forces have fired at each other sporadically
since they fought a one-month border war in February 1979, but today's report
was the first in which China said it had retaliated with artillery.

''The Chinese frontier guards were forced to fire back at the Vietnamese
provocations and are closely watching the development of the situation,'' the
official New China News Agency said.

Barricades Reported Hit

It said a Chinese observation post reported that artillery fire from the
southwest Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region destroyed earthen barricades of the
Vietnamese troops. It did not say whether any Vietnamese were killed or wounded.

(In Washington, the State Department said there would be no official comment
from the Reagan Administration on China's announcement.)

Vietnam had no immediate response to the Chinese reports. Its official press
agency had accused Chinese troops of five incursions and mortar and artillery
attacks on Vietnamese territory between Tuesday and Thursday. It said a Chinese
platoon intruded into Vietnam on Wednesday, firing at hamlets and burning
houses.

Incident Last Week

On April 7, the Chinese press agency reported earlier, Chinese troops returned
fire after Vietnamese troops shot at 34 Chinese peasants as they worked in a
field. The agency said a 13-year-old Chinese boy was seriously wounded.

Last Sunday, China protested to the Vietnamese Embassy, accusing Vietnamese
troops of killing or wounding 14 Chinese border-area residents in March.

A press agency commentary also charged that Vietnam was intensifying border
provocations against China to divert attention from its military operations
against Cambodian forces and refugee camps. Vietnamese forces invaded Cambodia
in late 1978 and toppled the Chinese-backed Government.

'People Were Overjoyed'

The press agency's report today said Vietnamese provocations had persisted ''in
disregard of China's repeated warnings and protests.'' It said Vietnamese troops
''killed Chinese frontier guards and inhabitants with rifle and artillery fire
and seriously disrupted the normal production and life of the local people,
inflicting heavy losses in life and property.''

After Chinese frontier forces fired back, the agency said, ''the border people
were overjoyed and hailed the counterattack.'' It said they had suffered
Vietnamese harassment since spring plowing began, and had been urging the
Chinese troops to shoot back.

Earlier dispatches said Vietnamese troops fired more than 3,100 rounds from
light arms and artillery into Chinese border communes on Thursday. They said
Vietnamese troops had fired 428 rounds of artillery into Yunnan Province between
Monday and Thursday.

China was an ally of North Vietnam during its war against the American-supported
South Vietnamese Government, but Vietnamese-Chinese relations deteriorated after
the Communist victory in Vietnam in 1975. China now is a major backer of
Cambodians fighting the Vietnamese occupation.

----

Supply Line Reported Cut

ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 16 (UPI) - Cambodian guerrillas fighting
Vietnamese troops said today that they had opened a counteroffensive and cut
major supply lines of Vietnam's forces along the border with Thailand.

The guerrillas said they blew up four bridges between the provincial capital of
Battambang and Moung. Battambang, western Cambodia's main town, is 72 miles
southeast of here and Moung is 35 miles further inland.

In interviews at their camps inside Cambodia opposite Aranyaprathet, 120 miles
east of Bangkok, the guerrillas said they also blocked shipments on a rail line
parallel to the highway.

The guerrillas said they took control of 19 miles of the highway in fighting
late last week. They gave no casualty figures.  Western analysts said an
offensive begun by the Vietnamese on March 31 had slowed appreciably for
logistical reasons early this week.  The guerrillas said they were able to cut
the highway because Vietnam had sent many troops from that area to positions
closer to the Thai border for a possible attack on guerrillas.

In their offensive, the Vietnamese easily overran two major guerrilla bases
along the Thai border and caused heavy but still uncounted casualties among
Cambodian guerrillas and civilians. The Vietnamese also entered Thailand several
times while chasing guerrillas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Asia

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SUNDAY, APRIL 17, 1983

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 604 words


International

Chinese gunners shelled Vietnam's northern border barricades, Peking announced,
saying the attack was in retaliation for a Vietnamese bombardment that killed or
wounded at least 15 soldiers and peasants. Vietnam did not respond to the
Chinese reports. Its official news agency earlier accused Chinese troops of five
recent incursions and mortar and artillery attacks on Vietnamese territory.
(Page 1, Col.  6.)

Solidarity's underground was raided by the Polish police in Warsaw and eight
other cities, according to a television report. At least 26 supporters of the
banned union were seized, along with radio transmitters and printing presses.
(1:5.)

Contacts between U.S. embassies and opposition leaders in militaryrun countries
in South America have declined since President Reagan took office, American
diplomats and opposition leaders in Chile, Uruguay, Paraguay and Argentina said.
(3:3.)

Rising joblessness in Western Europe is giving rise to a generation of young
people who increasingly feel powerless to control or even influence their
future. (16:1.)

National

Medical benefits for the jobless is an issue that has divided the Reagan
Administration. In the absence of any recommendations from the White House, the
initiative has been taken in Congress, where there is strong bipartisan support
to provide health care benefits. At least four Republican Senators are prodding
the President to respond to what they regard as a serious national problem.
(1:4.)

A question of conflict of interest concerns a Pentagon official who recommended
that the Army consider buying weapons from an Israeli manufacturer a year after
he had accepted a $50,000 consulting fee from the company. Richard N. Perle, an
Assistant Secretary of Defense and one of the Pentagon's most influential policy
makers, acknowledged that he received the consulting fee the same month he
entered the Government in 1981, but maintains he did nothing wrong.  (1:2.)

The President's job-approval rating has not improved significantly in a year,
according to The New York Times/CBS News Poll. Public approval of Mr. Reagan's
handling of the economy has improved slightly, halting a decline in confidence
that began two years ago, but this was offset by growing doubts about his
foreign and military policy, the poll found. (1:1.)

Child abuse prevention nurseries are being established nationwide as child abuse
increases. One of these nurseries has been established at the New York Foundling
Hospital, where anyone who fears that he might neglect, abuse or batter a child
can leave the child there for night or two. (1:4.)

A strong, supportive family is essential when considering the implantation of an
artificial heart, according to University of Utah surgeons. The surgeons refused
such an operation for a New York man heart because he lacked family support. The
man died. The need for family support is one of the many medical lessons being
drawn from the recent case of Barney B. Clark, who lived 112 days with the
artificial heart. (1:3.)

Metropolitan

Whether commuter trains will run Monday depends on a vote by trainmen on the
Hudson and Harlem lines for or against a decision to arbitrate their
six-week-old dispute with the Metro-North Commuter Railroad. On Saturday, the
strike leaders on the New Haven line approved the decision to submit remaining
issues to binding arbitration. (1:1.)

Loss of Federal welfare-aid funds is expected to be avoided in New York and
Connecticut because the states will be fully complying with new welfare rules
within a few months, officials in both states said. (38:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Michigan Regents Bob and Weave

BYLINE: By Margot Slade and Wayne Biddle

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 274 words


University investment portfolios have been targets of campus protest for years,
especially since Vietnam-era arguments about industrial support for unpopular
military ventures. Debate over financial links to South Africa has been just as
bitter, with the University of Michigan the latest scene of contention between
those who believe American-owned business helps apartheid and those who think it
mitigates a racist system.

The issue in Ann Arbor was triggered partly by a state law enacted in December
that requires public universities to divest their endowments of interest in
companies active in South Africa. The university's board of regents believes,
however, that this law ''represents an unconstitutional intrusion'' upon its
authority.  With General Motors, Ford, Burroughs and Dow Chemical among the
Michigan companies touched by the debate, the economic stakes for the state's
colleges are high.

Some companies have tried to answer criticism of South African ties by applying
affirmative action rules known as the Sullivan principles (named after Leon
Sullivan, a black member of the General Motors board who pressed for their
approval in 1977 in return for supporting G.M.'s South African operations). ''We
have tried the Sullivan principles for five years and they have not brought
about the change we had expected,'' said Gordon R. Dunn, a University of
Michigan regent who introduced a divestment resolution for the school's $115
million endowment.

The board's action last week underlined its dilemma. It voted to divest the
university of all stock in corporations operating in South Africa, except those
based in Michigan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
SIX MORE YEARS?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 16


The Reagan Administration feels it has won a ''great victory'' in the Senate
confirmation of Kenneth L. Adelman as the new director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency. And the President says, ''We are not doing anything to try
and overthrow the Government of Nicaragua.''

If you can believe this, you can believe that President Kennedy didn't really
try to overthrow the Castro regime, President Johnson won the war in Vietnam,
and President Nixon was just kidding at Watergate.

Mr. Adelman was finally confirmed after months of bickering because to reject
him now would dramatize the inner disorder of the Administration on this
presiding question of foreign policy. This wasn't a victory for anything, except
maybe Soviet propaganda. The Senate merely agreed to leave bad enough alone.

What this incident demonstrated, not for the first time, was the casualness, or
even carelessness, of the President's appointments procedure. He could have had
George Shultz as Secretary of State from the beginning instead of Al Haig, who
was better qualified to run the Pentagon than Cappy Weinberger.

Likewise, he could have appointed William D. Ruckelshaus to head the
Environmental Protection Agency from the beginning, but summoned him only after
its internal philosophical and administrative confusion became a public scandal.

Kenneth Adelman wasn't the cause of this latest flap after the dismissal of
Eugene Rostow at the arms agency but the victim of the Reagan system, if that's
the right word. The really valid criticism, with which Mr. Adelman would
probably agree, was that he was simply not the best qualified person available
to manage the most critical and complicated foreign policy question of our time.

It's ridiculous to say that Mr. Adelman or the President are somehow indifferent
to the control of nuclear weapons, but there has been an odd approach to the
arms agency by this Administration from the start. While the President is still
fighting for a 10 percent increase in the Pentagon budget, there have been
significant cuts in funding for many key activities of the agency.

Also, its main computer was removed, and it must share a computer with another
Government agency, meaning the disarmament agency must now rely on the Pentagon
for classified research it used to be able to do itself. The number of permanent
employees has been cut back 25 percent, and half its library has been given to
George Washington University. Maybe there were good reasons for this other than
fiscal economy, but this Administration does have a peculiar notion of
priorities.

Central America is another case in point. At first, the Administration made a
great fuss about the shipment of Communist arms into the region and promised to
stop this flow ''at the source,'' which presumably meant Cuba.

Then the propaganda apparatus was turned down for a while and little was heard
about Central America until recently; it has been turned up again amid
increasing suspicion that the Administration is violating the law and trying to
overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.

Not so, says Mr. Reagan, it's the Nicaraguan Government that's trying to
overthrow the Government of El Salvador. Here again, as in the Adelman case, the
Congress hesitates to pass a law explicitly forbidding him to interfere either
directly or indirectly for any purpose, though the United States is already
treaty-bound under the specific terms of the Organization of American States to
refrain from doing so. This is another case of the President's acting first and
thinking later after protests from a Congress that goes along reluctantly rather
than make things worse than they are.

Meanwhile, Karen Elliott House, in a revealing Wall Street Journal interview
with King Hussein of Jordan, discloses the secret promises President Reagan made
to the King, without Israel's knowledge, in the hope of persuading him to join
the talks on the Reagan plan, which Israel opposes.

These include putting pressure on Israel to halt the settlements of its people
in the West Bank, promising ''you will not be pressed to join negotiations on
transition arrangements until there is a freeze on new Israeli settlements,''
and offering to sell a squadron of America's most advanced fighter planes -
F-16's - if the King will join the talks.

Also, according to the Journal's interview, which has caused something of a stir
here but has not been denied at the White House, Mr. Reagan told King Hussein
that he knew he would lose the ''Jewish vote'' in 1984 by backing a peace plan
Israel opposed but that he would win anyway. ''We'll be partners for six more
years,'' the President said, according to King Hussein's notes of their
conversations.

There is something capricious about all this. The evidence seems to be that Mr.
Reagan is inattentive part of the time, as in the Adelman appointment,
impulsively anti-Communist, as in some of his Central American activities, and
sometimes highly active and personal, as in his dealings with King Hussein.

It's interesting to know the President's present way of thinking about
re-election from such an odd source. But do we really want six more years of
this sort of misconduct of foreign policy?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NAZI-HUNTER SEES RESPONSIBILITY TO GO ON

BYLINE: By James Feron

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 3, Column 1; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 833 words

DATELINE: BEATE KLARSFELD, the German


born Nazi-hunter who tracked down Klaus Barbie in Bolivia, told an audience in
the county last week that ''most'' of the 76,000 French Jews deported to death
camps during World War II ''would have been saved if France had refused to help
the Nazis.''

Cooperation between the wartime Vichy Government in Paris and France's German
occupiers declined, she said, ''only after the summer of 1942, when the public
realized the French were separating children from their mothers before
deportation.'' Then, she said, ''there were protests.''

It was ''not that there were such feelings for the Jews,'' Mrs.  Klarsfeld said,
''but people were touched by the human side of it.'' In an hourlong account of
her work before 400 people at the Westchester Jewish Center in Mamaroneck, it
was the human side of the wartime tragedy that Mrs. Klarsfeld emphasized.

''Barbie is only one case,'' she said, referring to the wartime Gestapo chief of
Lyons who was extradicted to France in February by Bolivia after a Socialist
Government ended years of military rule in La Paz. Mrs. Klarsfeld and her
husband, Serge, a lawyer, had identified the 69-year-old former Nazi as Klaus
Altmann, a Bolivian citizen since 1951.

In 1952 and 1954 Mr. Barbie was convicted in absentia and condemned to death for
war crimes, including the killing of Jean Moulin, the French Resistance leader.
There is a 20-year French statute of limitations to war crimes, but not to
''crimes against humanity,'' and Mrs. Klarsfeld said he will now stand trial for
deporting and shooting Jews in specific incidents.

''Barbie is still proud of his crimes against the Resistance fighters,'' Mrs.
Klarsfeld said. ''He called them terrorists, and we know from Vietnam this is
nothing new, but he never spoke of crimes against the Jews. He said, 'I never
touched a Jew,' '' she said.

Mrs. Klarsfeld, a Christian, was born in Berlin 1939 and knew little of the
wartime events until her move to Paris in 1960 and marriage three years later to
Mr. Klarsfeld, a Jew whose father was a member of the French Resistance and died
in Auschwitz. In 1968, Mrs.  Klarsfeld, in a widely reported incident, slapped
Chancellor Kurt-George Kiesinger at a dinner in an attempt to focus attention on
the former West German leader's Nazi past. Much of her subsequent activities and
those of her husband similarly have focused on drawing attention to Germany's
wartime past.

''My country is divided into two ideological blocs,'' she told her Mamaroneck
audience, ''but every German has a responsibility for the deaths of millions.''
It is ''not a collective guilt, especially for the young,'' she said, ''but a
collective responsibility.''

The Klarsfelds have received death threats, seen their parked car blown up and
have been beaten, arrested and jailed. ''But we have to be active,'' she said in
crisp, accented English. ''I am not a conference woman; there are beautiful
ideas in meeting halls, but one has to act on the spot. Our aim was never
vengeance.'' Once, in an attempt to kidnap Kurt Lischka, the wartime Gestapo
chief in Paris, Mr. Klarsfeld ''fired an empty pistol at him, just to
demonstrate that if we wanted vengeance, we could do it -we want them jailed.''

Mrs. Klarsfeld and her husband have identified former Nazis, the majority in
West Germany and some holding responsible post-war positions, in a continuing
effort to bring them to trial, she said.  The Lischka incident, for which Mrs.
Klarsfeld received a two-month jail sentence, also led to a French-German treaty
that enables German courts to try former Nazis already convicted in France.

A woman asked how the Klarsfelds found the former Nazis, and the answer was
disarming: ''You just get the names and track them down'' She said Lischka had
come from Cologne ''and we assumed he would return there, so I called the
telephone operator and he was listed in the book.'' The problem was not finding
their quarries, but getting them to trial, she indicated.

Another questioner wanted to know about how the Klarsfelds ''interacted'' with
Simon Weisenthal, whose work in hunting former Nazis began soon after the war.
Mrs. Klarsfeld praised Mr.  Weisenthal's postwar interviews with concentration
camp refugees and his information center in Vienna as ''extremely important,''
but ''he is in his 70's and we are doing what he is not doing.''

''Why are American Jewish organizations not getting involved in your work?''
Mrs. Klarsfeld was asked. Her answer prompted a burst of laughter: ''The rule is
that organizations never support individuals,'' she said, but added that
''individuals like you can help us,'' through the Beate Klarsfeld Foundation,
P.O. Box 137 South Deerfield, Mass. 01373.

Her appearance was videotaped by students from Mamaroneck High School. Michael
Witsch, the school's television coordinator, said the tape would be made
available to teachers, to UA-Columbia for use on its local access cable stations
and for organizations. He can be reached at 698-9000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Beate Klarsfeld

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Shoreham Debate: Another Opinion

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 28, Column 6; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


Herbert Jaffe's opinion on the Shoreham debate (''Tactics in the Debate on
Shoreham,'' Opinion Page, April 3) is a natural one for a director of the
Association of Investors in New York Utilities. He represents people who have
invested in a poorly run company that has run into very bad luck and that is
trying to sell a product very few Long Islanders believe in -''safe'' nuclear
power.

My Lilco stock was sold after my being dismayed at stockholders' meetings by the
poor decisions -Bokum, upstate nuclear, etc. - and especially by the absolute
refusal to take seriously any opposition to Shoreham.

The poor Lilco stockholders may have to do what Chrysler stockholders have done
- go without a dividend or sell.As one of the ''untutored laymen'' Mr. Jaffe
talks about, I have enough sense to read about Three Mile Island, Salem and all
the other problems of nuclear plants. I also have enough sense to look at a map
of Long Island and visualize the catastrophe of a nuclear accident here.
Hundreds of people are tring to tell this to our elected officials and Lilco. I
didn't attend any of the hearings, but as a protest against Shoreham I have
withheld one month's payment.

Mr. Jaffe, the Government found no adverse effect from Agent Orange after the
Vietnamese war. Ask some of the veterans who were exposed to it if that makes
Agent Orange as pure as Ivory soap.

It all boils down to this - most of us local yokels, tutored or untutored, do
not want a nuclear power plant on Long Island.
CONSTANCE BORNTRAEGER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING SAYS FIGHTING WITH HANOI HAS SPREAD TO SECOND BORDER AREA

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 17


China said today that it had intensified its shelling of Vietnamese border
positions and that the clashes, which began Saturday, had spread to a second
border region. The fighting appeared to be the worst military clash between the
Communist neighbors in nearly two years.

On Saturday Chinese frontier artillery units in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
Region opened fire on Vietnamese earthworks in response to what the New China
News Agency charged were ''armed provocations'' by Vietnamese troops along their
common border. Today the agency reported that artillery manned by Chinese
frontier troops in neighboring Yunnan Province began firing at Vietnamese
positions across that border.

''According to a report from the forward command post, the shelling destroyed
the enemy's surface fortifications,'' the Chinese report said. ''The Vietnamese
position is in a mess.''

'Bombardment Is Still Going On'

''The bombardment,'' it added, ''is still going on.'' Details remained skimpy,
with the official press agency not reporting the exact locations, scope of the
fighting or casualties.  China's border units are armed with mortars and light
artillery pieces and the apparent lack of regular army involvement suggested the
shelling was limited in area.

But the fighting seemed the most serious since May 1981, when tanks as well as
artillery were involved in a clash in Yunnan Province.  Later China claimed to
have killed over 150 Vietnamese soldiers.

Chinese Invaded in 1979

There was no evidence so far in the latest outburst that China might be planning
a new invasion of Vietnam, such as it conducted in early 1979. That offensive
involved fierce fighting, with the Chinese Army suffering substantial casualties
before it withdrew across the border.

While the Chinese press insisted that the current artillery shelling was purely
in response to Vietnamese provocations locally, some Western diplomats here said
they believed the move was aimed at disrupting Vietnam's latest offensive
against insurgents in Cambodia and tying down more Vietnamese forces on the
border.

A prominent commentary today in the official People's Daily newspaper
acknowledged that the border tensions were linked to Vietnam's drive against the
Chinese-backed guerrillas in Cambodia, also known as Kampuchea.

People's Daily said that whenever Hanoi launched major ''aggressive military
operations'' in Cambodia, the Chinese-Vietnamese border became tense because of
''provocations'' by the Vietnamese.

''The Vietnamese authorities have increased provocations on the
Chinese-Vietnamese border in an attempt to tie up China and prevent her from
supporting the just struggle of the people of Kampuchea and Thailand,'' the
official commentary said.

People's Daily warned Vietnam that ''the military provocations and aggression
against China must be stopped at once.'' The shelling into Vietnam by Chinese
artillery based in Guangxi and Yunnan provinces follows accusations traded
earlier this month between the two former allies.

On April 10 the Chinese Foreign Ministry handed the Vietnamese Embassy here a
note accusing Vietnam of conducting armed provocations and intrusions along
their common border. Vietnam responded two days later with a diplomatic note
protesting 25 similar incidents by Chinese forces in the final week of March.

'Whitewashing and Covering Up'

The New China News Agency also charged that on April 11 Vietnamese troops fired
more than 3,100 shots on 62 occasions at peasants in eastern Guangxi Province,
among other incidents.

The Hanoi radio this month called China ''a thief crying 'Stop thief,' '' and
said its charge of Vietnamese border provocations ''is aimed at whitewashing and
covering up its own criminal acts.''

Today the New China News Agency said Chinese frontier guards in Yunnan were
compelled to fire back because the Vietnamese troops since the latter half of
March ''repeatedly fired'' into Chinese territory, ''killing Chinese border
inhabitants working in the fields.'' It gave no details about such fatalities.

The press agency also charged that Vietnamese infiltrators had set fires in
mountain areas, burning 2,000 acres of woods, bamboo groves and rubber trees as
well as destroying some houses and telecommunications wires.

On Saturday the New China News Agency said spring plowing in the Guangxi border
area had been hampered by constant harrassment and intrusions of Vietnamese
troops. It charged that the Vietnamese launched more than 50 ''armed
provocations'' in March alone and that these had increased in April.

No Outside Observers Allowed

When the Chinese launched their bombardment, the agency reported, ''the border
people were overjoyed at and hailed the counterattack.'' The border tensions
have previously been characterized by reports of isolated shooting,
infiltrations and seizure of fishing boats at sea. The charges are virtually
impossible to confirm independently because neither side will let outside
observers visit the frontier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ROCKNE GRANDSONS FEEL HELD BACK BY THEIR NAME

BYLINE: By CRAIG WOLFF

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1774 words


FOOTBALL is very important in East Carbon, Utah. So when Gregg Wakefield, the
principal of East Carbon High School, picked up his phone two years ago and was
asked by the school superintendent how he would like to have Knute Rockne as his
football coach, the principal replied flatly, ''Don't kid with me.''

It was no joke. Knute Rockne 3d, a grandson of the legendary Notre Dame coach
who was killed in a plane crash 52 years ago, wanted the job. He wanted to go to
a town with a population of 2,000, to a school with 125 students. ''First I
caught my breath,'' recalled the principal. ''Then I wondered, with his name,
why couldn't he get a better job.''

Two years later, the question still perplexes Knute Rockne 3d as it does his
brother John, the head football coach at Jonathan Alder High School in Plain
City, Ohio. Sometimes, the question stands in their way. Their grandfather died
about 20 years before they were born, but his legend is so powerful, it has
reached across generations.

John is 33 years old. Knute is 32. They are the oldest in a family of seven boys
and one girl. Of Knute Rockne's three sons and one daughter, and 12
grandchildren, they are the only ones who have chosen football as their
profession. For many different reasons and circumstances, their careers have had
to endure many bumps and turns.

In part, because of the pervasive influence of the Rockne legacy, the two
brothers have not seen each other in more than five years and they rarely speak
with each other. Still, they share the same dream: to be a coach at Notre Dame
some day.

''I know it may sound corny,'' says Knute, ''but I really dream of the day I can
walk out on the field at Notre Dame and the stands would be filled, and I would
look down at my shirt and see 'Notre Dame' written across the front. What else
is there?''

John agrees. ''I went into coaching,'' he says, ''because I love football, not
because of who my grandfather was. We grew up in South Bend. That's all anyone
ever talks about there. Outside of Notre Dame, there are no other places.''

Apparently, however, there are, because John and Knute have been to many of
them. They and their families have made nine stops on the trail. Neither
grandson has ever submitted a job resume to Notre Dame, both preferring to hold
off until they have more experience.

''I've had enough,'' says Knute, ''of people looking at me because of who I am
and what my name is. I want to get there because I'm the best at what I do.''

''For Knute it has to be worse,'' says John. ''He has the first name to contend
with. At least, I can hide a little bit.''

This has always been the problem of Knute Rockne 3d. As a child, he remembers
that his father, Jack, the youngest of the four Rockne children, would invite
some of the old-timers back to the house after the games on Saturdays, just the
way his grandfather had 30 years before. They would talk in awe about Knute
Rockne's record of 105-12-5, the best percentage mark in the history of major
college football coaching. Using bottle caps, they would illustrate some of his
innovations, including putting the backfield in motion before the snap of the
ball. But mostly, the conversation would be about Knute Rockne's notion of
spirit, that the most important things in life were hard work and clean living.

''To hear these old-timers tell it,'' says Knute, ''my grandfather wasn't human.
I'd like to know if he was ever really separated from the legend. Where was the
real human side of him? Where did the myth end and the man begin?''

When Knute Rockne played football at Notre Dame before World War I, it was
another era. His height was 5 feet 8 inches and his weight was 145 pounds.
Fourteen years ago, Knute Rockne 3d, at 5-11 and 160, thought he did not have
the size to compete at Notre Dame. He accepted a partial athletic scholarship at
Utah State, where it turned out he was also not big enough. He was delegated to
a backseat role, making an appearance, he says, only when the team was up by 40
points or down by 40.

''It was disappointing,'' he says. ''I grew up reading all the Horatio Alger
stories. All you need is hard work and determination, live a clean life, and if
you do these things, then all the good things are going to happen to you. The
American work ethic.

''The frustrating thing is when I got to college, it didn't work. I lived by the
old cliches. I was the first guy on the field, I was the last guy off. I ran
everywhere. I hustled. I did everything I could, but at some point in time, that
doesn't make you any faster at the 40. It doesn't make you any bigger. It
doesn't make you any stronger.

''I thought about my grandfather and said, 'If he could do it, why can't I?' But
it didn't work.'' As a result, he became an object of scorn for the other Utah
State players, who resented the publicity he received while sitting on the
bench.

''And he was very sensitive,'' says Jeff Jorgensen, his best friend, then and
now, who was also a teammate. ''People could rile him with comments. Back then,
men were not supposed to cry, but they would rib him and play practical jokes on
him and he would cry.''

Finally, at the end of his sophomore year, unable to tolerate his teammates'
ridicule and having difficulty living up to his own image of his grandfather, he
left school temporarily, missing a final exam. He came, he says, as close to a
nervous breakdown as he has ever been. ''We spent that summer talking,''
Jorgensen recalls. ''He finally realized that it was O.K. not to be able to walk
on water.'' Knute Rockne 3d returned to Utah State the following semester but
not to the football team.

''I decided then'' he says, ''that if I couldn't play, I would try for the next
best thing, even if it meant competing against the legend. At least I wouldn't
have to grow muscles I didn't have.''

After graduating, he worked in Logan, Utah, as a part-time high school history
teacher, and then in Kremmling, Colo., for one year as the head coach of a
football team with only 13 players. He then went to Frederick, Okla., for three
years as an assistant in football and girls' basketball and as the head baseball
coach, before stopping in Denver for three years as an assistant high school
football coach.

For the last two years, Knute Rockne 3d has been a history teacher, assistant
basketball coach and head football coach at East Carbon High School. His
football team won six and lost three last season after going 4-5 the previous
year. Three months ago, his wife gave birth to their fifth child, a girl -
giving them two sons and three daughters. ''We can survive,'' says Patsy Rockne,
''but as the kids get older, the moves will get harder.''

Knute's salary is $19,700. In a perfect world, he says, he would like to arrive
at Notre Dame in three more steps - first a bigger high school, then a small
college and then, what he calls his dream come true. At the moment, he is not
sending any applications to any schools. ''I guess I'm still afraid of
rejection,'' he says.

Conversely, every spring for the last three years, his brother, John Rockne, has
sent out 200 letters to colleges. Every spring, the effort brings the same
reaction: First, surprise that a Rockne actually has to apply for a job and
then, turndown.

''Sometimes, I feel trapped,'' says John, who earns $17,500 a year. ''One time I
talked to the coach at a major school in the East. They had two positions open.
The coach said, 'With a name like you've got, you should have no problem finding
a job.' I said, 'Give me a job.' He said he couldn't.''

Still, John plans, drawing his strategy largely from war books and war
experience. He spent two and a half years in Vietnam as an army military
intelligence specialist and sergeant. He just finished reading ''Campaigns of
Napoleon,'' which, he says, advocates ''striking the enemy in total.''

That's one of the reasons he sent out so many job queries. ''To make sure I hit
every base,'' he says. ''War can teach you many useful lessons on the football
field, too - how to deceive the opponent, how to psych yourself up.

''My grandfather used the same tactics. When a player would have a bad first
half, he would make the player change his shoes. He would blame the shoes and
psych the player into thinking he hadn't done anything wrong. I do the same
thing. If one of my boys has a bad game, I blame myself.''

His three-year record in Plain City, Ohio, is 14-16.  After coming home from
Vietnam, he attended Northeastern A. and M., a junior college in Miami, Okla.,
where he was a reserve quarterback and defensive back. He left the school after
a year and a half, saying that his classmates were spoiled and did not
appreciate his Vietnam experience. ''I thought it would be a neat trick to have
a Rockne on the team,'' says Chuck Bowman, who was his coach, ''but the talent
really wasn't there. He wasn't a gifted athlete.''

John received his bachelor's degree from Central State University in Edmond,
Okla., where he also was an assistant coach. Then he went to Murray State in
Kentucky, where he coached the receivers and attained his master's degree.
Before coming to Plain City, he was the offensive coordinator at a high school
in Kentucky.

Through it all, his desire to reach Notre Dame one day has only intensified. He
often stays at the high school into the evenings, occasionally overnight, using
the school's computers to work on his playbook.

''Being successful is the most important thing in my life,'' says John. ''To get
to a major college and then to Notre Dame, it's my No.1 priority.''

''It is a worthy goal,'' says Notre Dame's current head coach, Gerry Faust,
''but they will have to be patient. I have a list a mile long of people I would
have to consider before them.'' Notre Dame's retired athletic director, Ed
(Moose) Krause, who was one of Rockne's players, is more optimistic. ''You never
know,'' says Krause, ''things have a way of happening.''

While John and Knute wait, another generation is being touched by the Rockne
tradition. Knute's 8-year-old son, Jonathon, maps strategy for his father
between the halves of games.

John's second son, Gary, was named Knute Rockne 4th when he was born, but Knute
Rockne 3d's wife, Patsy, insisted that the name be changed. ''We had two boys at
the time,'' she says. ''And I wanted the name for our next baby. Knute didn't
want to give his son the same name he had been burdened with, but I convinced
him that the baby would be named for him, not his grandfather.'' Since then, the
two families rarely speak.

''Since then,'' says Patsy Rockne, ''I have had three babies, all girls.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Rockne photo of Knute Rockne III

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 17 words


AUTHOR FROM A SAVAGE PEOPLE. By Bette Pesetsky. 197 pages.  Knopf. $12.95.  THE
TENNIS HANDSOME.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



TYPE: WOMEN are the ''savage people'' in the title of Bette Pesetsky's effective
first novel, ''Author From a Savage People'' - at least according to the book's
epigraph, which reads: '' 'You're savages,' the politician said. 'Women are
savages. I've always known that.  Civilization has never reached women.' ''
Review By Barry Hannah. 163 pages. Knopf. $11.95.

As for the ''author'' in the title: it obviously refers to the story's
protagonist, May Alto, who is both a writer and a woman, and thus an ''author
from a savage people.'' But it also could refer to an author that the ''savage
people'' as a class are addressing - a male writer, possibly, who, the women
might feel, was exploiting them and thus would need to be petitioned in a letter
sent to the ''author from a savage people,'' as it were.

These ambiguous meanings of ''author'' are neatly captured in Mrs.  Pesetsky's
novel, which follows by about a year the publication of her impressive
collection of short fiction, ''Stories Up to a Point.'' May Alto is an author,
and yet she isn't, for she makes her living by writing other people's books for
them. Dr. Quayle is an author, and yet he isn't, for both of his famous books,
''Eine Leerstelle'' and ''Permissible Loveplay,'' were actually written by May
Alto. She is the author representing ''a savage people.'' He is the one being
addressed by them.

At the outset of Mrs. Pesetsky's inventive story, May Alto is also the survivor
of two marriages to men who tried to live off her (one of them is still trying),
the mother of three demanding teen-agers, and the recent victim of a mugging
that has cost her, in addition to petty cash and a tape recorder, a knife wound
in her upper arm. But what obsesses May is that Quayle, whose character and
talent she had in mind when she titled the book she wrote for him ''Eine
Leerstelle'' (or ''The Empty Place''), has just been awarded the Nobel Prize.
This is too much for May. She intends to get her due by blackmailing Quayle for
the prize money and a lifetime monthly stipend. And she has the leverage,
because just as she has done in every book she has ever ghosted, she has put
into ''Eine Leerstelle'' fragments from the histories of her overbearing mother,
Sonya, and of her aunt and uncle, Giselle and Trasker.

As May's obsession grows and she carries out her criminal plan, her world seems
to grow increasingly stressful. Her children and friends make demands. Her
second husband keeps coming around for more money, food and attention. The wound
in her arm festers, almost as if it were a stigma of her infected soul.

More and more, May assumes responsibility for world literature. In her mind,
Giselle, Sonya and Trasker show up in Kafka, Joyce, Proust, Cheever, Malamud and
Salinger. In one of the novel's funnier, more pointed scenes, May's blackmail
plot comes to a boil while she is trying to bake a cake for a friend's wedding.
Not even a criminal female can escape the kitchen.

It may all sound a bit far-fetched, especially the idea of awarding the Nobel
Prize to a two-book author who sounds like a cross between Kahlil Gibran and
Lewis Mumford. But in the world created by Mrs.  Pesetsky's mordant,
hallucinatory prose, such extremes seem not only possible but also downright
plausible.

The world of Barry Hannah's ''The Tennis Handsome'' is also extreme and
hallucinatory. Characters have names such as French Edward, Baby Levaster, Jubal
DeWayne Edward, Whitney Humble and Tyrone Hibatchi.

There is a sexual assault by a walrus of a woman who is carrying on an
incestuous love affair with her nephew, himself a veteran of Vietnam who once
killed a general who had modeled himself after J.E.B. Stuart. And, as Mr. Hannah
might put it, there are other ''marvels of violence.''

The appeal of Barry Hannah -whose previous books include ''Geronimo Rex,''
''Nightwatchman,'' ''Airships'' and ''Ray'' - is that he seems to have chewed up
and swallowed the entire rhetorical tradition of the American South and then
spit it back out in a rainbow of hilarity and nonsense. Thus we have Bobby
Smith, the Vietnam soldier, explaining why a photo of ''the tennis handsome''
had set him to weeping:

''The Picture of French Edward about to hit that ball at Forest Hills was stuck
in my head. There was such care in his eyes, and it was only a tennis ball, a
goddamned piece of store-bought bounce. But it was wonderful and nobody was
being killed. The tears were out on my jaws then. Here we shot each other up. It
seemed to me my life had gone straight from teen-age giggling to horror. I had
never had time to be but two things, a giggler and a killer.''

The trouble is that in ''The Tennis Handsome'' - which includes and expands upon
two stories, ''Return to Return'' and ''Midnight and I'm Not Famous Yet,'' from
the author's earlier collection, ''Airships'' - the manic language palls
eventually, and there is little in the way of credible characterization to bring
us relief.Finally, the only living thing in ''The Tennis Handsome'' is the
author's fierce determination to stun us with his zaniness. This works for a
while, but it's simply not enough to sustain us for the length of a novel.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

1965 MEMOS SHOW DOW'S ANXIETY ON DIOXIN

BYLINE: By DAVID BURNHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2477 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


Almost 20 years ago, scientists from four rival chemical companies attended a
closed meeting at the Dow Chemical Company's headquarters. The subject was the
health hazards of dioxin, a toxic contaminant found in a widely used herbicide
that the companies manufactured.

Shortly after the meeting, in Midland, Mich., on March 24, 1965, one of those
attending wrote in a memorandum that Dow did not want its findings about dioxin
made public because the situation might ''explode'' and generate a new wave of
government regulation for the chemical industry.

Another scientist noted that at the meeting, Dow officials had disclosed a study
showing that dioxin caused ''severe'' liver damage in rabbits.

Dioxin, which has also been linked to birth defects and skin disorders in
laboratory animals, is believed to be the deadliest chemical made by man, but
its effects on humans have been difficult to prove.  Since the Midland meeting,
various studies have yielded conflicting evidence on whether dioxin increases
the risk of cancer in humans.

Although it has been known for many years that Dow held the 1965 meeting with
its competitors, excerpts from corporate memorandums about the session are only
now beginning to emerge as a result of a lawsuit filed in 1979 against Dow and
several other chemical companies. The memorandums raise the possibility that Dow
scientists have been saying one thing in private about dioxin while the
company's management has said something else in public.

''There is absolutely no evidence of dioxin doing any damage to humans except
for something called chloracne,'' Paul F. Oreffice, the president of Dow, said
last month on NBC's ''Today'' show. ''It's a rash.'' Dow has performed medical
tests on individuals suffering from chloracne for ''over 20 years,'' he added,
''and there is no evidence of any damage other than this rash which went away
soon after.''

Dow's critics challenge the accuracy of Mr. Oreffice's flat assertion that there
is no evidence that dioxin causes human damage other than chloracne and also
charge that Dow has failed to publish all the information it has collected in
its own dioxin research.  Furthermore, they say, Dow has systematically resisted
Federal and state efforts to learn about and regulate dioxin.

According to a pretrial motion filed by Yannacone & Associates, the legal
organization created to represent the Vietnam veterans in the Agent Orange case,
the 1965 meeting on dioxin was attended by eight of Dow's senior scientists and
six officials of Hooker Chemical; the Diamond Alkali Company, which later became
part of Diamond Shamrock, and the Hercules Powder Company. A representative of
the Monsanto Chemical Company was invited but did not attend.

Donald R. Frayer, a spokesman for Dow, confirmed in an interview April 5 that
the giant chemical company had called the meeting to discuss the health hazards
of dioxin. ''We feel the meeting was pretty darn straightforward and proper,''
he said. ''I think on the balance that the record shows we discovered a problem,
sought out our competitors and tried to give them information and a means to
control the problem.''

Invitation to Meeting

The pretrial motion filed by Yannacone & Associates quoted a number of
documents. V.K. Rowe, then director of Dow's Biochemical Research Laboratory,
said in his invitation to the meeting that Dow had been researching
''toxicological problems caused by the presence of certain highly toxic
impurities in certain samples'' of the herbicide 2,4,5-T and wished to share its
findings. The Dow laboratory was and is recognized as one of the world's finest
privately owned toxicology labs.

Two days after the meeting, C.L. Dunn, a chemist who was manager for regulatory
affairs for Hercules, summarized in writing what he had been told.

''Dow says that their examination of their own and competitors' 2,4,5-T products
contain what they call 'surprisingly high' amounts of the toxic impurities,'' he
wrote.

''In addition to the skin effect,'' he wrote, describing the results of tests on
rabbits, ''liver damage is severe, and a noeffect level based on liver response
has not yet been established.  Even vigorous washing of the skin 15 minutes
after application will not prevent damage and may possibly enhance the
absorption of the material. There is some evidence it is systemic.''

Fear on Situation

Dr. John Frawley, the chief toxicologist for Hercules, who had also attended the
March meeting, got a follow-up telephone call four months later from Earl
Farnum, a Dow executive. Dr. Frawley immediately wrote a confidential memorandum
to the file.

Mr. Farnum, he wrote, said he was calling on behalf of a Dow vice president,
Donald Baldwin, and ''stated that Dow was extremely frightened that this
situation might explode.''

''They are aware that their competitors are marketing 2,4,5-T which contains
'alarming amounts' of acnegen,'' Dr. Frawley continued, referring to dioxin,
''and if the Government learns about this the whole industry will suffer. They
are particularly fearful of a Congressional investigation and excessive
restrictive legislation on the manufacture of pesticides which might result.''

A second memorandum written by Dr. Frawley, and quoted in part by lawyers for
the veterans, said he had just received new information about health effects of
dioxin from Monsanto, which did not send a representative to the meeting. ''From
the data provided, a sample which contained 5 parts per million would be acutely
toxic,'' he wrote. ''Whether this refers to death or liver damage is not
clear.''

Daniel Bishop, a Monsanto spokesman, said in an interview that his company
''didn't do any testing, period, not then and not now.'' He said that a fair
reading of Dr. Frawley's full statement would make it clear that he had not
received the toxicity information from Monsanto, but was not able to identify
the information's source because the material in the Agent Orange case had been
sealed by the judge. The documents were sealed at the chemical companies'
request.

Group of 75 Compounds

Dioxin is the name given to any of a family of 75 compounds, called
dibenzo-para-dioxins, composed of benzene molecules and oxygen atoms. The
compounds are an unwanted byproduct of several chemical processes, including the
manufacture of 2,4,5-T under certain circumstances; 2-4,5-T is one of the two
major components of Agent Orange.

Proving the specific effects of toxic chemicals on humans is extremely
difficult; human experiments are generally prohibited by medical ethics. Animal
tests, which are universally accepted by scientists as providing essential
guidance on appropriate exposure levels for humans, are not a perfect guide
because various species react differently.

In laboratory rats, concentrations as small as five parts per 1,000 million have
caused statistically significant increases of cancer in rats.

Two studies, conducted on a group of forestry workers in northern Sweden and on
a group of agriculture workers in southern Sweden, point to a possible
association between exposure to herbicides contaminated with dioxin and an
increased risk of soft-tissue cancers. Other studies, however, including one in
New Zealand, show no higher risk of cancers for a group of farmers, foresters
and fisherman exposed to dioxin than in men in other occupations.

Dr. Samuel S. Epstein, a physician who is professor of occupational and
environmental medicine at the University of Illinois Medical Center in Chicago,
cites the Swedish studies and other research on such questions as reproductive
abnormalities to challenge the statement of Dow's president that there is no
evidence that dioxin causes any more damage than a skin rash. ''For Mr. Oreffice
to make that statement is absurd,'' he said in a recent interview.

Warning on Dioxin Studies

On March 23, Dr. Perry J. Gehrig, Dow's vice president for agricultural research
and development and director of health and environmental science, cautioned the
House Subcommittee on Natural Resources, Agriculture Research and Environment
against ''ove@rinterpreting'' the Swedish studies. The reports, he argued, ''are
too incomplete, both individually and in aggregate, to currently formulate a
clear picture of the possible associations between TCDD and soft-tissue
sarcomas.'' TCDD is a form of dioxin.

In 1982, Dow scientists published a report of a company survey on the occurrence
of spontaneous abortions, stillbirths, infant deaths and several categories of
birth defects among the wives of Dow workers who had been directly exposed to
dioxin. The study concluded there were few differences in the number and kind of
birth abnormalities found in these women compared with the wives of Dow workers
not exposed to dioxin, and the report has been used frequently to support the
theory that dioxin is not as dangerous as generally believed.

But Dr. Marvin S. Legator, professor and director of environmental toxicology at
the University in Texas in Galveston, questions the study.

''Initially,'' Dr. Legator went on, ''Dow planned on comparing the birth defects
among the wives of Dow dioxin workers with two controls. First, a group of wives
of Dow workers in Midland who had not been directly exposed to dioxin, and
second, some wives of workmen who lived outside the Midland area. This second
control group was important because the Midland area is quite polluted and the
general population has a relatively high level of congenital abnormalities. But
when they published the study the second control group was not included.''

A 'Sampling Problem'

Mr. Frayer, the Dow spokesman, said the second group had been deleted because of
''sampling problems.'' ''The women could not be compared with those in the first
two groups, and they were questioned in a different way,'' Mr. Frayer said.
Information compiled by Dr. Alvin Young, an expert at the Veterans
Administration, indicates that from 1961 to 69 American companies made a total
of 154.5 million pounds of 2,4,5-T.

Of that total, 44 million pounds were applied to the jungles of Vietnam, 23.4
million pounds were exported to other countries and 78.1 million pounds were
used domestically. The balance, 10 million pounds, was destroyed by the
Government after it was decided to halt the Vietnam defoliation program.

Dr. Young estimates that 1,700 pounds of dioxin a year were produced in the
United States from the mid-1950's to about 1975, when steps were taken to limit
it through changing the manufacturing process.

There is broad agreement that a substantial portion of dioxincontaminated wastes
are buried in thousands of dumps around the country. The Environmental
Protection Agency recently said there were 12,000 of these dumps. Other experts
have estimated the number may be closer to 50,000.

Suits Against Companies

Billions of dollars are at stake in the answer to the question of what the
chemical companies knew and when they knew it. In addition to the tens of
thousands of veterans who have sued the chemical companies because of their
exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam, thousands of other Americans living near
toxic dumps, such as the one in the Love Canal area of Niagara Falls, N.@Y., are
seeking damages on the grounds that dioxin and chemical poisons left there have
shortened their lives and caused cancer, birth defects and genetic damage.

In January 1979, a group of veterans brought a Federal suit in New York,
charging that the dioxin contained in the 2,4,5-T sprayed in Vietnam was a cause
of cancer and other diseases among their members and had resulted in genetic
damage and the birth of severely deformed children.

Victor John Yannacone Jr., a principal organizer of the association of lawyers
handling the class-action suit, said in a recent interview that the group now
represents 20,000 Vietnam veterans, widows and children of veterans who are
seeking damages against the chemical companies that provided the Government with
Agent Orange.

The suit against Dow and the other major manufacturers of 2,4,5-T is scheduled
to go to trial in the Uniondale, L.I., court of Federal District Judge George C.
Pratt Jr. in June.

E.P.A. Action Opposed

In an annual report filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in
Washington called a 10-K, Dow said it was one of six chemical companies who were
defendants in the suit. ''Dow believes it has not been scientifically
demonstrated that the injuries claimed by the plaintiffs were caused or could
have been caused by exposure to Agent Orange,'' the report said.

The Dow report also noted that the chemical company was opposing a move by the
Environmental Protection Agency initiated during the Carter Administration that
would totally ban the use of 2,4,5-T in the United States. The herbicide
therefore is still being used on rice fields, on range lands and in industrial
areas such as refineries, to control weeds.

The company's repeated public statements about the comparative safety of dioxin,
including testimony to Congressional committees, press releases and scientific
papers, have been accompanied by efforts on its part, particularly in the Reagan
Administration, to block the Government from collecting information about the
contaminant.

Evidence of the repeated contacts between Dow and E.P.A. officials in
Washington, if not of the subject of the meetings, is contained in the calendars
and travel records of these officials that have been obtained by the House
subcommittees investigating the agency.

Links to Government

Anne McGill Burford, for example, made at least two trips to Midland, Mich., in
her 22 months as the head of the Environmental Protection Agency. Rita M.
Lavelle, the former head of the Government program to clean up toxic waste
dumps, met at least 14 times with Dow officials in the 11 months she held
office.

Mrs. Burford, Miss Lavelle and 11 other political appointees recently resigned
or were dismissed amid Congressional inquiries on allegations that the agency's
toxic waste program had been mishandled.

According to the public testimony of some officials of the agency, Dow used its
connections with the top echelon of the agency's Washington officials to get its
way on several important matters relating to the regulation of dioxin.

Three weeks ago, for example, agency officials in Chicago told the
Investigations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce that
their superiors in Washington ordered them to change an important report on
dioxin to comply with the wishes of Dow.

The key deletion from the report was the following central conclusion about
Dow's Midland plant: ''Dow's discharge represented the major source, if not the
only source, of TCDD contamination found in the Tittabawassse and Saginaw Rivers
and Saginaw Bay in Michigan.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Oreffice (page 18)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA AND VIETNAM TRADE FIRE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 310 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Tuesday, April 19


Chinese artillerymen inflicted ''heavy casualties'' on Vietnamese gunners who
shelled a school, hospital and houses along the embattled frontier, China's
official New China News Agency reported today.

It said the latest artillery duel began Sunday afternoon and continued all day
Monday with Vietnamese troops making ''armed provocations.''

The agency quoted a report from an observation post in the Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region as saying, ''The Vietnamese troops suffered heavy losses.''

The agency said that Sunday and Monday, Vietnamese troops destroyed a primary
school, bank, hospital, grain office and 11 housing units.  More than 3,000
people were forced to leave their homes and production stopped, it said.

''The fire was returned by Chinese frontier guards,'' the agency added.  It was
the fourth report of heavy shelling since Saturday, when China announced it had
ordered ''retaliatory'' fire against the Vietnamese forces.

The Chinese said the shelling was in retaliation for Vietnamese firing across
the border that killed or wounded at least 14 Chinese in March. They said it
also was a warning to Vietnam to call off its offensive against the
Chinese-supported guerrillas along the Cambodian-Thai border.

The agency had said Monday that Chinese militiamen killed four Vietnamese
intruders in an ambush, and Vietnam said the Chinese bombardments killed or
wounded 17 civilians and destroyed many houses.

The official press agency said the ambush occurred at 2:30 A.M.  Sunday after
five Vietnamese ''agents,'' apparently meaning armed men in civilian clothes,
slipped across the border in Yunnan Province in cloudy, rainy weather to attempt
a surprise attack on Chinese positions.

The report said a militia squad shot and killed four of the Vietnamese ''in less
than one minute,'' and the fifth man threw down his weapons and fled.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION

BYLINE: Special Plaque Ordered To Honor Vietnam Dead, AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger today ordered that a special plaque
honoring the country's Vietnam War dead be placed at the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier, where there is still an empty crypt. The plaque will be dedicated on
Memorial Day, the Pentagon said.

Mr. Weinberger also ordered a second plaque placed at the Arlington National
Cemetery Memorial Amphitheater to explain that ''interment of a Vietnam war
unknown is impossible now because the remains of Americans who died in Southeast
Asia are still being identified,'' the Pentagon said.

More than 10 years after American forces were pulled out of the Southeast Asia
war, Army technicians at a special laboratory in Hawaii are still trying to
identify three sets of remains.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE PROBLEM OF KEEPING SO MANY SECRETS SECRET

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


Ever since the Government contrived its system for keeping secrets during World
War II, Presidents have been laboring, mostly unsuccessfully, to prevent
classified information from spilling out, except when they want it to.

Perhaps the most diligent has been President Reagan, who a year ago issued an
executive order designed to tighten controls over secrets.  Last month he
reinforced that order by directing officials to sign secrecy agreements and,
when unauthorized disclosures did occur, to cooperate with investigators and
submit to lie detector tests.

The President's orders, however, may be unenforceable because of the staggering
expanse of Government secrets and the chaotic system that has evolved over 40
years to control their dissemination.

The Information Security Oversight Office, which monitors the system for the
National Security Council, says that in 1980, the year of its latest survey, the
Government placed secrecy classifications on 16 million pieces of information.
The office estimated an annual growth of 10 percent, which would put the 1983
figure over 21 million.

Within the Government, 7,150 officials in 1980 had what is known as original
authority to declare information secret. But they had delegated to 113,000 other
officials the authority to decide what should be kept secret. Uncounted hundreds
of thousands of other officials had access to those secrets.

Random Check for Abuses

While the information office asserted that most officials in the 100 Government
agencies empowered to classify information abided by regulations, it
acknowledged in a 1981 report to the President that there had been abuses.

In a random check, the oversight office estimated that 600,000 papers had been
classified without authority; another 800,000 had been classified unnecessarily.
Officials with delegated authority marked 1.2 million documents as if they had
original authority; in 2.2 million cases, unauthorized restrictions were
imposed.

Today, more than half the classifying is done by five agencies: the Departments
of Defense, State, Energy, Justice and the Central Intelligence Agency, all
concerned with national security. The Energy Department makes nuclear weapons
while the Justice Department includes the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
internal security.

Between Oct. 1, 1981, and July 31, 1982, the Defense Department alone classified
11,691,876 pieces of information, with 301,355 stamped ''top secret.'' The
department also had 1,210,014 top secret documents in its inventory, according
to a departmental report.

''Top secret'' is defined as meaning that unauthorized disclosure could cause
''exceptionally grave damage to the national security,'' such as an armed
attack. ''Secret'' means that disclosure could cause ''serious damage,'' such as
compromising a military or intelligence operation, while ''confidential'' could
cause ''damage,'' such as revealing production data on war munitions.

'A Judgment Call'

Each agency has regulations to specify what should be classified and at what
level. The Pentagon has 19,000 guidelines. But officials asserted that decisions
are really left to each official. ''It's a judgment call,'' said one.

Over the years, some secrets have clearly been necessary. Others have been
frivolous, or at least have not fit definitions stamped on cover sheets.

The C.I.A., for instance, classified as top secret a report based on aerial
photographs in 1962 that 33 Soviet missiles and 23 launchers were in Cuba,
evidently because the agency wanted to conceal the extent and method of the
surveillance.

During the war in Vietnam, however, the Joint Chiefs of Staff made use of a top
secret designation on a telegram that directed field commanders in Vietnam to
minimize publicity about American air strikes.

The State Department classified as secret a highly sensitive negotiating plan to
bring the nation's balance of international payments under control in 1963. But
it also classified as secret a routine summary of Soviet press commentaries on
the election of President Truman in 1948.

Evaluation of the F-18

Each paragraph in a classified paper may bear a different marking, depending on
its gravity. In the Pentagon's newest Defense Guidance, which provides strategic
direction for the armed forces, this seemingly innocuous paragraph was marked
secret: ''The Air Force must be able, in conjunction with other U.S. forces and
our allies, to deter aggression and defeat it, should aggression occur. This
means the projection, application, and sustainment of air power.''

More recently, the Navy marked as confidential a message from Norfolk, Va., to
Washington last November asserting that the F-18 Hornet fighter bomber, after
tests, ''is not operationally suitable'' and recommending against approval for
service use.

Earlier, however, the same confidential marking was stamped on a telegram from
the American Embassy in Tokyo to the State Department in 1964 reporting that
Japan Air Lines wanted to fly into New York.  Anyone who had read a Japanese
newspaper had known that for months.

An official in the system here acknowledged that there is ''an instinct to
overclassify'' and said: ''Most of that is done by top political appointees who
haven't worked in the system before.'' Checks turn up abuses, he said, but ''the
bureaucratic burden to change is such that most people think it not worth the
effort.''

Rules Sometimes Ignored

The President's executive order forbids classifying information ''to conceal
violations of law, inefficiency, or administrative error'' or ''to prevent
embarrassment'' or ''to restrain competition.'' Officials suggested those rules
were sometimes ignored.

The order further provides that abuses could be punished with a reprimand,
suspension without pay, removal or terminating the right to classify. But
officials could not recall offhand having heard of anyone subjected to those
sanctions.

Beyond the sheer size of the secrecy program, trying to enforce it may be
illegal. Congress has never passed a law specifically setting up the process.
Instead, the President has relied on his constitutional authority to conduct
foreign policy and organize national security to issue executive orders on
secrecy.

Said one knowledgeable official, speaking on condition that his identity remain
secret: ''There are no laws giving the President the authority to classify
anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING WARNS HANOI ON BORDER CLASHES

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 19


As new artillery duels were reported along the border, China warned Vietnam
today to stop ''armed provocations'' or face possible fresh retaliation.

Chinese artillery began pounding Vietnamese positions Sunday along the border of
Guangxi and Yunnan Province, ostensibly in response to Vietnamese sniping and
other harassment.

Western diplomats said the Chinese action put pressure on Vietnam at a time when
its forces have mounted an offensive against the Peking-backed insurgents in
Cambodia.

The New China News Agency said today that the Vietnamese shelled the Pingmeng
area of Guangxi's Napo County on Sunday and Monday, blowing up a hospital,
primary school, bank, grain management office and some homes. Over 3,000
residents had to flee their homes, the agency said.

Chinese frontier guards fired back and reported that the Vietnamese had suffered
heavy losses, the press agency said. It gave no casualty figures.

Peking Justifies Shelling

Here in Peking, Qi Huaiyuan, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, said the shelling
had been ''fully justified and necessary.'' He challenged a Vietnamese Foreign
Ministry statement blaming China for the fighting.

Mr. Qi said Vietnam was ''confounding black and white and distorting the facts
in an attempt to shift onto the Chinese side the responsibility for the tension
along the Chinese-Vietnamese border so as to divert people's attention from
their own grave criminal acts.''

He told foreign reporters at his weekly briefing that the tensions on the
Chinese border and the Thai-Cambodian border were caused by Hanoi.

''The Chinese Government hereby issues a stern warning,'' he said.  ''The
Vietnamese authorities must immediately stop their armed provocations against
China's border areas, or China will reserve its right to fight back.''

The language of the statement struck Western diplomats as carefully measured,
and contributed to a feeling that China was not about to mount the kind of
invasion that it carried out in 1979.

Regular Army Not Involved

Chinese reports of artillery clashes stress that the shelling has been carried
out for self-defense by local frontier guards rather than regular army units.

On Monday night, the New China News Agency said militiamen in Yunnan's Hekou
County had ambushed Vietnamese infiltrators before dawn on Sunday, killing four
of them and capturing a machine gun and four submachine guns. The emphasis was
on the role of the militiamen, who are local civilians on temporary military
duty.

The clashes appear to involve Chinese mortars and light artillery shelling
Vietnamese military targets of opportunity and the Vietnamese retaliating in
kind. It is difficult to evaluate the allegations because both sides have barred
independent observers from the area. The outbreak is the most serious since May
1981, when a regimental-sized clash erupted on the Yunnan border.

The Chinese press has been more restrained than in 1979, when the goal was to
''teach a lesson'' to Vietnam and not merely to defend Chinese territory.

The deposed Cambodian ruler, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, said at a news conference
here: ''It appears that China does not want to be considered by public opinion
as a provocateur. China is waiting for Vietnam to react now.''

The Prince, who met Monday with Deputy Prime Minister Wan Li, added: ''I am sure
China will refrain from attacking, from sending infantry into Vietnam. But if
Vietnam attacks, then China will have a good opportunity to teach Vietnam a
second lesson.''

The Prince heads a coalition of Cambodian insurgents, dominated by the Pol Pot
Communists, that have been fighting Vietnamese troops in Cambodia with Chinese
aid.

Prince Sihanouk said the Chinese were supplying considerable amounts of
ammunition to the guerrillas. He also said the Chinese had given him $100,000 in
humanitarian aid to distribute in Cambodian guerrilla-held areas.

''If China decides to punish Vietnam from time to time, to teach lessons, I have
to thank China,'' he said. ''I don't want them to create conditions for a big
war, but we must put an end to Soviet-Vietnamese expansion in our region.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET IS CRITICAL OF CHINESE AGAIN

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 19


A Soviet newspaper today criticized China more harshly than at any time since
moves toward better relations between the two countries began last year.

The Government newspaper Izvestia said Peking, despite avowals of readiness to
improve relations, had persisted in a policy of ''anti-Sovietism.''

A commentary noted the ''atmosphere of normalcy'' that had been achieved in two
rounds of talks and reiterated readiness to improve ties. But it said Chinese
words and deeds were having a negative impact.

''This country is prepared actively to contribute to progress in Soviet-Chinese
relations that would serve the interests of the U.S.S.R. and the People's
Republic of China and the cause of peace and friendship among all nations,'' the
commentary said. ''The Soviet people have a right to expect a similarly
constructive approach from the Chinese side.''

Criticism Avoided Recently

Apart from an article earlier this year accusing China of harboring territorial
claims, Moscow has avoided criticism in the eight months since high-level talks
resumed.

Yuri V. Andropov and other Soviet leaders have spoken positively of China, and
officials have talked about ''substantial detente.'' The Izvestia commentary was
disseminated by the press agency Tass over its English service, indicating that
the Government favored wide circulation abroad. Western diplomats said the
timing of the article might have been related to tension along the
Chinese-Vietnamese frontier and to Vietnam's offensive against Chinesebacked
Cambodian rebels near the Thai border.

But while these frictions may have provided an occasion for the attack, the
diplomats said, the article reflected general disillusionment at the course of
the Soviet-Chinese talks. Soviet officials have been conveying a similar message
to Western officials.

''They are much less optimistic than a few months ago,'' a diplomat said. ''They
will persist in the talks, but there is a realization that breakthroughs are
going to be hard to achieve. In the meantime, they are reminding China that
Moscow's rhetoric can be every bit as tough as Peking's.''

The Izvestia article depicted the Chinese as having responded to Soviet good
will with a two-sided policy that combined declarations of concern for better
relations with ''the cultivation of unfriendly views and ideas.''

''Judging by articles in the Chinese press,'' the commentary said, ''the people
in Peking have not yet given up attempts at using some of the attributes of
anti-Sovietism, which for many years, especially in the bad times of the
Cultural Revolution, poisoned the atmosphere of Soviet-Chinese relations.
Anti-Sovietism has never been and cannot be of benefit to the Chinese people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SAYS BLAST WON'T DETER PEACE EFFORTS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


President Reagan said today that as a result of the bombing of the United States
Embassy in Beirut he was determined ''more than ever'' to do everything possible
to bring about the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon.

Meanwhile the Administration released the names of six Americans missing and
presumed dead in the blast, bringing the overall total to 16 Americans killed or
presumed dead. The Lebanese Government reported a total of at least 40 people
confirmed dead and 25 presumed buried under the rubble.

The White House issued the President's remarks, made in a telephone call to the
United States Ambassador in Beirut, as it announced plans to send a delegation
to Lebanon to bring back the bodies of the Americans killed in the explosion on
Monday.

Mr. Reagan ordered the flying of all official flags at half-staff until Tuesday
''as a mark of respect for the American diplomats, military personnel and loyal
staff members who died violently'' in the attack.

The President, in his telephone call to Ambassador Robert S. Dillon in Beirut,
was reported by Larry Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary, as
saying:

''This tragedy, however awful, must not distract us from our search for peace in
Lebanon and elsewhere. Your devotion to duty is known to all of us. Please let
everyone know we will never give in to this cowardly type of incident. I am
determined now more than ever that we do everything that is necessary to make
Lebanon a free and safe country again.''

Mr. Speakes said the No. 3 man at the State Department, Lawrence S. Eagleburger,
the Under Secretary for Political Affairs, would head the nine-member
delegation.

Mr. Speakes said the bodies of 10 Americans had been identified.  The State
Department said today that the body of the 10th victim was that of Terry Gilden,
26 years old, who was on temporary duty at the embassy as a security officer.

Later the department identified these six Americans as missing and presumed
dead: Phyllis Faraci, 44, an administrative specialist in the Beirut embassy
since 1982 and a former administrative aide in United States Embassies in South
Vietnam and Kuwait.

Kenneth Eugene Haas, 38, a political officer at the embassy, and a member of the
Foreign Service since January 1974. He previously served in Dacca, Teheran, and
Muscat and Oman.

Deborah Hixon, 30, a foreign affairs analyst on temporary duty at the embassy.
She joined the Foreign Service in March 1975, and had previous service at
embassies in Brussels and Pretoria.

James Foley Lewis, a political-military officer in the embassy since last year.
He joined the Government in March 1970 and the State Department in December
1974, and served in embassies in South Vietnam and Tunisia.

Monique Lewis, 36, the Vietnamese-born wife of Mr. Lewis and a part-time
secretary at the embassy, apparently starting this month.  William Richard
Sheil, 59, a civilian Army employee on temporary duty at the embassy. Previously
he served in South Vietnam, Okinawa and Thailand.

In addition the Marine Corps confirmed the death of Cpl. Robert V.  McMaugh, 21,
of Manassas, Va., listed in some reports on Tuesday as missing and in others as
dead.

On Tuesday the Administration identified the bodies of five Americans: Robert C.
Ames, 49, the C.I.A.'s chief Middle East analyst; Frank J. Johnston, 47, a first
secretary at the embassy; William R. McIntyre, 52, Deputy Director of A.I.D. in
Beirut; Thomas R. Blacka, 59, Controller for the A.I.D. mission and Albert N.
Votow, 57, a housing and urban development officer,

On Monday, the Pentagon identified the bodies of Sgt. 1st Class Richard Twine,
36, and Staff Sgt. Ben. H. Maxwell, 26; and said Staff Sgt. Mark E. Salazar, 30,
was missing and believed to be dead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
THE REAGAN COROLLARY

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


President Reagan has decided to use a joint session of Congress as his forum to
address the American people on the defense of this hemisphere. It's about time.

Isolationists have mired us in squabbles about how secret our defense should be,
whether we help or hinder the anti-Communist forces with our aid, and whether we
are going to be drawn into another Vietnam. The President has a duty to lift the
nation's eyes to the essential debate:

In the face of an undeniable penetration of Central America by forces beholden
to a foreign power, does the United States have the will to organize and supply
the resistance - and the skill to enable the local anti-Communists to win their
own battles? Are we so transfixed by our Vietnam defeat that we cannot help
mount a defense of our own continent?

Ah, but the questions are not so simple, the isolationists say. The internal
shortcomings of our allies, and not Soviet-Cuban agitation, may be the cause of
the fighting. Why should we care which totalitarian regime wins?

The unselfish answer is that we should care on the basis of human rights,
because we have seen that no modern government inflicts police-state brutality
as thoroughly as a Communist government; the selfish answer is that the United
States must care on the basis of its own defense.

Assuming that Mr. Reagan will make the case for rising to responsibilities, here
are notes for his yellow pad:

1. Don't waste much time proving again that Castroites and Sandinists are
supplied by Moscow; that's a given. Point to the four Libyan planes turned back
by the Brazilians: their cargo was labeled ''ambulances, hospital equipment and
medical supplies''; that's what they call Soviet guns, rockets and ammunition
for Nicaragua's army.  Make the point and move on.

2.Show how this region is central to U.S. defense. Nearly half our foreign trade
tonnage and imported crude oil passes through the Caribbean; access to the
Panama Canal is vital. The Communist conquest and use of Central America would
pose a direct strategic danger.

3.Expose the hypocrisy of isolationist ''compassion''. Ten percent of the
population of El Salvador - a half-million people - have fled to the U.S., just
as 30 percent of Afghanistan's population has fled Communist op-pression; these
refugees are not running from phantoms.

4.Tell Americans what the fine-sounding ''negotiated settlement'' means in El
Salvador. It means upsetting the results of a democratic election and forcing
the Government to share power with gunmen, leading to salami-tactic takeovers.
We are not going to force our ally do that.

5.Explain the purpose of our not-so-secret war in Nicaragua. The Carter
Administration tried bribing the Sandinists with twice the foreign aid and
multilateral loans in two years that was provided the Somoza Government in 20
years; appeasement did not stop Nicaragua from gagging its press and subverting
its neighbor. Since the Sandinists would not stop pouring arms into El Salvador,
we decided to help the anti-Sandinists make home life difficult for the
troublemakers in Nicaragua.

6.Does this mean we are breaking the curious law passed to guarantee Nicaraguan
Communists that our aid would not be used to overthrow them? No; arming 5,000
anti-Sandinists is hardly likely to lead to the overthrow of a regime backed by
a 75,000-man army.  Obviously we are helping to make life miserable for the
junta by supplying its opponents; this is called ''applying pressure.'' A
painful tax on the export of revolution will be more effective in getting
Nicaragua to stop subverting El Salvador than the millions spent on appeasement.

7.Does that mean we will pull the plug on ''our'' Nicaraguans if the Sandinists
pull the plug on ''their'' guerrillas in El Salvador?  The President should
refuse to countenance such a deal, which would be like the Shah's betrayal of
the Kurds; he should press for free elections in both countries, and let all
anti-government factions take their chances at the polls.

8.The Reagan Corollary. Needed now is an assertion of U.S. policy to update the
Monroe Doctrine. We should pledge our willingness to answer Communist subversion
not merely with aid to the victim but with support of clandestine opposition in
the subverting countries.  Recognizing the war power of the Congress, the
President should ask the joint session to appropriate specific ''punitive
funds'' to finance the indigenous harassment of our allies' harassers.

9.Peroration. Ixnay on the usual soaring rhetoric and spiritual uplift. Get
serious, even solemn: Central America is too close to home for isolationism to
be an option. We will help our friends defend themselves. Take note, Havana: We
will apply the pressure to the source of the trouble.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE MX'S NEW CLOTHES

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, April 20


The argument now being made by President Reagan for building the MX missile is
an extreme example of a strange new phenomenon in American statecraft. Our
leaders have taken to poormouthing the country: announcing how weak and
vulnerable it is.  The world will not respect us, they say, unless we show our
resolve by doing something foolish and dangerous.

It may have begun with President Nixon's warning that the United States would be
a ''pitiful, helpless giant'' unless it intensified the Vietnam War. Then toward
the end of that war came Henry Kissinger's self-domino phase: dramatizing the
disaster by his insistence that U.S. credibility depended on pouring more into
the sinkhole.

Ronald Reagan has poor-mouthed our nuclear strength. As candidate and President,
he said the country was open to attack by Soviet missiles through a ''window of
vulnerability.'' He suggested that the United States had in effect
''unilaterally disarmed'' by doing nothing for years while the Russians built up
their nuclear armory - when in fact the U.S. put multiple warheads on many
missiles, started building Trident submarines, developed cruise missiles and so
on.

The MX was supposed to close the ''window of vulnerability'': the fear that a
surprise Soviet attack could knock out our land-based missiles in their silos
and that, thus disarmed, America would have to give up. A fleet of MX's, each
with 10 warheads, would be invulnerable to surprise attack because they would be
mobile, or based in a way that assured their survival.

But the premises of that argument are now officially dead. The Scowcroft
commission, in its report to the President, dismissed the ''window of
vulnerability.'' A massive surprise attack is deterred, the commission said, by
the ''operational uncertainties'' of such a venture - and by Moscow's knowledge
that the U.S. would still have thousands of nuclear weapons on bombers and in
submarines to retaliate.

The idea that the MX can be made invulnerable was also dropped by General
Scowcroft and his colleagues. After all the frustrating years of effort to find
a magic basing mode for the huge missile, they concluded that there was none.
They suggested that future land-based missiles should be small and mobile.

The premises were gone, but the commission still recommended the MX. The
proposal now is to build 100 of these costly weapons, designed to meet a need
that has been found nonexistent, and put them into Minuteman silos where on the
Administration's past arguments they would be vulnerable. Senator John Tower, an
MX advocate, said in 1981 that MX's in fixed silos would be ''sitting ducks.''

They would also be destabilizing. The MX is a first-strike weapon, one that the
Russians will see as having the potential of a surprise attack on them. If a
moment of tension comes, if the Russians are misled into thinking we are about
to launch, they might be tempted to hit the MX's first. And because the missiles
are not survivable, we might prepare a hair-trigger response.

Why would the Scowcroft commission, and then the President, go for such an
unstable, unneeded weapon system? The answer lies not in logic, but in politics.
In the age of nuclear weapons, proposed new systems develop a momentum of their
own. There is a militaryindustrial complex in both the United States and the
Soviet Union.

McGeorge Bundy, in a brilliant analysis of the Scowcroft report, said the
unspoken gist of it was that we must have these weapons because the Russians do:
''Never mind their contribution to instability in crisis; never mind what the
Russians will build in reply; never mind what else you could do with $15 billion
...; never mind that Soviet advantages on land are fully matched by our
superiority in the air and under water.''

Brent Scowcroft is a humane and intelligent man. He found himself, I think, in a
framework from which he could not escape: the universal awareness that President
Reagan had appointed the commission to find some way of getting the MX through
Congress. Its task was political.  And in the end General Scowcroft fell back on
the new politics of fear.

We have to build the MX, he said in an interview, ''to demonstrate U.S. national
will. If we back away from it now, it will underscore our paralysis for both our
opponents and our friends.'' President Reagan echoed that, saying we had to
''demonstrate our resolve, our national will.'' In short, to make the world
believe us, we have to press obsessively on with an expensive and dangerous
folly.

How nice it would be if we had a President who could say: ''The United States is
a confident country. We do not need to prove our strength, to ourselves or
others, by persisting in mistakes. We are strong enough to act, not in reflex
but in wisdom.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
FAIRNESS VS. ADVOCACY

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 883 words


DOCUMENTARY makers discussed their work last week at a conference in Washington.
For the most part they were independents, the freelancers of television
journalism, whose films over the years have included some of the most
provocative programs seen on television.  The conference was called to examine
journalistic standards, although many of the documentary makers there denied
they were journalists.

The conference, sponsored by the American Film Institute and the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting, featured a keynote speaker, Fred W. Friendly. Mr. Friendly,
who was once Edward R. Murrow's producer, said, among other things, that truth
without facts was unacceptable.  In other words, a documentary maker may indict
anything or anyone he or she chooses to, but there should be data to support the
indictment.

Mr. Friendly's proposition was unassailable. Film clips shown at some of the
conference seminars proved it. If a documentary, or any other piece of
television journalism, must hang someone, the hanging is legitimate only when it
is accompanied by elementary rules of fairness: Has the documentary presented
both sides of an argument?  Has the person criticized been given a chance to
reply to the criticism? There is a difference between a hanging and a lynching.

Many of the documentary makers, however, did not quite see it that way. ''I am
not a journalist - I am a film maker with an independent point of view,'' a
young documentary maker said. He was, presumably, a partisan of advocacy
journalism. He was also an apostle of the moving image. For him and some of his
colleagues, the issue was not what a documentary said, but how it said it. They
were making an argument for style over substance.

The conference, meanwhile, had a subtext: the documentary makers' struggle to
get their works shown on, and funded by, public television. ''Public
television,'' as Mr. Friendly said, ''is the last best hope for independent
documentaries.'' The documentary makers agreed, although at the same time many
of them clearly saw public television as the enemy. They were persuasive when
they said they did not have sufficient access to public television; they were
considerably less than persuasive when they argued that public television curbed
their right to self-expression.

It was argued, for example, that the Public Broadcasting Service was cowardly,
even reactionary, when it declined to show ''Agent Orange,'' a half-hour film
that purported to examine the effects of the spraying of chemicals by American
forces in South Vietnam. Its principal character was a former serviceman whose
wife had given birth to handicapped children. The film, which was shown at the
conference, offered no evidence that the spraying had caused the family's
trauma; it only implied it. It also implied that any one of the American
servicemen or women who were once in Vietnam might one day be the parents of
handicapped children. It was a dreadful piece of journalism.

It was depressing, therefore, to hear some of the documentary makers denounce,
not '''Agent Orange,'' but PBS, for refusing to put it on the air. They seemed
to be saying that because the producer of the film had an acceptable point of
view, it wasn't necessary for him to prove it. They were describing ''Agent
Orange'' and films like it as if they were samizdat, little works of
self-expression sent out to the other prisoners in the Gulag. It is possible the
documentary makers were right; maybe that's what the films are. Still, when did
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn ever ask for public funding?

MTV Music Television, the cable network, is a triumph of imagery, possibly
America's next great cultural export, and the kind of thing that may keep
Secretary of the Interior James Watt awake at night.  Mr. Watt worried about the
influence of the Beach Boys on the public psyche. MTV offers all-day, all-night
music, with each piece of music accompanied by a brief film. Some of the music
is execrable, but the films are seldom less than interesting. Some of them, in
fact, are brilliant.

Each film is labeled with the name of the group and the music: for example,
Fleetwod Mac and ''Gypsy.'' Therefore, they are promotions for the music,
although this hardly detracts from the films or, as they are referred to on MTV,
the video.

Meanwhile, in between the films, nice-looking young people intermittently offer
news about pop music: Freddie Mercury and Michael Jackson are hoping to have a
recording session; Billy Joel is writing a song for Rodney Dangerfield; Eye to
Eye is making an album. None of this may interest you, but hold on because in
another moment there will be more video.

The Fleetwod Mac-''Gypsy'' video, for instance, alternates between color and
black and white. A young woman, Fleetwood Mac's lead singer, is dancing. She
seems to be swathed in gauze. Cut to black and white and what looks like the
Lower East Side. Cut again to what could be a speakeasy, and then to some
well-dressed people dancing in the rain.

The other thing about the video, shown relentlessly 24 hours a day, eating up
miles and miles of film, is, random viewing suggests, its good taste. Violence
is absent; sex is implied, never overt, and even when it is implied it is so
stylized that most of the time it just seems amusing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of MTV videotapes

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

CBS VIETNAM DOCUMENTARY FAULTED

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


''Inside Story,'' public television's weekly critique of broadcast and print
journalism, contends in its program on WNET at 8 tonight that CBS News, in a
documentary aired last year, failed to prove its contention that United States
military officials deceived President Lyndon B. Johnson and the American people
about enemy troop strength in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968.

The CBS report, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' was a 90-minute
documentary that sought to show that the United States military intelligence
apparatus in Vietnam as well as the former commander of the American military
forces there, Gen. William C.  Westmoreland, deceived the President, Congress
and the American people about aspects of the war. CBS said General Westmoreland
consistently underreported enemy strength in the area to make it appear that his
own forces were stronger and were winning the war.

The CBS show has been controversial since it was broadcast. When General
Westmoreland demanded 45 minutes of rebuttal time, CBS offered him 15 minutes.
He refused it and sought $120 million from CBS News in a libel suit. The suit is
still pending.

CBS has stood by its story but it has admitted to some violations of the
network's news-gathering guidelines. Van Gordon Sauter, CBS News president,
acknowledged that there had not been enough interviews supporting General
Westmoreland's views.

Broadcast Jan. 23, 1982

The CBS report was broadcast on Jan. 23, 1982. It opened with this comment by
Mike Wallace, its correspondent: ''Tonight we are going to present evidence of
what we have come to believe was a conscious effort - indeed, a conspiracy - at
the highest levels of American military intelligence to suppress and alter
critical intelligence on the enemy in the year leading up to the Tet
offensive.''

In the edition of ''Inside Story'' scheduled to be broadcast nationally tonight,
its correspondent, Hodding Carter 3d, offered his own conclusion.

''History may yet decide that there was indeed a conspiracy in Saigon to fake
the numbers,'' he said. ''But at this point the evidence is less compelling, the
witnesses more contradictory and the possible conclusions less obvious than the
documentary suggests.''

No Comment From CBS

A spokesman for CBS News said the network would not comment on the ''Inside
Story'' program until it had been broadcasat. Mr. Wallace was interviewed for
three hours by ''Inside Story'' but declined to appear on the screen.

In an interview, Mr. Carter said the two-month ''Inside Story'' investigation
had not uncovered new information about the military operations in Vietnam, but
did turn up ''a lot of old information that was not included in the
documentary.''

He said that George Crile, a CBS producer, and his staff either did not talk to
or did not include interviews with Gen. Philip Davidson, head of the Military
Assistance Command in Vietnam; Gen. George Gooding, head of military
intelligence in Vietnam, or with Walt W.  Rostow, a special assistant to
President Johnson.

''If you're going to make a case that there was a conspiracy at the highest
levels of American intelligence,'' Mr. Carter said, ''then you have to go to the
highest levels and allow the chief conspirators to talk.''

'Seems Time Enough'

Mr. Carter said during the program that CBS officials told him they ''couldn't
reach'' General Davidson because he was ill. ''The show was 15 months in the
making,'' Mr. Carter noted. ''That seems like time enough to reach almost
anyone.'' General Davidson, reached by ''Inside Story,'' said he had gotten
married during that period, had been ''playing lots of tennis'' and was
accessible.

CBS interviewed Mr. Rostow more than three hours but used none of it.
Interviewed by ''Inside Story,'' Mr. Rostow scoffed at the conspiracy theory and
said President Johnson knew about the varying figures.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITOR'S NOTE

Under this heading, The Times amplifies articles or rectifies what the editors
consider significant lapses of fairness, balance or perspective. Corrections,
also on this page, continue to deal with factual errors.

A news article in The Times yesterday, headed ''CBS Vietnam Documentary
Faulted,'' reported criticism of CBS News, leveled last night by the public
television program ''Inside Story.''

As The Times reported, ''Inside Story'' evaluated CBS's much-debated 1982
documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The CBS documentary
maintained that United States military officers in 1967 and 1968 deceived
President Johnson and the public about enemy troop strength in Vietnam. Last
night the public television commentator Hodding S. Carter 3d asserted that CBS
had failed to prove its thesis.

The debate over CBS's documentary had long since been detailed in The Times. And
yesterday's Times article quoted Mr. Carter as saying that ''Inside Story'' had
turned up no new information about military operations in Vietnam - only ''a lot
of old information that was not included'' in CBS's documentary.

Nothing in the Times account suggested that the criticism of CBS by ''Inside
Story'' was fresh, substantive or otherwise newsworthy.Nevertheless The Times
devoted some 700 words to ''Inside Story,'' displayed across six columns at the
top of a page. By its length, the Times article seemed to imply that the
criticisms of CBS were fresh or newly substantiated.

By The Times's standards of news judgment and fairness, the article was too long
and too prominently displayed.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

16 HANOI SOLDIERS KILLED, CHINA SAYS

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 21


China announced today that its frontier guards had killed 16 Vietnamese soldiers
in clashes Wednesday along the border of Yunnan Province.

According to the New China News Agency, five Vietnamese soldiers were killed and
a sixth wounded when they took advantage of a rainy mist to cross the frontier
late Wednesday afternoon to Jinping County and ran into a patrol of frontier
guards outside a village.

That evening, soon after 9 o'clock, other Vietnamese soldiers tried to rush the
company guard post, but withdrew after the Chinese opened fire with machine guns
and rifles, leaving 11 Vietnamese dead, the agency reported.

It was the first substantial ground skirmish reported from the tense border,
where Chinese frontier guards began shelling Vietnamese positions last Saturday
and Sunday, ostensibly in reprisal for ''armed provocations'' by the Vietnamese.

There was no further word about the exchange of artillery fire today, suggesting
that it may have halted after shelling from both sides on Monday. But today's
front page of the official People's Daily featured pictures of helmeted Chinese
artillerymen preparing to fire on Vietnamese targets and of a school said to
have been damaged by Vietnamese shelling on Monday.

Meanwhile, a senior Chinese official hinted today that Peking would continue to
retaliate if Hanoi pressed its recent offensive against the insurgents in
Cambodia. Western diplomats here tend to believe that China's recent actions
have been intended at least in part to put pressure on Vietnam and force it to
keep troops on the border rather than send them into Cambodia. Li Xiannian, a
member of the ruling Politburo, asserted that China's shelling was necessary
because of ''repeated Vietnamese provocations.'' He made his comments at a
banquet here for Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the exiled Cambodian leader, who is
titular head of the three-party resistance coalition in Cambodia.

''Should the Vietnamese authorities cling obstinately to their course and
continue to play with fire, threatening the security of China and the peace and
stability of Southeast Asia, they will inevitably swallow even more bitter
fruit,'' Mr. Li was quoted by the New China News Agency as saying.

Supplying the Rebels

China has been providing weapons and ammunition to the Communist guerrillas of
the former Pol Pot regime, which was replaced in Phnom Penh in by a
Vietnamese-backed Communist Government in early 1979, and to a lesser extent to
the two non-Communist insurgent forces in the coalition. Mr. Li assured Prince
Sihanouk that ''we will never stop our support so long as Vietnam does not stop
such aggression.''

Details of earlier border skirmishing were released today when the New China
News Agency reported that two brothers belonging to the Miao ethnic minority in
southern Yunnan were decorated for killing a Vietnamese soldier and wounding
another on April 9, a week before the Chinese started shelling across the
border.

The two brothers, Wang Linhua and Wang Linhe, were militiamen on reserve duty in
the Wenshan Autonomous Prefecture when they spotted a four-man Vietnamese patrol
that had crossed the border in the fog for reconnaissance and to plant mines,
the news agency said. The two brothers opened fire and two of the soldiers
dragged their wounded comrade back across the border, leaving the dead
infiltrator and a submachine gun behind.

The reports on both fighting and casualties have been skimpy, with the Chinese
releasing only selected details to back their claim that they are acting in
self-defense. But today's report of the ground clashes confirmed that tensions
remain high.

New Invasion Is Discounted

Western diplomats here doubt that China will mount a ground invasion of Vietnam,
as it did in early 1979. The Chinese press has emphasized that the fighting this
time has been carried out by frontier guards and local militiamen rather than by
regular army units.

But China has left its options open by asserting that it is up to Vietnam to
reduce the hostilities, which Mr. Li implied today included the action in
Cambodia as well as along the border.

In the published version of Mr. Li's remarks today to Prince Sihanouk, he
reiterated China's position: ''The Vietnamese authorities must immediately and
unconditionally withdraw all their aggressor troops from Kampuchea and
immediately stop all sorts of provocations against their neighboring
countries.'' Cambodia is also called Kampuchea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of China (Page A12) photo of Chinese gunners

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CBS IS TOLD TO GIVE WESTMORELAND INTERNAL STUDY ON VIETNAM REPORT

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 996 words


A Federal District judge ordered CBS News yesterday to give Gen.  William C.
Westmoreland the text of its investigation into a television documentary that
charged that the General had conspired to falsify figures on enemy troop
strength in Vietnam.

CBS said it would appeal the decision.  According to libel lawyers, the case
poses a novel issue in journalism law because CBS is being required to produce
internal studies made after it broadcast the documentary. News organizations
frequently investigate their own stories if questions are raised about them, but
they have not been required to tell a libel plaintiff everything that such an
investigation finds.

General Westmoreland said he had been libeled by the 1982 program and sued CBS
for $120 million, which he said he would turn over to charity if he won his
case. In pretrial motions, he sought the report to bolster his contention that
the reporters and producers of ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' had
deliberately refused to broadcast material that rebutted the thesis of a
conspiracy.

Investigation Into Documentary

The CBS investigation into the documentary was made by a senior executive
producer, Burton Benjamin, after an article in TV Guide said that the producer,
George Crile, and the narrator, Mike Wallace, had failed to interview key
figures who knew how troop-strength estimates had been made.

TV Guide also said the documentary had left out rebuttals from officers
challenging the idea that General Westmoreland underreported enemy strength to
avoid stirring up domestic protests about the conduct of the war in Vietnam.
General Westmoreland, now retired from the Army, was the commander of United
States military forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

In July, Van Gordon Sauter, president of CBS News, made public a memorandum that
said the program had violated some journalistic procedures. But the memo added
that the network stood behind the show and cited the Benjamin report as
supporting that conclusion.

The Federal judge, Pierre N. Leval, in U.S. District Court in Manhattan, said
such action destroyed any constitutional privilege CBS might have had to keep
the document secret. He said, ''CBS cannot at once hold out the Benjamin report
to the public as substantiating its accusations and, when challenged, decline to
reveal the report contending it is a confidential internal study utilized solely
for self-evaluation and self-improvement.''

CBS, supported by a variety of other news organizations, had argued that the
First Amendment protection of a free press effectively gave it the privilege of
not having to disclose an internal selfevaluative document. Judge Leval, a
Harvard Law School graduate appointed to the bench by President Jimmy Carter,
said he was not trying to decide whether there was such an absolute privilege
because, even if it existed, CBS had effectively waived it.

Dan M. Burt, the lawyer representing General Westmoreland, said CBS had been
trying to cover up the allegations made by TV Guide but ''Bud Benjamin told the
truth and then they had a problem.'' Mr. Burt is president of the
Washington-based Capital Legal Foundation, which describes itself as ''a
public-interest law firm concerned with a fair, free-market approach to Federal
regulation.''

The case presents a new twist in the evolving area of libel law.  Courts have
not ruled on the specific issue of whether a news organization that investigates
its own stories can be forced to reveal what it finds to a libel plaintiff.

Interviewed 32 People

Mr. Sauter said last summer that Mr. Benjamin had read unedited transcripts of
interviews for the broadcast and had interviewed 32 people, including 12 CBS
News employees, in his investigation. In a statement yesterday, CBS said Mr.
Benjamin had promised confidentiality to many of those he interviewed.

The network said it ''continues to believe that it is imperative that
journalists be able to conduct post-broadcast and postpublication examinations
of their work.'' It added, ''And confidentiality is important if those efforts
are to be meaningful.''

In legal terms, General Westmoreland is a public figure who cannot pursue his
case unless he can prove that CBS broadcast the program with ''actual malice'' -
either knowing that it was false or simply not caring whether it was true or
not. To do that, however, the courts have said that plaintiffs must be allowed
to find out what journalists knew when they published or broadcast the story in
question. This means that plaintiffs can get access to reporters' files and can
ask about the ''state of mind'' of journalists.

Judge Leval said that because the Benjamin report studied the making of the
documentary, it ''may well lead to evidence of degree of care for accuracy,
concern for truthfulness, and possible bias, prejudgment or malice.''

Further, he noted, General Westmoreland is suing CBS both for the original
program and for Mr. Sauter's memorandum last summer, which, the General says,
repeated the libel.

Possible 'Important Evidence'

''The Sauter memorandum implies that the Benjamin report supports its
conclusions,'' the judge wrote. If it does not, he said, it could be ''important
evidence of the necessary element of malice.''

Last fall, CBS reportedly offered General Westmoreland 15 minutes of unedited
air time to reply to the charges in ''The Uncounted Enemy,'' but he has declined
and has insisted that the network apologize for the program. CBS canceled plans
for a follow-up program on the issue of enemy troop strength in Vietnam after
the General and other potential participants said they would not appear on it.

CBS was represented by its own lawyers and by the New York City firm of Cravath,
Swain & Moore. ABC, NBC, Newsweek magazine and The Wall Street Journal were
among the news organizations that filed briefs supporting a right of
confidentiality for internal investigative reports such as the Benjamin study.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES SEE NEED FOR BIG EFFORT TO AVERT REBEL VICTORY IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2409 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 21


A range of Administration officials say the United States must make a sustained,
increased effort in El Salvador or lose the war to the guerrillas.

Even with such an effort, the officials believe, it will take from two to seven
years before significant progress can be made toward bringing the situation
there under control.

They also speak as if there is now agreement in the Administration that Cuba is
''the source'' of the problem in Central America, as Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. argued it was in 1981.

Making Cuba Pay a Price

Although there is apparently no agreement yet on what to do about it, some
officials talk as if something is either going on or in the works to make Cuba
pay a price.

The officials know they are running out of time. With few exceptions, officials
say that if things continue as they are in El Salvador and if the United States
does not do more to help ''we will lose,'' as one high-ranking official put it.

Yet there is apparently no clear agreement on how much more aid or how many more
advisers are needed in El Salvador, or on what actions should be undertaken
against Nicaragua and possibly Cuba to prevent a defeat.

An Administration Consensus

Interviews with more than a score of officials in the White House, the State
Department, the Defense Department and intelligence agencies show this consensus
within the Administration:

- The Administration cannot step up direct United States military involvement
and win a quick military victory, in view of Congressional constraints.

- The Administration will not seek a face-saving way of losing through
negotiations, given its own view of El Salvador as vital in containing the
spread of Communism.

- It cannot control the actions of its Salvadoran allies any more effectively
than it could dictate to past dependents such as South Vietnam. Hence it cannot
rapidly build a viable military force and a centrist government in El Salvador
with the popular support essential to success.

Playing for Time

Thus the Reagan Administration, unable to win and unwilling to lose, is playing
for time in the face of a messy situation in El Salvador. The real test,
officials assert, is whether Congress and the people of the United States will
give them that time.

During such a time, the Administration has to bring the Salvadoran right wing
under control, build public support for the center through a program of
elections, rebuild an economy shattered by the war, and transform the Salvadoran
military into an effective fighting force.

Officials realize nothing is possible unless the security situation is brought
under control, and United States military experts are not optimistic.

A special, high-level military report in 1981 found that even with increased
United States aid the Salvadoran forces could not defeat the rebels without a
major overhaul. According to two Pentagon officials, that overhaul is just
beginning to get under way now, with uncertain prospects.

Many Striking Parallels

There are many striking parallels between the situation the Reagan
Administration faces today in Central America and those the Johnson and Nixon
Administrations faced a decade and more ago in Indochina.

But there is one major difference: Congress has already tied the Reagan
Administration's hands on El Salvador in ways it took many years to do with
respect to Indochina.

To get the necessary Congressional support for a sustained and increased United
States effort in Central America, Mr. Reagan was told by top aides in February,
he can no longer stand aside as he has done for more than two years, and he has
to take his case to the public.

''He was told, in effect, that his policy could not be carried on the back of
some assistant secretary of state,'' one high-ranking State Department official
said. Mr. Reagan has taken this advice and is expected to address a joint
session of Congess on the subject next week, a highly unusual step.

If Congress does not go along and the guerrillas win, officials make clear, Mr.
Reagan intends to lay the blame on Capitol Hill and the Democrats.

'Not Being Done Cynically'

''This is not being done cynically,'' a key State Department official explained.
''The senior people in this Administration are not prepared intellectually,
politically and strategically to abandon El Salvador at all, and certainly not
before the 1984 elections.''

The Administration's secret policy is its public policy, as is clear from
classified documents recently made available to the news media, and there is
every sign that officials working on Central America strongly support the
policy. This was not the case during the Vietnam War, except toward the end in
1975.

What there is of dissent is almost entirely over tactics - such as whether to
ask for increases in United States military advisers and aid now or later, how
much to stress negotiations without appearing weak, and the legality of covert
military operations in Nicaragua.

So far Congress has dodged Administration thunderbolts. But Congressional
objectives are far from clear. The majority of legislators has refused either to
abandon El Salvador or give the Administration a relatively free hand.

'Tying Our Hands'

''They are forcing us to lose piecemeal by tying our hands,'' a Pentagon
official said. ''But they won't cut our hands off because that way they'd have
to take the responsibility.''

Some Congressional critics retort that they are trying to strengthen Mr.
Reagan's hand. Congressional standards on human rights, they say, can be used by
him to compel the Salvadoran Government to shape up. Others say they are trying
to save the United States from falling into the Salvadoran quagmire. To this
end, they are willing to support and share responsibility for a negotiated
settlement with the guerrillas.

Senior Administration officials simply do not believe that civil wars are
settled by negotiation, and the weight of history is on their side. To them, the
kind of settlements proposed by critics are a disguised way of losing, and the
Administration will not buy that.

The Administration is willing to negotiate left-wing participation in elections,
including issues such as safety for candidates and access to voters and the news
media. But officials make clear that they think there is little or no chance of
the guerrillas' believing they can safely participate in elections.

The Administration is not prepared to go farther and grant the guerrillas a
share of political power in advance of elections, as the guerrillas' political
organizations have demanded. The Administration does not believe that left-wing
guerrillas can be trusted to keep agreements and share power. Officials point to
efforts by the Carter Administration to provide economic aid to Nicaragua on the
condition that the Sandinists allow a free press and political pluralism. The
efforts did not work, they said.

A Propaganda War

Several officials make plain that the Administration sees the toand-fro over
negotiations essentially as part of a propaganda war.  ''The feeling never was
that we could negotiate an agreement on El Salvador or Nicaragua,'' a high
official said. ''Notwithstanding, we decided in February that we needed to move
on the diplomatic side to deflect the perception of our only going for a
military solution.''

On March 10 Mr. Reagan said the ''defense of the Caribbean and Central America
against Marxist-Leninist takeover is vital to our national security.'' That
proposition is largely unquestioned within the Administration.

The belief is that if the left takes over in El Salvador the contagion will
spread uncontrollably to the Panama Canal and up through Mexico to the border of
the United States.

A Dissenting View

Some State Department officials are known to question the idea of inevitability
and argue that what happens in the rest of the region depends on the specific
situations in each of the countries. But there is no evidence that these
doubters push their point very hard.

Prof. Robert Osgood of Johns Hopkins University analyzed the Administration's
approach as a return to ''the containment policy, pretty much as defined in the
late 1940's, preventing the expansion of Soviet influence and control.''

From the 1940's to the 1970's, Administrations regarded almost all revolutions
as Communist-inspired and directed from Moscow. This sense waned in the 1970's.

But Administration officials are now convinced that the revolution in El
Salvador would amount to little without external support from Nicaragua, Cuba
and the Soviet Union.

Arms for the Guerrillas

Without exception, the officials maintain that there is no doubt that direction
and supplies for the Salvadoran guerrillas come from Cuba and Nicaragua. They
acknowledge that the guerrillas are now getting most of their arms from within
El Salvador - by capturing them or buying them - but insist that the flow from
Nicaragua is essential to the guerrillas' maintaining their current level of
operations.

The officials say the United States' surveillance operation for Nicaragua is
even greater than the one for the Soviet Union. ''We can hear a toilet flush in
Managua,'' an intelligence analyst said.

Asked why the Administration has not used this capability to shoot down one
aircraft arriving from Nicaragua or capture one van coming over the mountains
from Honduras, or present other evidence of the arms flow, the answers are
sketchy.

One official said the guerrillas were now taking effective countermeasures to
block United States intelligence-gathering.  Another replied that shooting down
an aircraft was ''a good idea.'' Others said it would reveal our intelligence
capabilities and thus jeopardize them.

Mexico Going It Alone

Administration officials also maintain that their view of a threat from
Nicaragua and the Salvadoran guerrillas is shared by most of the Latin American
countries involved in the area, with the exception of Mexico. To them, Mexican
policy is short-sighted, intended to protect Mexico from revolutions at the
expense of the rest of the area.

Administration officials are not impressed that almost all Latin American and
Western European nations support more far-reaching negotiations than those
backed by the United States. Most of these efforts, they contend, are being done
primarily as domestic, political window dressing, and, in any event, will fail.

Matters such as these are discussed about twice a week by an interdepartmental
group under the chairmanship of Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs.

The group, which operates under the authority of the National Security Council,
is regarded as the key policy group on El Salvador. Its meetings are seen as the
place where day-to-day decisions are made, studies commissioned and broad policy
choices are framed for the President.

Regular participants at the sessions in Mr. Enders's sixth-floor office include
Alfonso Sapio-Bosch, a member of the National Security Council staff; Nestor
Sanchez, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Inter-American Affairs;
Lieut. Gen. Paul F. Gorman of the Army, assistant to the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff; Vice Adm.  Thomas J. Bigley, Director of Plans and Policy for
the Joint Chiefs; L. Craig Johnstone, Director of the State Department's Office
of Central American Affairs, and a representative of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

Several members of the group - Mr. Enders, General Gorman and Mr.  Johnstone -
were important middle level participants in Vietnam policy making, as are a
number of other State Department officials and military officers working on
Central America.

Richard Stone, a former Democratic Senator from Florida, often attends the
meetings in his capacity as special representative of the President for public
diplomacy in the area.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick's Influence

By virtually everyone's testimony, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States
representative at the United Nations, is the central intellectual force behind
the policy. But she does not participate in the group.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick recently wrote that the United States had ''moral'' stakes in
El Salvador. This view is widely shared in the Administration. The feeling is
that the United States is doing the right thing in trying to create a viable
political center in El Salvador.

Most officials acknowledge that the center is weak and weighed down by the right
wing. But the conviction is that what there is of a political center has values
in common with those of the United States, and would be better for the people of
El Salvador than either the left or the right. These officials believe that the
effort to establish the center as a real political force must not be abandoned.
This, they say, is the goal, and they bemoan public questions about their
sincerity.

Many of those interviewed conceded that the Administration carried a great deal
of ideological baggage about supporting right-wing dictatorships, and that the
United States was bound by historical burdens in Latin America. But they
insisted that the Administration was trying to do things right this time -to
build up the center - and that it deserved a chance.

Morality vs. Viability

To the Administration, the issue of right - as the officials see it - transcends
questions of viability. Officials tend to construe questions about whether the
policy can work as tantamount to arguing that the United States should abandon
El Salvador.

Consequently, there are a number of questions that many officials do not want to
talk about, or, in some cases, have not thought much about.

Will Congress wait two to seven years to see real progress toward eliminating
human rights abuses, Salvadoran ''death squads,'' economic and military
stability? Will a majority of legislators vote for increasing aid packages for
another war of indefinite duration and result? Is it really possible to build up
the political center and wean the right wing away from power? Are not many
members of the guerrilla front a part of what there is of a political center in
Salvador? How far is the Administration prepared to go on whom it will negotiate
with, up to but not including the Communists? If all else fails, and the
Administration continues to believe El Salvador is vital to United States
security, will it then advocate sending United States combat troops?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jeane J. Kirkpatrick(Page A10) photo of Thomas
O. Enders (Page A10)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOW NOT TO WIN OVER THE YOUTH OF EUROPE

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 538 words


To the Editor:

To this old Europe hand (over 30 years of teaching, thinking and writing about
politics and government of Western Europe) the current frantic efforts to
explain the causes of Europe's anti-Americanism, and seek remedies, seem almost
totally inept (''U.S. Is Planning Bid to Win Over Europe's Young,'' news story
April 4).

These efforts are doomed to failure because they all seem to be based on the
assumption that the Europeans' hostility to the U.S. is misguided, irrational
and the result of a diabolically clever propaganda effort on the part of the
U.S.S.R. There is not even a suggestion in your article that any one of these
official, semiofficial or so-called private efforts to ''win over'' the
Europeans is considering the proposition that the young Europeans' distrust of
the U.S. might be well founded, if not necessarily from an American perspective.

Passing reference is made to the sad facts of the dismantling of various
programs that in former times have brought people across the Atlantic both ways,
but that reference is not really followed up as possibly having something to do
with the decline of European understanding of the American point of view.

Only some of the elements of this American-European estrangement can be
suggested here: ''Official'' America on both sides of the Atlantic has almost
always been hostile to European leftists. Such people often had visa problems
when they wanted to visit the U.S., and they were not invited to participate in
events in Europe for fear that their hosts would be politically contaminated.
The end result: ignorance and hostility on both sides.

The U.S. Information Agency's Charles Wick is reported to have raised ''several
million dollars'' from private sources to finance youth exchanges. Has anyone
considered that young Europeans, rather than sharing Mr. Wick's pride in having
twisted so many arms so successfully, might assume instead that American
capitalists are investing in what they see as a ''fight against Communism''?

If there were less preaching about an Atlantic community and more willingness to
recognize that the systems of values on which societies on the two sides of the
Atlantic rest exhibit some profound differences, we would perhaps be able to
deal with European suspicions realistically instead of by incantations about the
generational differences: Marshall Plan and Berlin airlift vs.  Vietnam War and
Watergate.

Europeans, especially younger Europeans, have ideas - about the welfare state,
about the nature of the work place and the rights of workers in the work place,
about war and peace and about the general quality of life - that are very
different indeed from those they see being propagated by official America, and
that is the only America they see or hear.

Obviously, Americans cannot and should not change simply to accommodate European
values, but we could make a beginning if we started with the premise that there
are indeed some very profound value differences that make communications,
negotiations and ultimate agreement very difficult.
ALFRED DIAMANT, Bloomington, Ind., April 8, 1983

The writer is professor of political science and West European studies at
Indiana University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
FRIDAY, APRIL 22, 1983

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


International

Chinese forces killed 16 Vietnamese in two clashes along the border of Yunnan
Province, Peking announced. The New China News Agency said one group of
Vietnamese troops was slain after being spotted by guards outside a Chinese
village and a second group was killed while the Vietnamese were trying to rush a
frontier guard post. (Page A1, Column 1.)

The expulsion of three Soviet envoys accused of espionage was announced by the
F.B.I. The bureau said the diplomats included a military attache at the Soviet
Embassy who was reportedly caught while retrieving what he thought were stolen
American military secrets hidden at the base of a tree in rural Maryland.
(A1:4.)

An increased effort in El Salvador is needed or the guerrillas will win the war,
according to a range of Reagan Administration officials. Even with such a
sustained effort, they believe, it will take from two to seven years to make
significant progress toward restoring peace. (A1:2-3.)

The death of a key Salvadoran rebel in Nicaragua last week prompted speculation
about rifts among the guerrilla movements of Central America. Both the
Nicaraguan Government and his rebel faction said that the 63-year-old senior
commander of El Salvador's insurgent forces, Salvador Cayetano Carpio, had
committed suicide after learning that a trusted aide was responsible for the
recent murder of another leader of his faction. (A1:3-5.)

National

A postponement of withholding taxes on interest and dividend income for at least
four years was approved by the Senate, 91 to 5. The compromise legislation,
which includes provisions to increase taxpayer compliance, faces an uncertain
future in the House and at the White House. (A1:6.)

A proposed budget advanced in the Senate Budget Committee. Spurning a White
House plea for delay, the chairman of the panel, Pete V.  Domenici, and three
other Republicans formed a temporary alliance with the Democratic minority to
break a week-long impasse and send a draft budget to the Senate floor. The plan
calls for $30.2 billion of additional, and unspecified, taxes in the next fiscal
year. (B6:1-2.)

A possible $40 million cleanup is in prospect at the Stringfellow Acid Pits
toxic waste dump near Riverside, Calif. The Federal Government and the state
went to court to force operators and major dumpers, including some of the
nation's largest industrial corporations, to pay for the cleanup of what was
described as a ''serious threat'' to public health. (A1:5.)

Derek Bok assailed the legal system in the United States as ''among the most
expensive and least efficient in the world'' and said that law schools bore part
of the blame. In his annual report to the Board of Overseers of Harvard College,
Mr. Bok, the university's president, said the system offered a ''spurious form
of justice'' that places the interests of the privileged above justice for poor
or middle-class citizens. (Al:6.)

Six Ku Klux Klansmen were indicted along with three American Nazi party members
by a Federal grand jury on charges of conspiring in 1979 to disrupt an anti-Klan
rally in Greensboro, N.C., at which five demonstrators were fatally shot.
(A14:1.)

The new teamsters' president is Jackie Presser, an aggressive union leader from
Ohio. Mr. Presser was elected without opposition by the union's general
executive board to replace Roy L. Williams, who resigned to avoid being sent to
a Federal prison hospital after his conviction on fraud and bribery charges.
(A20:1-3.)

Senator John Glenn declared his candidacy for the 1984 Democratic Presidential
nomination in his hometown of New Concord, Ohio. Mr.  Glenn stessed patriotic
themes and what he termed ''small town'' values and accused President Reagan of
abandoning the vision of America that he offered as a candidate. (A14:4-6.)

Metropolitan

CBS News lost the latest round in a dispute with Gen. William C.  Westmoreland.
A Federal judge in Manhattan ordered CBS News to give the general the text of
its investigation into a controversial television documentary that charged he
had conspired to falsify figures on enemy troop strength in Vietnam. (A1:1-2.)

One of the two bodies dug up in a Staten Island backyard was identified as that
of a 17-year-old Brick Township girl who disappeared on Halloween night in 1981.
The Monmouth County Prosecutor said he would seek a murder indictment against
Richard F.  Biegenwald, who is suspected of killing at least four other people
in New Jersey. (B1:5-6.)

Five firemen were injured and 800 office workers were evacuated when a
suspicious three-alarm fire broke out in an unoccupied storage room on the sixth
floor of a 22-story building in the heart of Manhattan's financial district.
Many of those leaving the tower at 25 Broadway, just north of Bowling Green,
said they had heard no fire alarms and had learned of the blaze only by word of
mouth or by smelling smoke. (B3:1.)

Differences over minority hiring were resumed at City Hall. Mayor Koch, who said
Tuesday it was a ''fact'' that he had hired a higher percentage of black and
Hispanic people than his commissioners had, conceded that his claim was based on
''intuition'' and not statistics. (B1:1.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EDITORS' NOTE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1,; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 267 words


Under this heading, The Times amplifies articles or rectifies what the editors
consider significant lapses of fairness, balance or perspective. Corrections,
also on this page, continue to deal with factual errors.

A news article in The Times yesterday, headed ''CBS Vietnam Documentary
Faulted,'' reported criticism of CBS News, leveled last night by the public
television program ''Inside Story.''

As The Times reported, ''Inside Story'' evaluated CBS's much-debated 1982
documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The CBS documentary
maintained that United States military officers in 1967 and 1968 deceived
President Johnson and the public about enemy troop strength in Vietnam. Last
night the public television commentator Hodding S. Carter 3d asserted that CBS
had failed to prove its thesis.

The debate over CBS's documentary had long since been detailed in The Times. And
yesterday's Times article quoted Mr. Carter as saying that ''Inside Story'' had
turned up no new information about military operations in Vietnam - only ''a lot
of old information that was not included'' in CBS's documentary.

Nothing in the Times account suggested that the criticism of CBS by ''Inside
Story'' was fresh, substantive or otherwise newsworthy.Nevertheless The Times
devoted some 700 words to ''Inside Story,'' displayed across six columns at the
top of a page. By its length, the Times article seemed to imply that the
criticisms of CBS were fresh or newly substantiated.

By The Times's standards of news judgment and fairness, the article was too long
and too prominently displayed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORS' NOTE

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1335 words


''NEXT Monday, Sonny Landham begins work in Arizona on a movie called ''Fear and
a Handful of Dust,'' in which he plays a Vietnam veteran, an Indian accused of
murder. Mr. Landham is himself part Indian, and a veteran. And he believes the
Army's foot-dragging about sending him to Officer Candidate School probably
saved his life.  ''I'd have been right there in the middle of Vietnam, and I'd
have wanted to be there. But I realized I wasn't one for chains of command,
talking to one dummy who sends you to another dummy, so I didn't re-enlist. When
I got out in 1964, I was still subject to the draft, but I'd already served;
they wouldn't have drafted me until eight people after Ladybird Johnson.''

Back home in Georgia, Mr. Landham got in trouble with the law. Why? Money, he
says, and thrills. ''I learned to pick a lock. I said, here's all these safes,
they just put 'em here for me like Christmas packages. It was just one of those
things that came along. Anything I've ever put my mind to, I was good at.''

Good at sports, good at preaching (he was ordained a Baptist minister), good at
singing country music, Mr. Landham was working in the California oil fields when
the astrologer Carroll Righter suggested he ought to go to the Pasadena
Playhouse. Acting jobs and jobs as a stunt man followed.

''Ever since Burt Reynolds did 'Hooper,' everybody wants to be a stunt person,''
Mr. Landham says. ''They write letters. 'I can do this, I can do that, I'm not
afraid to die.' Well, you may not be, but I am. I was taken out to Lime Rock by
a bunch of Japanese who wanted me to hit a ramp at 90 miles an hour in a car
they'd brought over from Japan, and I'm no Phi Beta Kappa, but I understand
physics. I said, 'You're willing to pay Paul Newman a million dollars to do the
commercial, and you don't want to spend a few hundred dollars to rig the car so
it will be safe for me. I'm not going into a bunch of trees at 90 miles an
hour.' You have to know when to go home.''

These days, Mr. Landham doesn't have to risk his high cheekbones, he's made it
as a movie star. Playing Billy Bear, one of the bad boys in ''48 Hours,'' seems
to have done it for him. ''I used to walk down the street, and people didn't
even speak to me,'' he says. ''I think I was the first customer they had at the
Carnegie Deli. I ate there all the time. Then the owners saw '48 Hours,' and
next time I walked in, they took me in the back and threw a cloth napkin on my
lap. I went, 'Wait a minute, I've been eating here for nigh onto 16 years, and
this is the first time I've ever had a cloth napkin.' ''
Toback Tells of Delays

In Starting 'Exposed'

James Toback, who wrote and directed ''Exposed,'' starring Rudolf Nureyev and
Nastassia Kinski, and opening today at Cinema 1, suffered a year of ''nonstop
humiliating rejection'' before he could start the movie. ''Anyone in the world
who finances movies turned it down,'' he says, ''because it wasn't like any
other movie. Luckily, Nastassia Kinski wanted to do it, and she stuck with it
against the advice of her agent, her lawyer and her boyfriend at that time, Paul
Schrader, who told her that 'Cat People' was going to make her the biggest star
in the world, and she might better jump out of a window than do 'Exposed.' ''

If people reject ''Exposed,'' it will not destroy Mr. Toback. ''I will never
take a beating worse than the one I took on 'Fingers,' '' he says. ''Fingers''
was Mr. Toback's first foray into the world of directing; the picture starred
Harvey Keitel, Tisa Farrow and Jim Brown (about whom Mr. Toback had written a
book), and it was, he says, ''severe and tough.'' ''It dealt with pain and
failure and had rather graphic sex juxtaposed with frustrated tenderness. I knew
it was going to create hostility.

''As it turned out, people I had admired from a distance - Truffaut, Fassbinder,
Norman Mailer - went crazy for it, but at the same time, my premonitions of
antagonism were, if anything, feeble.  In Arthur Knight's film class at the
University of Southern California, a pleasant-looking girl of about 18 came up
to me trembling with rage and said, 'I'm not a violent person, but I would like
to take a kitchen knife and stick it in your face.' ''

The Harvard-educated Mr. Toback began his working career as a journalist, and
turned to movies after he decided that his literary works were not worth
preserving between hard covers. ''I was reading Dostoyevsky and Kafka and
Balzac, and then rereading what I had written, and it froze me. I thought, what
is the point? What am I doing except embarrassing those who are dead and whom I
revere?''

His first screenplay was for a movie called ''The Gambler,'' and after that he
wrote a script based on the life of Victoria Woodhull, the spiritualist,
feminist and free-love advocate, which George Cukor agreed to direct. Then Mr.
Cukor went into a six-month depression.  ''The reviews of 'The Bluebird' came
out,'' Mr. Toback says, ''and these people who didn't deserve to shine his shoes
were calling him a senile old man. And he said to me: 'Maybe they're right. I
used to know when I made a movie whether it was good or not, but I don't know
any more.' Later on, he did 'Love Among the Ruins,' and 'Rich and Famous,' but
for a time there, he couldn't function. And the Victoria Woodhull picture fell
through.''

From that point forward, Mr. Toback directed his own scripts. Of ''Exposed,'' he
says, ''I made the picture I wanted to make. If you look at Nastassia's face in
the beginning, rosy, fresh, and then look at her face in the last shot, haunted,
blanched, the progression from that first expression to the last is what I
wanted to do.

''At previews, the response has been mixed, a quarter of the audience loving it,
half the audience with mixed feelings, a quarter of the audience saying it's no
good. I like the movie.''
A Father's Touch

In Son's Career

Never mind that he's got John Springer, one of the best-known press agents in
the world, working for his son Robert, Bruce Macnaughton leaves nothing to
chance. For the last couple of years, Mr.  Macnaughton, a management consultant,
has been bombarding columnists, editors and casting people with head shots and
fact sheets about Robert, who played the older brother in ''E.T.'' Wherever
Robert ventured, his father figured out a way to turn that venturing into
publicity. Last December, for instance, a picture of Steven Spielberg watching
as Robert shook hands with the Princess of Wales ran in The Hollywood Reporter,
above the caption: ''Steven: Thank you for this spectacular 16th birthday week
and a very, very exciting year. Robert and the Macnaughton family.''

Robert Macnaughton explains his father's technique: ''He has this mailing list
he's collected. Whenever he sees a name of somebody in the entertainment
industry, he'll get it, and he'll find out when people switch over to different
jobs, you know. He decided to sort of put me in every place at every time. But I
was never pushed. Even when he was sending out all that stuff, it was entirely
up to me whether or not I wanted to do something.''

One of the things Robert wanted to do was ''I Am the Cheese,'' a movie that
opens next week in Leominster, Mass. ''It's based on a Robert Cormier novel,''
he says. ''It's about a boy who has like amnesia, and he's trying to uncover his
past. Robert Jiras is the director. He used to be a makeup man. And the
surprising thing is, hardly anybody wore makeup for this movie.''

Robert and Bruce Macnaughton are the co-authors of a book called ''Act Now: An
Actor's Guide to Breaking In,'' which Robert carries with him (in addition to
his homework assignments) when he's on lecture tours, recounting tales of the
making of ''E.T.'' and ''I Am the Cheese.'' The book, as yet unpublished,
doesn't try to tell anybody how to act. ''That would be stupid,'' he says.
''It's basically just giving people pointers that we learned. It's got the names
and addresses of, like, 3,000 people that will help them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sonny Landham

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'BANKING ON THE BRINK,' REPORT ON PROBLEM LOANS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


''NBC REPORTS'' looks at the banking industry tonight and finds it distressed,
caught in problems of its own making. Banks, NBC finds, are in flux, searching
for higher and higher profits and often acting imprudently while they search.
The provocative program, ''Banking on the Brink,'' will be seen on Channel 4 at
10 P.M.

The transformation of banking began in 1961, NBC says, when Citibank began to
issue certificates of deposit - C.D.'s. They proved how profitable banking could
be, contributed enormously to the growth of the credit market and turned banking
from comparatively staid to frenzied business practices.

''In the old days, a banker could count up his deposits, and that total was the
most he could prudently lend,'' Marvin Kalb, the NBC reporter, says. ''Now the
banker rushes into one loan after another and only later buys up the money to
cover them. A onetime senior official of a major bank told us that banking has
entered the era of mindless lending.''

''NBC Reports,'' meanwhile, finds evidence of its own that many loans,
particularly foreign loans, are mindless, made when there is no guarantee they
will ever be paid back. Coincidentally, a well-done ''ABC Closeup'' documentary,
''On Borrowed Time,'' shown last night, reached the same conclusion. Foreign
lending increased dramatically in the 1970's; loans to developing countries now
total about $600 billion. When Mexico said last August that it could not meet
the payments on its $81 billion foreign debt, it was a signal that other nations
might do the same. If they did, there could be a ripple effect in the world
economy, touching off a crisis of unforseeable proportions.

NBC, interested as much in domestic as foreign loans, examines the default last
year of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma. Penn Square assets soared in the
1970's, and Penn Square made increasingly large loans, particularly for oil and
gas explorations. When the explorations failed, Penn Square did, too. NBC,
unfortunately, becomes almost moralistic here, particularly when it examines
what might be called the flashy life styles of some Penn Square executives.
Actually, the life-styles seem consonant with those of any number of executives
in any number of businesses.

Meanwhile, NBC is firm in its conclusions: Banking is heading toward an
uncertain future; the uncertainty is in large part the result of its own
irresponsibility. Congress has coddled the banks; now the banks want Congress to
guarantee their risks. The conclusions are alarming.
Best and the Worst

In 60's Documentary

How do you remember the 1960's? With nostalgia, pain, or a feeling that, thank
goodness, the decade is long since over? WCBS-TV examines the 60's in an
ambitious one-hour documentary on Sunday night, and finds in those turbulent
years the best of times and the worst of times, with something of a leaning
toward them being the best. The documentary, ''The Sixties: Music, Madness and
Magic,'' will be seen at 10 P.M. on Channel 2.

Mostly, it is the old film footage that will capture you here. It is made up of
exactly what you would expect, and hope, to find in a retrospective of the 60's:
the Beatles, President Kennedy, civil rights protests, student movements, the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Vietnam, acid freaks, drug prophets, hippies,
yippies, Richard M. Nixon, rock groups, some frauds, some significant people,
some people you would just as soon forget. The 60's were a melange.

Meanwhile, the documentary's point of view is presented by Michelle Marsh, the
host of the program. Miss Marsh speaks of having been a child in the 60's; the
point of view, in fact, is that the 60's were a time to be young. At the
conclusion of the program, some 60's figures - Timothy Leary and Bobby Seale,
among them - suggest that the decade was just great. Earlier, however, Miss
Marsh had said it was hard to make sense of the 60's. There's something to be
said for that, too.
The Wall Street Journal

With Business Report

Business news shows proliferate, broadcast now at almost any hour of the day or
night. One of the most interesting is ''The Wall Street Journal Report,'' shown
tomorrow at 9 A.M. on Channel 11 and repeated on Sunday at 8 P.M. One of the
program's virtues is that it is timely, dealing largely with what has happened
during the week.  Another is that it finds room for feature stories. A viewer
may neither know nor care about, say, the prime rate; it won't matter.  The
half-hour program also tries to be entertaining.

Last week's program, for example, offered segments on Broadway angels, a gold
buyers' convention and a successful businesswoman who had just flown her jet
around the world. The week before, there were segments on a Japanese-owned and
managed plant in Arkansas, the competition between the trucking and railroad
industries, and a new amusement franchise called Flyaway. In a Flyaway, a
customer bounces around on a pillar of air.

Mixed in with the segments is hard news, often amplified with background. A
report on the week's trading on the stock market, for instance, may be
accompanied by an analysis of an industry that did particularly well, or poorly,
in the trading. Richard Townley and Cindy Vandor are the anchors and chief
reporters. Miss Vandor even bounced around fitfully on the pillar of air.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Links Shelling To Morale of Guerrillas

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 184 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 22


Vietnam charged today that China was shelling Vietnamese border positions to
help the morale of Cambodian guerrillas fighting the Hanoi-backed Cambodian
regime.

The Vietnamese Communist Party daily Nhan Dan said Chinese gunners ''fired
thousands of artillery and mortar rounds into Vietnam'' since the attacks began
last Saturday.

In a dispatch carried by the Vietnam press agency and monitored in Bangkok, the
newspaper said Peking's action was motivated by the fighting in western Cambodia
and not in retaliation for Vietnamese ''provocations,'' as asserted by Prime
Minister Zhao Ziyang of China.

China supports the Cambodian rebel coalition led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk that
is fighting the Hanoi-backed regime and its 180,000 Vietnamese occupation
troops. The Vietnamese troops launched an offensive March 31 against guerrilla
bases along the Thai-Cambodian border.

----

PEKING, April 22 (UPI) - Prince Sihanouk canceled a scheduled trip to the
Thai-Cambodian border area to visit his followers this weekend and instead flew
to France for a meeting with President Francois Mitterrand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Donna Anderson

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 621 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 17.

1. Four Libyan transport planes were detained because a cargo check showed they
carried munitions rather than the medical supplies, as asserted by the Libyans.
Where were the planes detained? Where were they going?

2. The Supreme Court dealt a setback to the troubled nuclear industry. What was
the unanimous decision?

3. ''The problem is growing geometrically. It's a human tragedy and an
administrative nightmare,'' said the New York City Housing Authority chairman,
Joseph J. Christian. To what was he referring?

4. Only two players have appeared in more consecutive baseball games than Steve
Garvey. What are their names?

5. Anacapa Island, off the California coast near Santa Barbara, is the site of
an ecological success story. A species thought to have been headed for
extinction is recovering there. What is it?

6. A committee of Reagan Administration officials has proposed a law that it
feels would help stem unauthorized disclosures of classified information. What
is the proposal?

7. The man pictured above is one of two Democrats who formally announced their
candidacy for the Presidential nomination this week.  Who is he and who is the
other candidate?

8. Thanks to the success of its two miniseries ''The Winds of War'' and ''The
Thorn Birds,'' ABC won the prime-time network ratings race for the 1982-83
television season. True or false?

9. The Taj Mahal, which has stood in Agra, India, for three and one-third
centuries, is deteriorating, and some fear it may eventually be destroyed. What
is the cause?

10. Five foreign diplomats were ousted by the United States. What countries were
they from?

11. The last eight Shakers in the United States filed suit to bar construction
of a baseball stadium in Colonie, N.Y. What is their objection to the project?

12. According to a New York Times/CBS News Poll, most Americans (agree/disagree)
with President Reagan in his policy of cutting back on environmental protection
efforts to promote economic growth.

13. An advisory committee to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
has suggested a plan to revitalize planetary exploration. What is it and what
would be the priority targets.

14. The woman pictured above left an astonishing imprint on the 87th annual
Boston Marathon. Who is she and why was her finish remarkable?

15. The Metro-North Commuter Railroad resumed service after a sixweek strike by
trainmen. But the key issue has still not been settled and will be submitted to
arbitration. What is at issue?

16. Elections in a California city have defeated officials whose politics were
so far to the left that critics dubbed it ''The People's Republic.'' Name the
city.

17. Fighting has intensified in the worst border clashes in nearly two years
between Vietnam and (Thailand/Cambodia/China).

18. The United Automobile Workers and company officials announced a tentative
agreement to end what the union said had become its longest strike against a
major American company. What is the company, and when did the stike begin?

19. The number of major crimes reported in the United States in 1982
(increased/declined) (4/8/10) percent.

20. ''The National League will always give the close play to the National League
team.'' Who made that remark, about whom, and what was the final outcome?

21. A $5 million gift, believed to be the largest single grant ever made for
architectural scholarship, has been given by the architect Temple Hoyne Buell to
(Columbia University/Harvard University/Stanford University).

22. The missile plan endorsed by President Reagan includes the development of
the Midgetman. What is the Midgetman?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of man photo of woman

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS NEWS LOSES APPEAL BID

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 435 words


CBS News will give General William C. Westmoreland a copy of the investigation
it made into a CBS television documentary that he says libeled him, a lawyer for
the network said yesterday.

The lawyer, David Boies of the firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, told Federal
Judge Pierre N. Leval that the document would be turned over early next week. On
Thursday, Judge Leval ordered CBS to surrender the study, but the network said
it would seek to appeal that decision.

Yesterday, the network came back to Judge Leval's Manhattan courtroom to seek
his permission for the appeal, but he rejected the request, and Mr. Boies said
the network would not pursue other legal options to try to avoid releasing the
study.

General Westmoreland, the commander of the American forces in Vietnam from 1964
to 1968, is suing CBS for $120 million, contending that the documentary, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' falsely accused him of having conspired
to misrepresent the number of enemy troops.

A CBS Executive Investigated

Several months after the January 1982 broadcast, a TV Guide article said the
producers of the show had ignored or excised rebuttal remarks from officers who
challenged the conspiracy thesis. CBS asked a senior executive producer, Burton
Benjamin, to investigate the matter.

Van Gordon Sauter, the president of CBS News, then issued a memorandum that -
citing Mr. Benjamin's report - defended the conclusion of the documentary while
agreeing that some journalistic standards had been violated in preparing the
program. General Westmoreland sued, saying he was libeled both by the program
and by Mr. Sauter's memorandum, and in pretrial proceedings he asked for a copy
of Mr. Benjamin's report.

On Thursday, Judge Leval rejected CBS's arguments that the report was an
internal document, protected by First Amendment free-press guarantees. He said
that by citing Mr. Benjamin's report in Mr.  Sauter's memorandum, CBS had
stopped treating it as a confidential internal matter.

He reiterated that view yesterday in denying the CBS request to have an appeals
court rule on the issue of whether there is a constitutional protection for the
self-examinations news organizations often conduct when their news reports are
challenged.

Separately yesterday, the National News Council, an independent group that
investigates complaints about news reports, warned that the ruling would
jeopardize what it said had been a beneficial trend on the part of news
organizations to critique their own work. The ruling will have ''a chilling
effect'' on such self-examinations, the council said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
A New Band of Protesters Marches at Columbia

BYLINE: By Laurie Johnston and Susan Heller Anderson

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 191 words


Fifteen years ago today, Columbia University's dean of students, Henry Coleman,
was taken hostage by students who were protesting the Vietnam War, the
university's work for the Institute for Defense Analysis and the construction of
a new gym in Morningside Park.

Yesterday, 20 members of Columbia's marching band, clad as hippies in long wigs
and Army jackets, recreated the incident: In Hamilton Hall, the administration
building that had been taken over and occupied by the protesters, band members
marched into the office of Roger Lehecka, the current dean of students, and
surrounded him.

After a brief serenade, Ira Gilbert, the drum major, read their list of
''demands'': Immediate coeducation (the college will, in fact, admit women this
fall); demolition of the Baker Field football stadium and construction of a new
one (already under way); ''the ending of Columbia's ties to the Vietnam War,''
and ''a winning football team.''

Yielding to pressure, Dean Lehecka promised nattier band uniforms, immediate
entrance to law school and medical school for all band members and replacement
of Phi Beta Kappa with - naturally - the band.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK IN PARIS FOR TALKS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of a Cambodian resistance organization,
arriving yesterday in Paris from Peking. He is scheduled to meet with President
Francois Mitterrand, presumably to urge diplomatic pressures on the Government
of Vietnam, which now controls Cambodia. The Cambodian resistance he leads has
been under increasing attack from Vietnamese troops recently. Associated Press

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE PANEL SCHEDULES A VOTE ON MILITARY AID TO EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


The chairman of a key House subcommittee said today that he had scheduled a vote
for Tuesday on a Reagan Administration request to redirect $60 million in
military aid to El Salvador. The aid is currently earmarked for other countries.

The chairman, Representative Clarence D. Long, a Maryland Democrat, also
announced that he would leave for El Salvador on Sunday for a two-day trip at
the suggestion of Secretary of State George P.  Shultz.

The vote would come on the eve of a scheduled adddress on Central America by
President Reagan before a joint session of Congress. The House Intelligence
Committee, which has been considering a cutoff of funds for covert support of
Nicaraguan rebels, has delayed its decision until after the speech.

Five members of the Intelligence Committee are to begin a tour of the region on
Sunday at the invitation of the Director of Central Intelligence, William J.
Casey. Today the Nicaraguan Embassy said it had invited the five -three
Repubicans and two Democrats - to visit Managua during their trip.

Written Assurance Sought

Mr. Long, head of the foreign operations subcommittee of the House
Appropriations Committee, had said in the past that he would not schedule a vote
on the so-called re-programming of military aid until the Administration met
certain conditions. One of them was a written assurance that it would appoint a
special envoy to El Salvador.

Mr. Long refused today to say whether he had received such a written assurance.
''Let me say, I'd rather not comment on that,'' he said.

A State Department official, who spoke on the condition that he not be named,
said Mr. Long had received no written promise about appointing a special envoy.
But the official said the Representative had been given favorable signals that
one would be named.

Mr. Long said he was going to Central America ''for a number of reasons.'' One
of them, he said, s ''to let the Salvadoran Government know that progress on a
great many of the points I've raised'' will be a key factor in ''whether
Congress gives aid now or in the future.''

Release of Prisoners Urged

Earlier this week Mr. Long said that in addition to the appointment of a special
envoy he was interested in the release of political prisoners from Salvadoran
jails, the inspection of prisons by the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and an independent investigation of the criminal prosecution system in
the country.

The Reagan Administration has been trying to reassure Mr. Long about his
concerns because it is anxious to get a favorable vote in his panel. But
Administration officials have strongly resisted his demand for a written
assurance.

As a means of courting the Representative's favor, one official said, the
Administration has been trying to get the Salvadoran Government to release some
political prisoners while Mr. Long is in the country.

Reached by telephone at his home, Mr. Long was somewhat noncommittal when asked
if he had purposely timed the vote on Tuesday so it would take place before Mr.
Reagan's address Wednesday on United States policy in Central America.

'More or Less Coincidental'

''I don't think that was really a major factor,'' he said. ''I think it was more
or less coincidental. But he added that the White House ''would love the timing
if they get what they want'' on the subcommittee vote.

With a favorable vote, Mr. Reagan would be able to declare that he had received
a major signal of approval from Congress for his policy of using military aid to
resist Communist insurrections in the region.

In the past Mr. Long has resisted the Administration's aid requests on the
ground that the situation has parallels to the American experience in Vietnam.

Mr. Long said his findings in El Salvador would determine ''to some degree'' his
recommendation to the subcommittee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY BACKED IN POLL, BUT SPENDING STIRS DEBATE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


A new public opinion survey has found that Americans have a high regard for the
military as an institution but that ''the priority they give military
expenditure veers from extreme to extreme.''

The survey on views of the military by the National Opinion Research Center at
the University of Chicago also indicated ''Americans are generally satisfied
with the current ethnic mix in the armed forces,'' which have a higher
proportion of blacks than the general population.

The survey, conducted last year in 1,506 homes around the nation, indicated
Americans would like to see more women in the services and would approve of them
in some combat roles from which they are now barred, such as fighter pilots, but
not in close combat on the ground.

Americans also think more Hispanic people should be recruited, the survey
indicated. But it determined that ''there is no public consensus on military
personnel policy'' and that support for either the current volunteer force or a
return to the draft was lukewarm.

Most Confidence in Medicine

In rating the confidence of Americans in 11 large institutions, the survey found
that only medicine scored over 50 percent, and not by much. Of those surveyed,
52 percent said they had confidence in doctors, while scientists scored 40
percent. The margin of error in a sampling this size is plus or minus three
percentage points.

In the next group, running from 30 to 35 percent, were education, organized
religion, the military and the Supreme Court. The survey found 34 percent said
they had ''a great deal of confidence in military leaders.''

The next lower batch included major companies and the press. Still lower were
the executive branch of the Government, television and Congress. On the bottom
was organized labor.

On military spending, however, the survey found that opinion vacillated from a
low in 1973, right after the last American troops were pulled out of Vietnam, to
a high in 1980, when the military budget was a campaign issue, then back down
again.

''From 1973 to 1982,'' the survey said, ''military spending was neither a sacred
cow, such as halting crime and improving health, nor a permanent scapegoat, such
as space and foreign aid. Instead, its priority fluctuated enormously.''

Blacks in the Military

The survey found the issue of blacks in the military ''rather controversial and
quite subtle.'' It noted that, in relation to the population, women were
underrepresented in the military and Hispanic people were roughly in proportion,
but blacks were overrepresented.

Eleven percent of the people in the nation are black. In the four services, 22
percent of the members are black, while 33 percent in the Army are black.

''It may be that some military planners have questions about the current ethnic
composition of the armed forces,'' the survey said.  ''But the general
population does not seem to find it a problem.'' Only 12 percent said there were
too many blacks in the service.

The survey report added, however, that few Americans would be enthusiastic about
increasing the number of blacks in the services, in contrast to the positive
feelings of the majority for recruiting more women and Hispanic people.

Support for Women Pilots

The majority of those surveyed supported the idea that women, who make up 9
percent of the military, could fly as fighter or transport pilots or fight as
missile gunners or aboard warships, or command large bases.

But the majority also strongly opposed women as soldiers who might be engaged in
ground combat. Yet there was almost unanimous support for women as nurses in
combat zones or as truck mechanics or typists.

When it came to conscription or a national program in which young men and women
would be required to give a year to military or civic service, people in the
survey split. The survey found 28 percent favored the present volunteer force,
34 percent preferred the draft and national service and 30 percent favored the
draft but not national service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE GARDEN

BYLINE: JOAN LEE FAUST

SECTION: Section 2; Page 38, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


This Week:

Gardeners will have to make the most of each sunny day to catch up.

Lawn Herbicides

Dandelion, plantain, hawkweed, wild onion, chickweed, sorrel, spurge, knotweed,
ground ivy. Anyone who tries to maintain a velvet greensward knows these plants.
They are lawn weeds, the unwanteds, and most homeowners like to get rid of them.

The science of weed control lightened this task immeasurably by producing
several herbicides. These chemicals, called systemics, are absorbed into the
weeds' foliage and translocated down to root zones to kill them. Although the
effect may not be seen for several days, traditionally herbicides do a good job
of keeping lawns weed-free.  The most popular herbicides used for this purpose
are 2,4-D, mecoprop (MCPP) and dicamba (Banvel-D). The herbicides are available
either as single products or combined with lawn fertilizers or in mixtures of
two or three.

Recent developments in soil contamination by chemical residues has caused many
suburbanites to look carefully at this practice and question if these products
are safe to use? At the center of their questions is use of the herbicide 2,4-D.
This herbicide is closely related to 2,4,5-T which was suspended by the
Environmental Protection Agency in spring, 1979. It was an ingredient in Agent
Orange, the defoliant used in Vietnam. Agent Orange also contained 2,4-D.
Manufacture of these herbicides contained an impurity byproduct, dioxin.

Until recently, 2,4-D remained somewhat aloof from closer scrutiny. On April 13,
a Federal appeals court in San Francisco banned the United States Forest Service
from using the herbicide 2,4-D on its lands in California. A moratorium on the
use of 2,4-D remains in effect in the state until new laws regarding its use can
be written.

Final chapters of this controversy may not be written for some time and home
gardeners are free to choose alternatives. Lawn weeds will be of most concern
and good old-fashioned hand pulling is still an excellent way to get rid of
many. For dandelions and wild garlic get under weeds with a hand tool to grasp
the whole root/or bulbs. Record rainfall has made the ground soft and weed roots
offer little resistance.

If used with caution (gloves on and a windless day), aerosol products of lawn
herbicides which usually contain a mixture of one or two herbicides offer a way
to spot treat nuisance weeds that crop up in the lawn. Keep pets and children
indoors for several hours until herbicides are completely absorbed by foliage.
For weeds in flower borders and vegetable gardens, a scuffle hoe used frequently
and/or mulches go far to keep the unwanteds out of competition.
Lawn Fertilizer

A recent bulletin from the University of Connecticut Coooperative Extension
should gladden the hearts of drenched gardeners. If the lawn has not been
fertilized to date, there is still plenty of time.

In fact, late fertilzer applications could be better for the lawn.  The
university notes that lawns generally are less subject to spring diseases with a
late May fertilizer application. Also, at that date grass has absorbed more
nutrients to last through the summer.

The bulletin reminds gardeners that the best time to feed lawns is in September,
a time when grass plants are rapidly growing and filling in bare spots. The
second most important time is in November. Late fall applications are absorbed
into the plant over the winter and are in a much healthier condition to green up
earlier in spring.

Questions & Answers

NO TULIPS

Two years ago I planted tulips. The first year was beautiful; second year, few
blooms; this year, it is worse. What can I do? S.W., Brooklyn.

Several possibilities: Was tulip foliage cut too soon? Bulb foliage must ripen
naturally to nourish new bulbs and flowers forming for next season. Were bulbs
planted in poorly drained soil? Were they bargain bulbs and possibly diseased
and/or immature? Good quality tulip bulbs last and rebloom for several seasons
if planted deeply (six to eight inches) in well-drained soil.

SUNFLOWER SEED HULLS

What can we do with shells from sunflower seeds. We have loads of them since we
feed birds in winter. Can we use them in our vegetable garden as mulch? R.P.,
Monroe, N.Y.

No! Discard them and do not add to compost. Sunflower seed hulls have an
allelopathic quality and secrete a substance which inhibits growth of
surrounding plants. This new science is reviewing plants of similar nature
including walnut trees and certain species of oats.

CLIPPINGS/HERBICIDES

If I use herbicide on my lawn can I use clippings in compost or as a mulch?
A.G., Roslyn Heights, N.Y.

No! Herbicides act as growth regulators. Residue left on clippings could damage
plants if used for a mulch. Clippings should be allowed to remain on the lawn to
return nitrogen to the soil as they decompose.

YUCCA

I have a yucca which leans over its planter. Can I air layer the stems? C.M.,
Great Meadows, N.Y.

Yucca cannot be air layered as it forms new leaves from a basal crown. If this
plant is the hardy species Adam's needle (Yucca filamentosa) it can be planted
outdoors. Another could be started anew indoors.

Address questions to Garden News, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New
York, N. Y. 10036. Those of general interest will be published.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH-FLYING BROTHERS;
SIBLING ANALYSTS MADE THE JUMP FORM CARE PACKAGES TO WALL STREETS

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1785 words


CHRISTOPHER C. DEMISCH and Wolfgang H. Demisch lean back on their chairs, which
face each other across identical desks in their seventh-floor office at the
First Boston Corporation. The office is large, but windowless, and the pale blue
walls are lined with company annual reports: Lockheed. General Dynamics. Boeing.

Their desks, abutted by Quotrons and computer terminals, are equally
uncluttered. It's an ordered, balanced environment. The fact that the Demisches
are very close brothers does nothing to dispel the image.

Close, but not twins.  ''I'm the more volatile character,'' Christopher Demisch
says, glancing across the desk. ''I'm more oriented to the short term than
Wolf.''

''And I suspect I have a higher patience in terms of stocks than Chris does,''
Wolfgang Demisch replies.  Their combination has made for an unusual Wall Street
stock analyst team. The brothers Demisch call it a ''counterbalance.'' The idea
is to merge different strengths and weaknesses, and thereby come to what
Christopher Demisch calls, ''the sensible middle.''

Their forte is aerospace stocks, and their accent is German.  Unlike most other
research teams at competing firms, which are usually hierarchies - a senior
analyst who covers the big companies, and an assistant who does the rest; or a
team leader and a research staff - the Demisch brothers are more of a
partnership. Neither asserts leadership, and they overlap in covering many of
the same companies.

In many families, if not most, such a relationship could prove disastrous, but
the Demisches, who grew up in Germany and moved to Canada with their parents in
the early 1950's, say they've learned each other's idiosyncrasies over the
years, and have adapted - although they socialize outside the office far less
than in the past.

''Analysts tend to have strong opinions, and as such, aren't particularly fond
of hearing someone else's truth,'' said Wolfgang Demisch, who is 38, the younger
brother by three years. ''We have a good enough relationship that we can
hopefully bore a hole through each other's biases to give us a slightly
different perspective on things.''

''Being brothers helps,'' Christopher added.  In January, they were both hired
away from their respective firms by First Boston's research director, James L.
Freeman, (Wolfgang from Morgan Stanley, and Christopher from Lehman Brothers
Kuhn Loeb).

One of their demands - to the surprise of Mr. Freeman - was the sharing of a
single office. Separate offices would mean less interaction, they said, and less
exchange of ideas and opinions. And the opportunity to interact was a major
attraction.

Another motivation was financial. Although neither brother would discuss salary,
sources on Wall Street said that as many as seven other brokerage houses made
bids to hire the Demisch brothers, after their respective announcements to join
First Boston early this year.

During one hectic weekend in January, at the climax of the negotiations, the
brothers announced on a Friday afternoon that they had agreed to sign with First
Boston, but by nightfall had waffled over to Lehman Brothers. Discussions
through the weekend finally landed them back at First Boston by Monday.
Reportedly, the deciding factor was not the salaries offered - said to be in the
range of $200,000 to $250,000 -but the potential of generous profit sharing.

I played family therapist for a month and a half,'' said Mr.  Freeman. ''I had
to create the right atmosphere, to make it attractive. Yet at the same time, I
was extremely careful to point out every negative aspect about working with a
family member.''

Wolfgang Demisch downplays the Wall Street bidding war. ''It was not necessarily
a realization by the street that 'Hey, this is the greatest thing since sliced
bread.' '' he said. ''We were just some chopped liver that got loose, and they
said, 'Let's throw a bid on it.' ''

Other analysts said that competing bids are almost inevitable when established
analysts move within the industry, because the old firm's stock-buying clients,
particularly big institutions, will often follow a trusted analyst to his or her
new company. In addition, aerospace and defense industry analysts are now at a
premium, in part because of the dramatic increases in the United States military
budget.

CHRISTOPHER DEMISCH puts his hands behind his head, and his feet on the desk,
when he recalls growing up in France during World War II, and later, in Germany,
after German civilians were forced out near the end of the war. His father's
position as a salesmen for the German chemical giant, I.G. Farben, had kept the
family moving in German-occupied Europe - Christopher Demisch, for example, was
born in Italy, where Mr. Demisch worked for a time selling dyes to the Italian
textile industry.

However, it was not until the family's resettlement in Hatzbach, the town near
Frankfurt where Wolfgang was born, that the Demisch brothers' fascination with
flight and aeronautics began.

''With amazing regularity,'' recalled Christopher, who now lives with his wife
and two children in Upper Montclair, N.J., ''Care packages'' would arrive from
the United States, containing food, clothing and, sometimes, books, enclosed by
a teacher from Chicago.  ''I remember one of the series of books she sent was an
advanced children's book about airplanes, 'The Airplanes of World War II.' In
1948-49, we could tell what kind of planes were flying overhead.''

Business careers came out of practicality, says Wolfgang, who began his studies
at Princeton as a history major. ''I soon realized that history is what is known
in the trade as a 'breadless art,' '' he said. ''But it turns out that for
aerospace, it works out pretty well.''

Although both brothers received their M.B.A.'s from Harvard University - both
had to borrow to finance their educations - and have been in business for nearly
the same length of time, Wolfgang is more well known than his brother, partly
because Christopher has spent most of his career as a portfolio manager, buying
stocks, and only working the last two years as a stock analyst. Wolfgang has
been an analyst since he came to Wall Street in 1972 after leaving Harvard.

Also, Wolfgang, who lives in Greenwich, Conn., with his wife, is considered a
better public speaker, and is more often quoted in the news media. His
reputation was largely established in the mid-1970's with a report - published
when he was with Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Company - predicting that the
United States military budget had reached its low ebb, and that the decreases in
military spending after the Vietnam war would soon level off.

''I got that from the horse's mouth,'' Wolfgang said. recalling a casual meeting
with Roy Ash, then director of the Office of Management and Budget. ''I asked
him if it was true, and he confirmed it. Opportunity beckoned.''

As industry analyst, Wolfgang Demisch is considered something of a philosopher.
Institutional Investor magazine, for example, in its annual review of industry
analysts several years ago, said clients had praised Wolfgang for his
''thoughtful introspection,'' and ''excellent political insight.'' The magazine
has named him the No.2 aerospace analyst in the country for the past two years -
No.1, both times, was Cai von Rumohr of G.S. Grumman/Cohen & Company,

As a picker of stocks, however, his marks have been less impressive. ''I
wouldn't go to him for next quarter's earnings estimates,'' said one critic.
Some of his clients, who were quoted in Institutional Investor, complained that
he was too cautious.

''Wolf is a very creative, very abstract guy,'' said Mr. Freeman at First
Boston. ''But Chris is the stock picker.'' Sometimes there are disagreements:
Christopher, for example, was recommending Boeing Company stock to his customers
at $17 a share last year, when the brothers were at different firms. ''I
wasn't,'' said Wolfgang. ''But I changed my mind at $22.''

In other cases, the brothers say, it depends on the time frame. ''I tend to
operate on the premise that you make investments,'' said Wolfgang. ''Chris
operates on the premise that you make trades. I think I've had an influence on
Chris because he tends to become impatient.''

''I think that's fair,'' Christopher replied. ''Between the two of us, we have a
better crack at coming down the sensible middle.'' Some analysts question
whether such an equal relationship is really possible, and whether it is really
true that neither brother has more influence than the other, as the Demisches
adamantly insist.

''I think a leader is sort of implied,'' said Paul H. Nisbet, an analyst at
Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. ''It's not a formal thing, usually, but one
member will always predominate by reputation or authority - at least in the eyes
of the clients.''

Mr. Nisbet, who referred to himself as ''senior in age and experience'' to his
aerospace industry research partner at Prudential-Bache, Richard L. Wittington,
said, ''All you have to do is look at the research pieces, whichever name is on
top.''

On two recent research papers at First Boston, it varied: Christopher Demisch's
name came first on one, and Wolfgang's came first on the other.

According to Norvin Greene, a longtime Wall Street investor who formed a
partnership in 1928 with his brother to sell investment trust shares, a blood
relationship sometimes makes it possible to work out the inevitable problems
that might break up other partnerships.

Mr. Greene, who is 80, two years younger than his brother, Lancaster, also
agreed that partnerships require leaders.  ''I've taken that function for us,''
he said. ''I've done the formulating. My brother is good with people, good at
convincing somebody of something. Occasionally, we have had some difficulty
determining what the course of the firm would be.''

And sometimes, Mr. Greene said, disagreements became emotional, and painful.
''But we always found ways of overcoming the problems. Being able to survive the
crash of 1929 was certainly the biggest test of the partnership. It got easier
after that.''

The Demisch brothers, who admittedly have not had their partnership tested by a
market crash, seem secure in their relationship. But they also know it is
grounded in practicality, and may only last as long as they are successful.

As Christopher Demisch leaped up abruptly to check a stock quote on his computer
recently, Wolfgang said:

''I don't think any of this cuts any mustard with the customer.'' They don't
say, 'Gee, ain't it wonderful, Demisch and Demisch Enterprises.' But while one
of us is dealing with those customers, the other can be doing some digging.
That's what pays the freight on this enterprise.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Christopher and Wolfgang Demisch

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
China's Pressure On Vietnam

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger, Carlyle C. Douglas and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 321 words


In February 1979, Chinese troops invaded Vietnam ''to teach it a lesson.'' This
precedent is one reason for more than usual interest in the latest flareup of
hostilities - a series of mortar and artillery duels and a clash of frontier
guards last week that each side accused the other of provoking. China said 16
Vietnamese were killed when they tried to cross into Yunnan Province.

Some of the conditions that prevailed in 1979 - notably, Vietnam's expansion
into Cambodia - lay in the background this time too.  Vietnam is in the midst of
an offensive in Cambodia to shore up its puppet Government there against
guerrilla insurgents dominated by the Peking-backed Pol Pot forces.

Pressure on Vietnam's Chinese border is keeping troops pinned down in that
sector. This time, the pressure may go no further than that, according to
Western experts in Peking who cite the careful official statements so far.
Vietnam said China was shelling its border positions to boost guerrilla morale
in Cambodia.

Coincident and possibly linked with the renewed tension between Peking and Hanoi
have been renewed verbal attacks on China by a friend of Hanoi, the Soviet
Union. High-level talks that began eight months ago between Peking and Moscow to
improve their-long strained relations appear not to have gone well, judging by a
harsh report last week in Izvestia on China's ''anti-Sovietism.'' The Government
newspaper charged that Peking was being two-faced - a professed concern for
better relations combined with ''the cultivation of unfriendly views and ideas''
- but did not explain Peking's unfriendliness. Moscow's irritation may partially
lie in China's demand for a withdrawal of Soviet forces from the
Chinese-Siberian border as a condition for improved ties. Settling the Cambodian
issue, to remove another source of Chinese discomfort - a pro-Vietnamese,
pro-Soviet regime in Pnom Penh - is another likely condition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN WILL TAKE SOME MAJOR RISKS BEFORE JOINT SESSION

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ONLY nine times in the past quarter of a century have American Presidents gone
before a special joint session of Congress. In 1972, Richard Nixon reported on
the arms agreements signed in Moscow with the Soviet leadership. In 1978, Jimmy
Carter shared the triumph of the Camp David talks on the Middle East. In earlier
times, Lyndon Johnson made a major address on voting rights legislation, Harry
S.  Truman announced Marshall Plan aid to Europe and Franklin D.  Roosevelt
reported on the Yalta conference.

If President Reagan wanted to seize the nation's attention and focus the
political spotlight on Central America, he has done it by choosing this same
august platform for a major address on that bedeviled region next Wednesday
night. His extraordinary move has raised fears among Congressional Republicans
that this might be an exaggerated reaction to the House Foreign Affairs
Committee vote last week rejecting the President's request for another $50
million in military aid to El Salvador.

''At that rate, can you imagine how many times he would have to come up here to
defend a $700 billion budget,'' asked one pro-Reagan Congressional Republican.
''It's a high risk strategy because some people will say he's trying to drag us
into another Vietnam,'' added a Senate Republican leadership source.

''There is a real opportunity for him to create bipartisan support if he
stresses the U.S. commitment to economic development and to social and political
justice,'' suggested Representative Michael Barnes, an influential Democratic
critic of the Administration. ''But if he comes up here and gives a Red scare
speech, it will further polarize the debate; it will raise tensions not only
internationally but within Congress and make it even more difficult for us to
act rationally on these questions.''

The White House insists it has not underestimated the risks the President is
taking by obviously tying his personal prestige to success Wednesday night. For
the first two years of his Administration, political advisers like White House
Chief of Staff James A. Baker 3d deliberately protected him from public disfavor
over the draining Salvadoran war by keeping him from being too closely tied to
it. But William P. Clark, the national security adviser, has encouraged the
President to speak out on Central

America, once last month and again this week.  White House officials say that
Mr. Baker and his entourage enthusiastically endorsed the idea of going before a
special session, partly because they wished to mend fences with Mr. Clark after
persistent reports of friction between him and the Baker group. But the main
impetus has been the steady erosion of support for Administration policy in
Congress, discouraged by the drawn-out military struggle in El Salvador and
anxious about the dangers of covertly aiding Nicaraguans fighting the
Sandinists. A move to cut off funds for the covert activity was put off by the
House Intelligence Committee until after Mr. Reagan's speech. In the meantime,
several commitee members accepted a C.I.A. invitation to take a guided tour of
the secret Nicaraguan front this weekend.

''We're getting nibbled to death on Capitol Hill.'' a White House official
acknowledged. ''The perception of the situation in Central America is bad,'' he
went on. ''There's a strong feeling in the White House that the speech the
President made last month was not high visibility. It did not get much
attention. We had the feeling that we were seeing the beginning of a long
downward roll on Central America in Congress, in the media and among the public,
and if we didn't step in and stop it now, if we didn't make our case, we'd lose
in the long run.''
Soviet Missile Threats

President Reagan found fresh support for his case in the disclosure last week
that Brazil had stopped four Libyan planes from carrying munitions to Nicaragua
under the guise of medical supplies. ''The episode,'' he said, ''when the
aspirin they were supposed to be carrying turned out to be hand grenades and
things, is just further evidence that there are outside forces, all of them
principally aligned with or sympathetic to the Communist bloc, who are in there
and intervening in the legitimate affairs of those countries.''

Another serious worry lies in Soviet threats to put medium-range missiles into
the Caribbean area in reprisal for scheduled American missile deployments in
Western Europe later this year. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger reminds
visitors that this shows the dangers of allowing neighbors like Nicaragua or El
Salvador to fall under forces linked to Moscow.

As the White House sees it, the President's task is to combat the political
fatigue that has already developed over the Salvadoran conflict and to rouse the
nation to sustain an even greater effort because it will take from two to seven
more years to bring the situation under control. Seen from Congress, the
President seems more on the defensive, trying to hold the line against the urge
for a political settlement of the Salvadoran war through negotiations with the
guerrillas. That prospect may have been improved last week with the reported
suicide of Salvador Cayetano Carpio, the senior commander of the guerrilla
forces, who has reportedly opposed negotiations with the Salvadoran Government.

In Congress, sentiment for ''unconditional discussions'' between the Government
and the rebel forces has been growing. Moderate Democrats like Senator Daniel K.
Inouye of Hawaii and moderate Republicans like Senator Nancy L. Kassebaum of
Kansas have joined liberal Democrats in backing that approach. Republicans like
Senator Mark Hatfield of Oregon and Representative Jim Leach of Iowa have
proposed that future military aid to El Salvador be conditioned on the
Government's entry into talks with the rebels.

The real political risk for President Reagan, some Republicans contend, is that
his deliberately dramatic decision - his first such special appearance since his
successful appeal for his budget and tax policy after the attempt on his life in
1981 - may prove anticlimactic. Some warn that he may stir support in the short
run but gradually wear out public patience by ''going to the well too many
times,'' as one Senator put it.

For all Mr. Reagan's flair for the dramatic, the White House discourages
expectations of some radically new blueprint for Central America. Rather, the
President has seemed disposed to make a forceful case that falling dominoes in
Central America represent a danger that the nation cannot afford at its back
door.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James Baker III and William P. Clark

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS AND TRENDS;
The General Gets Reinforcements

BYLINE: By Wayne Biddle and Marrgot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 369 words


After two strikes in the same Federal court, CBS News last week declared itself
out of legal arguments. Gen. William C. Westmoreland will get an internal report
this week on a CBS documentary that he says libeled him.

It was a sudden surrender for CBS, which earlier said it would appeal the
directive by Federal Judge Pierre N. Leval. That was before the judge refused
the network permission to file for an appeal, saying there was no longer a
constitutional basis for it.

The case was prompted last year by a TV Guide article on a CBS documentary,
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which included General
Westmoreland in a high level Government conspiracy to misrepresent the number of
enemy troops American soldiers were facing. TV Guide said the program's
producers had ignored or excised material that challenged the conspiracy thesis.
CBS then launched an internal investigation and made public its conclusions in
July. The network, citing the internal review, said it stood by the program and
its conspiracy thesis.

General Westmoreland sued for $120 million saying he had been libeled by the
program and again in the July statement. In pretrial proceedings, he asked for a
copy of the CBS investigation and was refused. CBS argued on constitutional
grounds that a news organization's internal reports are privileged information
protected by First Amendment free press guarantees.

Judge Leval, however, ruled that the network ''cannot at once hold out the
(internal) report to the public as substantiating its accusations (against
General Westmoreland) and, when challenged, decline to reveal the report
contending it is a confidential internal study utilized solely for
self-evaluation and self-improvement.'' Judge Leval said the constitutional
question was thus not an issue in the case. Even if the privilege existed - and
he avoided saying whether it did or not - he said CBS effectively made the
private document public in its July statement.

Though the judge did not consider the constitutional status of news
organizations' internal reports, the National News Council last week said the
court action would have a ''chilling effect'' on selfcritique efforts of all
news groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Where to in Central America?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 602 words


If President Reagan persists in committing the nation's honor and arms to the
political wars of Central America, it is high time that he fully state why, what
he aims to achieve and how. His decision to speak out next Wednesday is
therefore welcome, if late. Congress and all Americans deserve to know what
interests are truly at risk and whether the responses Mr. Reagan recommends are
indeed adequate, lawful and sensible.

Clarity, not a clarion, is needed. Not a lack of concern but the want of
confidence explains the resistance in a Congress that seems sometimes to be
legislating in the interests of the nation's adversaries. This is the frustrated
response to treating Americans as less than grown-up.

Grown-ups understand that in Central America there can be good United States
intervention and bad intervention, but almost no such thing as nonintervention.
Whether the Yankee colossus opposes or accepts revolutionary regimes, or smiles
or frowns on a Somoza tyranny, its influence is formidable.

Nor do grown-ups doubt that America has a strategic interest in the security of
the Panama Canal and Caribbean sea lanes. So it is a proper use of national
power to prevent the Soviet Union from implanting offensive weapons in a
mini-bloc of client states. It is also right for the United States to assist
democratic forces in the hemisphere, using every lawful means to advance their
well-being.

But it takes a huge leap from all that to the proposition that potential threats
justify secret wars and other adventures in the company of the very forces that
did so much to stimulate revolution in the first place. The Reagan team may have
convinced itself that Nicaragua's provocations require covert help to an emigre
army. But it has not persuaded Congress, key Latin allies, professional
diplomats or the eminent members of an inter-American committee headed by Sol
Linowitz and Ecuador's former president, Galo Plaza.

We shall be listening closely Wednesday night for some answers to critical
questions: If the secret war has limited objectives, what are they? If, on the
other hand, the Managua regime is to be destabilized and toppled, why and at
what price? Is there to be no distinction between helping disaffected democrats
and Somoza veterans?

And what are the stakes and opportunities in tiny El Salvador? If the insurgency
there is flourishing primarily because of Soviet-bloc weapons, why can't the
shipments be proved or intercepted? What progress is to be expected from an army
that cannot stop its own forces from slaughtering innocent civilians and which
cares more for political power than effective combat against guerrillas? How
will tens of millions more in aid rebuild that army and convince it that its
failures will not be redeemed by American marines?

Strategically, Central America is not Vietnam. Nor is asking these questions a
mere reprise of the Vietnam debate. Americans have every reason to worry about
being led into another disastrous swamp because no one had the courage in time
to measure ends against available means.

But to say that Central America isn't Vietnam does not make it Munich. Indeed,
where would the United States be in Central America today if it had taken Ronald
Reagan's advice and rejected the enlightened compromises that produced the
Panama Canal treaties?

The President is to be commended for staking his political prestige on a
difficult policy question. Let him now move the discussion past slogans and show
that his objectives arise from an understanding of the possibilities - and
limits - of both military and diplomatic action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MR. SIKORSKI GOES TO WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By David Shribman; David Shribman covers Congress for the New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 44, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4855 words


STILLWATER, Minn., is an old lumber town on the St. Croix River. In the last
century, when the white pine still stood high on the hills and when settlers
traveled to the Middle West by steamboat and stagecoach, some enterprising
pioneers built a sawmill there. Later, when the railroads inched west and when
millions of logs were being sorted every year at the boom site just beyond town,
a modest downtown started to grow, and there sprouted a brewery, an opera house
and a series of mansions. The logging ended decades ago, but Stillwater endures,
a small town with a hardware store, a drug store, a grocery store and an elegant
old hotel. The butcher knows the name of just about everyone in town. The meters
charge a dime for two hours' parking.

Gerry Sikorski doesn't live there anymore. He has left the farmhouse on the
hill, his horses, the deer that used to nose up to his stoop and the great
horned owl that he used to hear in the night. He has packed up and moved away,
to Washington. He has bought a city rowhouse and a tuxedo. He has an unlisted
telephone number. And when he visited the White House early this year, he
entered through the front door.

This winter, when there was ice on the St. Croix, freshman Congressman Gerry
Sikorski went back to Minnesota. He drove down Route 36, the highway leading
from St. Paul to Stillwater, a road he has taken hundreds of times. He drove it
when he worked in a law office and he drove it when he served in the State
Senate. Over the years, he has seen houses spring up and trees grow from
seedlings to robust sentinels. He has watched one of the farms along the road
change, watched the number of cows increase and decline. This time, however,
everything seemed different.

''This time,'' said Sikorski, who turns 35 on Tuesday, ''I felt sort of morose.
It's like the two paths in the woods: I've taken a path, but I haven't gone so
far that I still don't see the other path. I hope I don't lose that path.''
Across the country last fall, 80 men and women began the complex process that
would transform them into members of Congress. Nearly three-quarters of them
were Democrats and many of them, like Sikorski, were lawyers, had served in
state legislatures and had borrowed heavily to run for Congress. They had based
their campaigns on opposition to Reaganomics, support of efforts to freeze the
level of nuclear weapons and reassurances that Social Security, which has 36
million beneficiaries, would be re-stored to financial health.  They had,
moreover, come to office with what Jonathan Moore, director of the Institute of
Politics at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government, called ''a
skepticism of clear-cut solutions.'' Days after the voters of Minnesota's 6th
Congressional District decided to send him to Congress, Gerry Sikorski was still
campaigning. For months, he had driven from suburb to suburb, from farm to farm,
across highways and down gravel roads.  His campaign had been a page torn from
an American scrapbook, greetings and speeches and parades and kisses, and now
that it was over, now that he had won and was going to Washington, he almost
could not stop. He got in the car and drove 60 miles through the November chill
to Monticello for the annual Wright County Democratic Farmer Labor dinner.

He was among the first to arrive, and was one of the few men there; it was deer
season and most of the men were hunting. It was cold inside the restaurant and
the barmaid, who handed out drinks with embossed cocktail napkins left over from
somebody's wedding, wore a heavy cable sweater and skimpy black hotpants.
Sikorski gave a short speech, telling the group how grateful he was for their
support, telling them of the challenges that were ahead, telling them how much
it all meant to him. The response was tumultuous. ''For us, a Congressman is a
big thing,'' Mary Bray, a county worker, said as the cheering faded. ''We're far
away from Washington. Most of us have never been there. He's our only direct
line there. I think he knows that.''

Susan Erkel Sikorski was at home. The house smelled of cloves and she sat in the
kitchen, going through the mail. There was a letter from Dan Rostenkowski, the
Illinois Democrat who heads the powerful House Ways and Means Committee,
inviting her husband's opinions on the Social Security financing crisis. There
was a letter from Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat,
pledging that ''we shall stay our course together.'' There was a letter
advertising a garden-apartment complex in suburban Virginia. And, less than a
week after the election, there already were job requests, scores of them,
opening with entreaties like this: ''I am an energetic young Democratic attorney
with a variety of skills that can contribute to the success of your first
team.''

For the Sikorskis, life was almost overwhelming: the speeches, the mail, the
good wishes, the phone calls, the endless plans. In the confusion, Sikorski lost
his pay check, his 20-month-old daughter screamed almost continuously and his
wife, a Ph.D. in home economics, worried about whether she could find a job in
Washington and whether it made sense to take their dogs and cats along. They
were excited, they were exhausted, but most of all they were scared.

One afternoon, Sikorski, who is lean and clean-cut in the oldfashioned way, was
working in jeans and a down vest in his campaign headquarters in a Minneapolis
suburb. He kicked away the large plastic 7-Up bottle that held his office door
open and there, amid the piles of letters and files and phone messages, he took
a deep breath. He talked about Minnesota's Red River Valley, where he grew up,
and he talked about his parents, about how his father had been a railroad
laborer and part-time bartender and how his mother had waited on tables, had
taken in laundry and worked at a turkeyprocessing plant. Then came one of those
moments, rare in the life of a politician, when he confronted, out loud, what
really troubled him. ''More and more,'' he said, almost in a whisper, ''I worry
about what this means for my family.''

In the early years of this century, before air-conditioning and before the
United States was a world power, Congressional sessions lasted only a few
months. Members of Congress would travel to Washington, stay in boarding houses,
visit the bawdy houses and go home to their families before the heat and the
oppressive humidity of the summer months set in. Today, Congress meets virtually
all year round, and more and more of its members maintain homes in the
Washington area.

From the start, the Sikorskis had decided that they, too, would move to
Washington. Gerry Sikorski knew about the late-night sessions, the dinner
meetings and the rounds of Capitol receptions.  His wife had multiple sclerosis,
suffering occasional and sometimes persistent bouts of numbness in her hands,
legs and feet. Their daughter was growing up quickly. He decided that he would
try to put his family first. ''I draw lines,'' he said that first week after the
election. ''I'm not going to a bunch of receptions and talk about the weather
and the Minnesota Vikings all night. I'd rather be at home talking to my wife
and my daughter. That's my choice. I'm not going to get fat, become an alcoholic
and lose my family. I'm not going to do that.''

Later that week, he took a walk on Fairy Falls Hill, near his home. Long ago,
before the white men came to Minnesota, the Sioux and Chippewa regarded that
land as a sacred plot of earth where the spirits talked to them. That morning
Sikorski walked in the snow, across the old logging road into the woods, and as
he walked he thought of the river and the fields and he remembered how, when
dusk deepened into night, he could see the lights of Wisconsin beyond the St.
Croix. ''I get sort of sad,'' he said, ''when I think that we have to leave
here.''

Two weeks after the election, the Sikorskis arrived in Washington and a campaign
of a different sort began. Like many other freshmen, Sikorski sought out
Congressional leaders in the tucked-away power centers where committee
assignments are made.

Sikorski wanted a position on the Energy and Commerce Committee, which puts its
imprimatur on about half the legislation that passes through the House. He
sought and won the support of Representative Martin Olav Sabo of Minneapolis, a
member of the Democratic Steering and Policy Committee, which plays a major role
in the committee assignment process. He then pressed his case in person before
virtually every member of the steering committee, leaving a resume with each of
them, and spent hours on the telephone trying to corral support from members of
the energy committee itself. He found that his Polish heritage could be an
advantage, dropping a few Polish words into conversations with Representative
John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who heads the energy committee, and
Representative Rostenkowski. ''The Polish connection doesn't hurt,'' he later
said.

Meanwhile, Susan Sikorski was scouring the real-estate listings.  They decided
that they wanted to live on Capitol Hill, where modest town houses routinely
cost more than $100,000. After days of searching, they finally found a
three-bedroom home, with a basement and a garage, only a few minutes' walk from
the Capitol. He was discovering that his Congressional pay of $69,800 would not
go far in Washington. ''It will be macaroni-and-cheese dinners for several
years,'' Sikorski said the night they signed the house contract.

Sikorski had always maintained a fast pace. Before the election, in fact, the
St. Paul Pioneer Press said that he campaigned as if he were trying to run a
three-minute mile. Now he was back in that mode. He dashed from one interview to
another, fielding telephone calls along the way, yet somehow also managing to
follow the rigorous orientation program laid on for new Democratic members of
Congress.

As freshman Republicans followed their own schedule, Sikorski and his fellow
Democrats pursued a regimen of seminars, receptions, luncheons and even a
session devoted to teaching them how to get reelected. There was a brunch with
former Vice President Walter F.  Mondale, a prayer breakfast, a reception
sponsored by Anheuser-Busch and a lecture entitled, ''Customs, Decorum and
Unwritten Rules of the House.''

The Sikorskis moved through the orientation period like timid college freshmen,
following the schedule faithfully. Early in December, they went to a session
held by the Democratic Study Group, a research organization for House members,
and listened to a speech given by retiring Representative Bill Brodhead of
Michigan. ''The hours are long and there will be embassy parties and dinners to
go to,'' Brodhead warned. ''You can get caught up in the whole syndrome. The
divorce rate is higher than it should be.'' Then he added: ''It doesn't have to
be that way. You don't have to do all that. If you just do your job, you won't
have to go out to dinner.'' The room was quiet.

When it came time for the session on Congressional procedures, the class was led
through the cavernous hallways of the Capitol to the House floor. Sikorski
pulled a piece of paper from his pocket and wrote a note to himself: ''There's
an incredible sense of pride and wonder on walking on the floor. Some sitting
Congressmen told us that the sensation never leaves you.''

It was a special moment, the crossing of the shadowy line between a man's most
cherished dreams and his realization that they were coming true. Sikorski was,
like many youngsters in his hometown near the North Dakota border, born and bred
a Democrat. When he was young and his parents had no money to contribute to the
Democrat Farmer Labor Party, they contributed the labor of their five children
instead. He made his first political poster, a sign for the Stevenson-Kefauver
ticket, when he was 8.

Sikorski was a college student during the Vietnam years, and quickly became
swept up in the antiwar movement. He was a street demonstrator at the Democratic
National Convention in Chicago in 1968, but soon became deeply involved in local
and state politics, working for such causes as the effort to lower the voting
age. Now as then, Sikorski found himself left of center politically; in Congress
he has spoken out for the nuclear freeze and against cuts in social programs
such as school lunches and aid to education. However, as a devout Catholic, he
strenuously opposes abortion. Sikorski has an aggressive streak. Once, running a
campaign for former Representative Richard Nolan, Democrat of Minnesota, his
zeal led him to tear down a lawn sign boosting Nolan's opponent. Sikorski
himself made an unsuccessful try for Congress in 1978.

Early in the orientation period, Sikorski announced his candidacy to be the
freshman Democrats' whip, helping Democratic leaders maintain party discipline.
He sent letters and resumes to the other new legislators and distributed
orientation schedules complete with pictures of the members of the Steering and
Policy Committee. He even called some freshmen at their homes during Christmas
week.

Yet the orientation could be disspiriting at times. The speakers droned on,
often repeating themselves or each other, and before long even the anecdotes
grew wearisome. Susan Sikorski went to a seminar, ''New Perspectives for
Political Spouses,'' sponsored by a group of Congressional wives and Georgetown
University, and sat restlessly as the speakers talked about the Constitution,
explained how a bill became law and touched on the rudiments of life in
Washington. In the audience, eyes rolled and groans were heard. ''I'm not an
airhead,'' said one Congressional wife, sotto voce. ''I'm not sitting through
this.'' Susan Sikorski later described parts of the session as a ''ninth-grade
civics lecture.''

By the end of the formal orientation period, the Sikorskis had come to feel as
if they were being suffocated, as if they were losing control over their own
lives. Always, always there were things to do, appointments to keep. Weariness
had settled in.

On Dec. 9, Susan Sikorski flew home to Minnesota while her husband and some of
the other freshmen legislators took a military plane to Massachusetts for yet
another series of seminars, at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of
Government.

As each lecture ended, the legislators rushed for a bank of telephones, and when
they made their connections, they spoke quickly, almost breathlessly: The clock
was running and the next seminar on agriculture policy or arms control was only
minutes away.  They had so little time. Many of them stayed up late in the
Sheraton Commander Hotel, washing laundry in their sinks in the small hours of
the morning.

''Talk about people making important decisions,'' Sikorski said after lunch one
day. ''I haven't been able to make a decision since we started orientation. I'm
tired of people telling me where to sit and what to eat. What I want is a little
more free time, fewer speeches and a cheeseburger.''

There was little relief when he returned to Minnesota shortly before Christmas.
''Everybody is trying to nip at my time,'' he said. ''Everyone wants you to have
breakfast, everyone wants you to be at their meeting, everybody wants you at
their Christmas party.''

The bittersweet is a native Minnesota berry, and this was a peculiarly
bittersweet time for the Sikorskis. They and their daughter, Anne, trudged out
to the woods behind the house and chose a red cedar; Sikorski chopped it down
and dragged it home. They decided to save money and forgo presents, exchanging
ornaments instead.

At year's end, Sikorski paused a moment to reflect: ''People don't understand
all the pressures. You're trying to get on the committees, you're trying to
start relationships with other members of Congress, you want to hire people, you
want to stay in touch with the people at home. And you're tired.'' With the
opening day of Congress, Jan. 3, a fresh atmosphere descended on the Capitol. It
was a scene of mink coats, microphones and Minoltas. The nine-man Ortiz Mariachi
Band from Kingsville, Tex., played on the Capitol steps, small groups of
television reporters conducted interviews on the triangle of grass near the
House office buildings and families took scores of snapshots.

Sikorski found a seat in the first row of the House chamber for the swearing-in
ceremony. Anne sat on the carpet in front of him, chewing gum. When she started
screaming for her mother during Opening Prayer, Sikorski put his hand over her
mouth. The House was now his home.

Then the voice of Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was heard in the chamber, and
the members of the House raised their right hands and swore to defend the
Constitution of the United States. ''You are members of this legislature,''
O'Neill said, and Representative Gerry Sikorski, Democrat of Minnesota, kissed
his baby girl.

Minutes later his entourage - his wife, his parents, his sister, his
mother-in-law, some friends - was on its way to a reception in the Rayburn House
Office Building.

''How do you get to the subway?'' Sikorski asked a Capitol guard.  They followed
the guard's instructions, rode the underground cars to the Rayburn Building and
finally came upon a group of elevators.  Sikorski pushed the ''up'' button and a
door opened under the sign ''Members Only.'' He took a step forward, and started
to enter the elevator, but then hesitated; he had, after all, only been a member
for a few minutes. He waited for the public elevator.

For freshman legislators, nothing is more important than assembling a loyal,
efficient staff. Sikorski delegated that job to Dennis M. McGrann, 32 years of
age, a close friend who had been a personnel manager for the Minnesota-based
Control Data Corporation.  McGrann had been feeling his own pressures. He was
completing requirements for his Master's of Business Administration, his wife
was expecting their second child and he was a stranger in Washington.

Like other freshmen, Sikorski was assigned a temporary office in House Annex No.
2, one of the depressing, boxlike stone Government buildings scattered like
breadcrumbs a few blocks off the handsome wide boulevards of the capital. The
day after the swearing-in ceremony, some staff members were sitting in a small
circle, open boxes behind them, 200 letters already awaiting answers. Ione
Yates, Sikorski's executive assistant and a veteran Congressional aide, was
typing up the letters that would give the staff entree to the House Office
Supply Service. When she finished, she took a blue felt pen and signed: ''Gerry
Sikorski.'' Then she led the staff in a quick survey.

''We need stationery,'' she said, ''the kind that says 'Congress of the United
States.' '' ''We need letter openers,'' added Tom Meskan, the 26-year-old
legislative assistant.  ''Staples and staplers,'' chimed in Lynn Drake, the
press secretary.  ''Just buy one stapler,'' said Ione Yates. ''I have one at
home I can bring in.'' ''Stamps,'' Lynn Drake said. ''We need stamps.'' There
was an embarrassed silence. Tom Meskan, who had worked with her throughout the
campaign, finally broke it. ''We,'' he said, ''don't need stamps anymore.''

Meanwhile, the Congress itself was getting down to business. House Majority
Leader Jim Wright of Texas called Sikorski's home with the good news that the
Minnesotan had been chosen as one of the six freshmen on the Energy and Commerce
Committee. And the next day brought Sikorski another triumph - he was elected
freshman whip by a substantial margin.

''He seemed to emerge pretty quickly as the person who was going to be the
pre-eminent spokesman for the freshman class,'' said Representative Dennis
Eckart, the Ohio Democrat who preceded Sikorski as freshman whip. ''This is
going to be a big edge for his career.''

Later that week, the new members of Congress were invited to the White House for
dinner. Susan Sikorski had gone to the G Street Remnant Shop, purchased material
and sewn her own dress. Her husband struggled with his new formal wear. Victor
Kamber, a Washington political consultant, finally took pity on his friend and
saw to it that the bow tie was straight and the cummerbund on properly. ''It was
like sending your kids out to the prom,'' said Kamber.  As legions of management
consultants have been saying for years, Congress is not the most efficiently run
enterprise in the nation, and the Sikorski staff was just discovering the
dimensions of that inefficiency. By Jan. 10, they were settled in their
permanent headquarters in the Cannon House Office Building, a magisterial,
white-stone structure a few steps from the Capitol. However, their duplicating
machine was broken, their long-distance telephone line had not been connected
and the facsimile machine did not work.

Meanwhile, banks and financial institutions across the nation were encouraging
one of the largest mail campaigns in history, and the effects were being felt in
Congressional offices. The banks wanted Congress to repeal a provision of the
tax law passed last August, that would force financial institutions to withhold
10 percent of their customers' interest income from savings and investments. In
a matter of days 1,000 letters on the issue had come into Sikorski's office,
virtually paralyzing it. ''We have an answer prepared,'' said McGrann. ''But
we're not even geared up mechanically to get the answers out. Our typewriters
don't even work.'' Sikorski favors the repeal.

After less than a week in session, Congress took its customary January recess.
At month's end, Sikorski came back to the capital feeling invigorated and
plunged into the basic work of Congress - meetings. Before long, he was sitting
down with lobbyists from groups favoring the arts, working for help for Soviet
Jews, seeking assistance for environmental causes and looking for support for a
proposed coal slurry pipeline. There also were the sessions with constituent
groups, including Minnesota delegations to the League of Cities convention and
to police and firefighting conventions. And gradually, as a routine developed,
Sikorski began to feel more at ease with himself and more at ease with life in
Congress.

Sikorski had been a leader in the Minnesota Senate in seeking the enactment of
child-protection measures and in efforts to assist the victims of family
violence. Early in February, he set out to win a place on the Select Committee
on Children, Youth and Families. He went to the Speaker's Office, where many
such decisions are made, and was urged to give a short speech on the floor to
demonstrate his knowledge of the subject.

On the day of the speech, his first before Congress, Sikorski was sitting by
himself in a corner of the cafeteria in the Longworth House Office Building.
There, surrounded by soiled trays, empty potato-chip bags and milk cartons, he
nervously went over his prepared text. It was going to be a hectic day, he said.
He had to be in two places at the same time, on the floor awaiting his turn to
speak, and in the chambers of the Energy and Commerce Committee, where a
critical vote had been scheduled.

Soon Sikorski would grow accustomed to the tug of the floor. In a month, in
fact, he would be able to go to the House gymnasium, lift weights, shower and
still be able to reach the floor for the crucial votes on the Social Security
bill. But in February, his first speech in hand, he made three frantic round
trips between the floor and the committee chambers in the Rayburn House Office
Building.

There were only two dozen Congressmen on the floor, a small group of students in
the visitors' gallery and a handful of reporters lingering in the press gallery
when Sikorski finally approached the lectern. As he stood there, he told
himself: ''Stop. Take a breath.  Take your time.'' But like so many freshman
Congressmen before him, he couldn't. He talked about drug and child abuse,
family violence and divorce on Minnesota Indian reservations, in California
barrios and in West Virginia hollows, and he raced through it all in only 40
seconds. The maiden speech of Congressman Sikorski occupied two and
three-quarter inches of type in the Congressional Record.  In the council
chamber of the Stillwater Municipal Building, one of the cinder-block legacies
of the largess of the Great Society days, there sat several dozen people in
heavy boots, lumbermen's jackets and dungarees. It was a wintry Saturday
afternoon and Congressman Sikorski was standing at the front of the room.
''Congress,'' he was saying, ''is a noble and old institution.''

It was the fourth town meeting Sikorski had held in two days, but the cold air
of Minnesota seemed to stir him and he plunged into a monologue with vigor. He
quoted John Kennedy, Mark Twain and Red Skelton, he talked about some of the
nuances of general revenue sharing, he touched on local landfill issues. But it
was Congress that he really wanted to talk about, and it was some of the
back-room mysteries of the Capitol that his audience wanted to hear. ''There are
a lot of egos in Washington, big heads,'' he said, the laughs starting to gather
in the audience. ''I know that comes as a surprise.''

Later that afternoon, Sikorski held court just down the hall, greeting a stream
of constituents who wanted to share their opinions and, just as often, to share
their problems. At one point, he was confronted by 18 postal workers, angered by
the prospect that new Federal workers would be forced under the Social Security
umbrella.  They stood in their woolen shirts and their windbreakers, arms folded
every one, as Sikorski preached to a congregation that refused to be converted.

They were afraid that without the pension contributions of new postal workers,
their own benefits would be endangered. ''When our retirement system starts
going down the tubes,'' one asked testily, ''is the Government going to kick in
some money?''

''I think we have to,'' Sikorski answered. ''I don't think there's any option.''
The questions continued for several minutes before Rex P. Johnson, general
president of the St. Paul area local of the American Postal Workers Union, made
his demand: ''We'd like a 'No' vote on a bill if it includes us in Social
Security.''

Sikorski did not hesitate. ''You won't get it,'' he said. ''I won't vote no.
You've got to accept that.'' The meeting began to break up. ''Thank you,'' said
Paul Ryberg, quality-control specialist with the St. Paul Post Office.  ''Thank
you?'' Johnson asked, mockingly.  ''Yes, thank you,'' Ryberg said, turning to
Sikorski. ''He could have hid like the rest of them in his office in
Washington.'' All that week Sikorski drove across his district, attending a
nuclear-freeze meeting, addressing the Anoka County Chamber of Commerce,
visiting a senior citizens' dance, dropping by a political fund-raiser, even
taking a few minutes on a Saturday night to dip into a testimonial for a leading
member of the Spring Lake Park Veterans of Foreign War.

But during that trip back to his district, a journey to where he had come from,
he also found time to reflect on where he was going.  Things have, in truth,
turned out quite well for him. His wife landed a part-time job with the National
Governors' Association in Washington. He was earning his spurs as the Democrats'
freshman whip.

The Democratic leadership, for example, dearly wanted Congress to reject
President Reagan's budget and adopt, in its stead, one fashioned by the
Democrats themselves. It was a major test of the President's influence in
Congress and the Democrats sought to exploit the opportunity to embarrass the
Administration. Sikorski drew up a checklist of freshman Democrats and met with
them individually and in groups, in the halls of the Capitol, in cloak rooms and
in committee chambers and then, when the actual floor vote neared, he telephoned
them or called upon them in their offices. In the end, he won the votes of all
but six of the 56 Democratic freshmen, an accomplishment that earned him the
praise of Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the Democratic Whip.

''It's not until you start seeing people's problems and trying to do something
about them that you actually know what it's like being a Congressman,'' Sikorski
says. ''I didn't know what it would be like. And the thing is, I do like it. I
like it more than anything else I've ever done.'' During that February visit to
Minnesota, Sikorski was asked by the Rev. Bernard Reiser, pastor of the Church
of the Epiphany of Coon Rapids, to be a lector at one of the church's Sunday
masses. At the proper time, Sikorski went to the altar, picked up the Scriptures
and did his two readings. But for most of the mass he sat in the front pew, a
pensive look on his face.

''How often do we sell our soul for power and fame?'' Father Reiser asked in his
homily. ''Lent is a time to look at our choices. What are our priorities? What
are our principles?''

Sikorski listened to the prayers and readings from the liturgy. He listened to
the choir. He listened to Father Reiser's questions and he listened to his own
thoughts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of freshman orientation at Harvard for Congressmen
photo of Sikorski talking to American Legion members photo of Sikorski O'Neill
just before inauguration photo of Sikorski talking with Speaker O'Neill photo of
Sikorski talking with other freshmen Congressmen photo of Sikorski and his
family

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SENSE OF PLACE

BYLINE: By Francine Prose; Francine Prose, whose most recent novel is "Hungry
Hearts," is teaching fiction at the University of Arizona.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 914 words


Missed Connections by Elaine Ford 229 pp. New York.  Random House. $13.95

In Elaine Ford's "Missed Connections," the Nunnery Grounds - a working class
Italian seciton of Somerville, Mass, - functions almost as a character.
Gradually we come to know its past, its secrets, its personality, its face. And
when, near the novel's end, the neighborhood is largely obliterated to make room
for a superhighway, we miss it.

Paralleling the plight of the Nunnery Grounds are the experiences of one of its
resident families, the Scarpas, who move from integrity through near dissolution
toward a compromised, fragmented survival.  In the book's early chapters, set in
1959, Christine Scarpa is finishing high school, shelving books at the public
library and carrying on a skittish teen-age romance with Sandy Cole from the B &
J Auto Body Shop. Although increasingly aware of other possibilities, Christine
is still very much part of her home and family. The Scarpa family is very
conscious of its history, and there are strong bonds between its members:
stormy, superstitious Ma; gentle Papa, with his garden, his shrine, his private
sorrows; and Christine's brothers and sisters - frail, otherworldly Anna,
Martin, the priest, and Molly and Jimmy, the two least complicated and most
good-natured children.

Encouraged by Sandy, Christine attempts to separate herself from her family. She
leaves the old neighborhood and moves across the Charles River to Boston, where
she gets a job at the Grayling Gallery. Later she moves in with Braden and
Charlotte Grayling, an arty, decadent aristocratic brother and sister. Christine
becomes engaged to Braden, breaks the engagement off, travels to Italy, visits
her family's relatives in the village of Poggiolo and later begins an affair
with a married photographer. By the time she returns to the Nunnery Grounds,
life has changed. whole blocks have been razed and look like "the aftermath of a
manaical demolition derby." Sandy Cole has married Anna. Christine's household
has been wounded by the war in Vietnam. The demolition, both environmental and
emotional, continues as the Scarpas and their neighbors regroup and go on.

The missed connctions of the title are not only the damaged ties of community
but also - and more important - the frayed circuits of domestic life. Throughout
the book we see family members approaching, circling, nearly touching, then
falling short through bad timing, misunderstanding, unlucky accident. Sisters
love and unknowingly betray each other; lovers marry the wrong people;
well-meaning parents blast children's futures.

What's lovely about this novel is the patience and care with which it details
these loyalties and rivalries, the small slights and kindnesses, the clashes,
silences and nuances of family discourse.  Elaine Ford is never less than
sympathetic, sensitive, evenhanded.  Her narrative tone is understated and so
gentle that we never cease to feel her respect for the Scarpas' dignity. Even in
passion and anger, her characters remain civilized, remarkably decorous and
restrained.

At times, though, this restraint works against the novel; it's part of what
keeps the Scarpas from coming fully alive. For all its deep currents of feeling,
this family seems drained of vitality; for all its storminess, life in the
Nunnery Grounds seems curiously dry.  Description and dialogue move the plot
forward, but there's no energy, no noise. At full volume, these voices seem to
be whispering.

Much of the problem is formal.The book is divided into sections so that scenes
are cut off before they can gather momentum. Too often the author's
understatement drifts into blandness. Her characters would be hard pressed to
fit any sort of imaginativelife into her unadorned sentences; there is no room
for them to talk at any length about the things - whether gardening of auto body
repair - that we're told offer them some satisfaction.

These restrictions are presumably intentional. Somerville in midwinter is hardly
the world's most colorful place, and we're meant to feel the narrowness and
deprivation of life in the Nunnery Grounds. Yet the limitations seem to stem
more from artistic decisions than from real life. It's difficult, for example,
to envision an Italian-American community in which no one is capable of simply
enjoying a meal or a glass of wine or of coming up with one genuinely funny
remark. Nor do things improve much when Christine visits Italy. Poggiolo turns
out to be even bleaker than Somerville.

Although there's a good deal of sensory detail, we're left starved for the taste
of Ma's cooking, the scents of Papa's garden. It's as if the author were
reluctant to allow us - or her characters - the most innocent pleasures. Perhaps
that's why her teen-ager, Christine and Sandy, seem so somber, so peculiarly
middle-aged. Despite scattered references to Elvis and Paul Anka, they exist
outside time, apart from their generation. What's sorely missed here is the
glint of a cigarette pack rolled up in a T-shirt sleeve, the snap of popping
gum.

There's much to admire in "Missed Connections": its generosity, its seriousness,
its sense of place and most notably its determination to illuminate the most
ordinary of lives. Yet the book calls out for some sort of spirit, some humor or
simply charm. Good intentions should be enough, but they aren't. When a novel's
subject is passion, emotion, connections missed and made, we long - if only for
a moment - to be seduced.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPEAKING PERSONALLY;
LESSONS FROM IWO JIMA AND BEYOND

BYLINE: By ANGELO CASAROLA; Angelo Casarola lives in Belleville.

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 31, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 779 words


AS I grow older and some of the memories of my childhood begin to fade, one
seemingly small recollection still burns brightly: The day my father taught me
''The Marine's Hymn.''

One afternoon, when I was 5 years old, my father invited me to climb onto his
lap because he ''wanted to talk to me about something.''

I remember quickly going over the day's events in my mind. Had I committed a
punishable offense? But my father assured me that I had ''nothing to worry
about.'' To my surprise, he embarked upon a mildly ostentatious account of his
tour of duty with the Marines in Korea.

I relaxed, realizing that I was in no danger, and leaned back against my dad's
chest. His arms were wrapped tightly around me as I listened to his thoughtful
remarks about the pride he felt when he served his country in war.

Then he told me there was a song that he wanted me to learn - ''The Marine's
Hymn.'' He would sing it first, he said, and I would do my best to follow.
Awkwardly, with unintentional disrespect for the melody and tremendous reverence
for the lyrics, my father launched into song. As the words bellowed forth, I was
struck, even then, by their boldness.

I didn't know the difference between the Korean War and the Civil War. Nor did I
know what, or who, Montezuma and Tripoli were. Still, I was so impressed that in
only two attempts I was able to give a disharmonious but acceptable rendition of
the Marine anthem.

I left my father's side that day with my fists clenched. The imagery of
green-shirted men rushing wildly into battle, guided by love for their nation,
was intense.

For days after, I boasted that my father had served with the Marines. It never
mattered to me - as I soon found out - that his greatest accomplishment as a
serviceman was that his commanding officer thought the world of his breakfast
rolls, or that the closest he had come to danger was when an enemy mortar shell
destroyed an outhouse that he had just vacated.

I cared only for those virile ideals that he and ''The Marine's Hymn'' stood
proudly for: Honor, freedom and bravery.  I carried that banner through my years
of high school and college, even when patriotism fell thoroughly out of fashion.
I argued the merits of the domino theory to support our country's presence in
Vietnam, and I decried the efforts of the ''bleeding-heart liberals'' who would
have our borders left defenseless and our arms dumped into the ocean.

I believed that my views were well-conceived responses to the realities in the
world at that time.  How distant those days now seem; how frightening our world
seems to have become.  And how foolish I feel not to have seen the terrible
legacy that crept stealthily upon us during those days when wars, for better or
for worse, and in spite of all the horrifying capabilities that existed even
then, were still fought by men with machines of definable impact.

Even the misery of Hiroshima was supposed to be a history never forgotten and
never repeated. Now, 10 years after the end of the Vietnam conflict, we have
begun to talk of a type of war worse than a thousand Hiroshimas, and the world
stands nearer to a fate that all peoples must cry out against, even those of us
who until now have looked blindly past the truth.

Today, President Reagan speaks of winnable nuclear encounters and flexible
responses. He and his military strategists, like crazed video-game addicts,
discuss the advantages of lasers, particle beams and antiballistic missile
systems the way that the local youths argue about the latest ''Star Wars''
movie.

We are inundated with maps and graphs, and with convoluted technical jargon
about missile deployment, zero options and neutron bombs, all delivered with a
smug coolness that belies the insanity that now threatens four billion human
beings.

The leaders of both world superpowers have become engaged in a bizarre game of
technological chance with all the logic of a barroom brawl. While people in
every corner of the globe go hungry, dollars are poured endlessly into devising
a new form of evil that will make mass destruction even more inevitable than it
was an hour ago.

I fear now that we are being led inexorably to self-obliteration by men who have
become as dehumanized as the computers that have become their toys. The myopic
loyalty to nation that I proudly flaunted 10 years ago has evolved into a
nightmare so different from the fond memory I have of the day my father sat me
upon his knee.

I see myself, in 10 years, sitting with my own son, my arms clasped tightly
around him and his feet dangling playfully from the couch, as a mushroom cloud
rises in the distance and we are seared into oblivion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Iwo Jima scene

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


THE deadline is approaching for visual, performing and literary artists and arts
organizations to sign up for this year's Celebration of the Arts, scheduled for
Labor Day weekend on the grounds of the County Center for the Fine Arts in
Roslyn Harbor.

Last year, at the first celebration, sponsored by the Nassau County Forum for
the Arts, more than 2,000 local artists entertained more than 300,000 people who
thronged to the four-day event.

''This year we are asking these artists to participate once again and we invite
other artists to join us,'' said Marcia O'Brien, executive director of the
Nassau County Office of Cultural Development and Forum coordinator.

The deadline is next Sunday. Those wanting applications should call 484-9333.

''There hasn't been much done out here on Long Island about El Salvador,'' said
Judy Keogh of Old Brookville. ''People either just don't understand it or they
think the Government is right or they hope it will go away. But it's been over
two years and it's not going to go away.''

Mrs. Keogh is the sister of Maura Clarke, a Maryknoll nun who, with three other
church women, was shot to death in El Salvador. Before going there, Sister Maura
Clarke had spent 17 years in Nicaragua, and when on leave from her missionary
duties stayed with the Keogh family.

''If the American people could see that country, they would know how wrong our
Government's policy is,'' Mrs. Keogh said, recalling her trip to El Salvador for
her sister's funeral. ''They'd see a little country about the size of
Massachusetts with a population of about 4.5 million. The people don't have
shoes, the children have swollen bellies from hunger - but everyone over 12 has
a gun supplied by the United States.''

Thursday at 8 P.M., Mrs. Keogh will speak at a meeting entitled ''El Salvador:
Another Vietnam?'' The meeting is sponsored by the Nassau Chapter of the
Committee in Solidarity With the People of El Salvador, the Long Island Catholic
Peace Fellowship, Mothers (and Others) Against the Draft and other groups. It
will be held at the North Shore Unitarian Church on Plandome Road in Manhasset.

Arthur Leipzig, an internationally known photographer who has taught at Long
Island University's C.W. Post Center for more than 15 years, has been chosen to
receive the university's highest honor for faculty achievement.

Mr. Leipzig, whose photographs are exhibited in numerous permanent collections,
including those at the Museum of Modern Art in New York and Canada's National
Gallery of Art, will receive, on Thursday, L.I.U.'s Trustees' Award for
Scholarly Achievement. The award includes a $1,500 honorarium.

The award jury called Mr. Leipzig's photography ''energizing, ongoing and
compassionate.'' ''I'm delighted,'' said Mr. Leipzig, who lives in Sea Cliff.
''It's nice to get recognized.'' Trustees' awards will also go to Dr. Eric
Posmentier, associate professor of marine science at Southampton College, and
Dr. John Sciarra, professor of industrial pharmacy at L.I.U.'s Arnold and Marie
Schwartz College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences.

Beginning this week, several Soviet diplomats and a Harvard professor will
discuss United States-Soviet relations at four free public lectures at the State
University at Stony Brook.

The series is sponsored by the Arms Center Disarmament and Peace Studies
Resource Center. Lester G. Paldy, dean of the Center for Continuing Education
and head of the Resource Center, said the lectures are ''part of the center's
program to stimulate discussion and study of important world issues.''

The series is scheduled at 7:30 P.M. on the following days: Wednesday,
''Economic Interactions -U.S.A. and U.S.S.R.,'' with Serge Lavrov, First
Secretary of the Soviet Mission to the United Nation; May 3, ''Politics and
Coexistence - U.S.A. and U.S.S.R.,'' with Nikita Smidovich, an attache with the
Soviet Mission; May 17, ''Are the Soviets Real Negotiating Partners for
Disarmament?,'' with Dr.  Everett Mendelsohn of Harvard University, and June 7,
''The Disarmament Negotiations -U.S.A. and U.S.S.R.,'' with Serge Kislyak,
Second Secretary, Soviet Mission.

Suffolk County law enforcement officials are now empowered to confiscate
vehicles used for the illegal transportation and disposal of hazardous waste.

The authority, contained in a law approved unanimously recently by the County
Legislature, is intended to give the District Attorney a quick way to put
illegal haulers out of business.

Local cesspool servicemen had feared that under the new law they would lose
their trucks if they unwittingly picked up contaminated loads. But the proposal
was amended to provide an exemption to cesspool haulers, to be based on an
affidavit certifying that the customer believed his cesspool was free of
hazardous material.

Lee Daniels, executive director of the Long Island Liquid Waste Association, had
urged approval of the new version of the proposal.  ''If there is an illegal
dumper, please get him,'' she said. ''Our only competitor is the illegal
dumper.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT GUIDE;
A HOST OF DAFFODILS

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 12, Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


A sea of daffodils, kept separated and fresh in water-filled beer bottles, will
be unloaded in Greenwich Wednesday and Thursday by dozens of amateur gardeners
from the New York-Connecticut area. The occasion is the 26th annual Connecticut
Daffodil Show, taking place at the Greenwich Garden Center, Bible Street, Cos
Cob, from 2 to 7:30 P.M. Thursday. The show is sponsored by the Greenwich Garden
Society and approved by the American Daffodil Society.

Unusually warm weather forced many of the bulbs to sprout early, but a spate of
cold and wet weather has made growers apprehensive.  ''The flowers have been
splashed with mud and badly beaten by heavy rains,'' said Viveca Wehtje,
co-chairman of the event. Since flowers may not be greenhouse-grown, numerous
contestants have removed their specimens from the garden and refrigerated them
until showtime.

Anyone may exhibit. Show containers will be provided during receiving hours from
noon to 6 P.M. Wednesday and from 8 to 10:30 A.M. Thursday. Entries will be
accepted in categories ranging from a single specimen to 24 specimens, depending
upon the number of varieties grown by the exhibitor.

Those who cultivate up to 100 species may compete for the Carey E.  Quinn Award,
given for a collection of 24 varieties. It may be won only once and it is not
necessarily given annually.

Phil Phillips will judge the show. He is in the United States on a biennial
daffodil-judging tour from his native New Zealand, where the flower grows in
abundance and is highly prized.

For more information call 869-9242.

NATURE'S CHANGES

In nature's game of musical chairs, a number of species of plants - along with
many varieties of animals, insects and birds - have disappeared entirely from
the Northeast. Others, such as the coyote - which made a recent appearance in
Connecticut -have settled here from other locations.

The Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale University has a new exhibition
called ''Arrivals and Losses - Our Changing Fauna and Flora'' revealing the
results of investigations into the state of the bog orchid, the regal moth, the
walking stick, the black widow spider and many other past, present and possibly
future inhabitants of the region.

Antipathy toward civilization drove the timber wolf out of New England
generations ago, making room for a breed of coyote that appears to grow larger
and darker as it adjusts from a plains environment to the forest. Problems have
already arisen related to protecting the animal from farmers who, the museum
says, mistakenly believe that it is killing their stock and pets. The coyote is
apparently valuable in controlling rodents, and farm animals are more likely to
be attacked by marauding wild dogs, according to museum officials.

Human influences and climatic changes predicted over the next century are
covered in the exhibition, which is open to the public from 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.
daily and 1 to 4:45 P.M. Sunday. Admission is $1, children from 6 to 16 pay 50
cents, children under 5 admitted free.

The museum is located at 170 Whitney Avenue, New Haven.

LECTURE BY BORGES

Jorge Luis Borges, the celebrated 83-year-old poet from Argentina, will deliver
the Joseph H. Selden Memorial Lecture on the subject of ''Poetic Expression and
Creativity'' at 8 P.M. tomorrow in Palmer Auditorium, Connecticut College, New
London.

Mr. Borges achieved an international reputation in 1961 when he and Samuel
Beckett were awarded the Formentor Prize by a consortium of American and
European publishers. He has also received the Order of the British Empire, the
Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters of the Government of France, the
Alfonso Reys International Prize, the Balzan Prize and honorary doctorates from
Oxford University, the Sorbonne and Columbia University.

The lecture is open to the public without charge and will be followed by a
limited question-and-answer period.

PURPLE HEART SYMPOSIUM

A symposium celebrating the bicentennial of the Purple Heart, the order of
decoration for wounds received in authorized military action by armed services
personnel or civilians, is to be held from 9 A.M.  to 8 P.M. Saturday in the
Center for Financial Studies at Fairfield University.

Sponsored by the Department of the Army and the 76th Division of the United
States Army, the conference will consist of lectures and panel discussions in
connection with Connecticut's part in the Revolutionary War and a retrospective
of the American Revolution.

Among the scheduled speakers are James Thomas Flexner, biographer of George
Washington, and a number of faculty members from Wesleyan and Temple
Universities and the University of Massachusetts.

Subjects include ''George Washington and the American Soldier,'' ''The Militia
in Revolutionary Strategy,'' ''The Generalship of Cornwallis'' and ''The
American Revolution and Treason.''

Several interviews will be conducted with recipients of the Purple Heart,
including James Aretz, who received the decoration seven times for wounds
sustained in Vietnam.

Reservations are $35 with lunch, $55 with lunch and dinner.  Overnight
accommodations are available at the university. For details call 255-0491.

YALE CHARITIES DRIVE

The possibilities are dizzying: perhaps a pair of Paul Newman's racing goggles,
or a preliminary sketch for ''Doonesbury'' by Gary Trudeau, or dinner with
William F. Buckley. These are the types of prizes, donated by Yale alumni, that
will be auctioned off at the 60th annual Yale Charities Drive, 2:30 P.M. Friday,
Cross Campus in front of the Sterling Library on the Yale University campus, New
Haven.

The undergraduate, nonprofit student organization raises money in this manner
each year to aid about a dozen agencies off and on campus, including the Urban
Improvement Corps, Community Outreach, Battered Women's Shelter, Halfway House
and a free children's theater.

For more information call Timothy Petersen, chairman, 432-1878.  Eleanor Charles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a flower

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETY;
REFOCUSING SCIENCE AND MATH

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 44; Page 44, Column 1; Survey of
Education Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words


ONCE AGAIN, as it was 25 years ago, The Congressional Record is d otted with
statistics about the scientific acumen of Soviet high school students. Close
behind are test results for schoolchildren in Japan and Western Europe. And once
again, the numbers are intended to spur a rededication to old fashioned
mathematic and scientific principles, the basics that form the underpinnings of
a technological society.

But many are now questioning whether the problems - or the solutions - of math
and science education today are truly comparable to those of Sputnik era. The
launching of the Soviet satellite galvanized the educational community to make
up for years of scientific neglect. But today, by almost every measure, the best
science and math students are emerging from the nation's high schools better
prepared than ever. Despite the warnings of businessmen and politicians about
the need for more scientific specialists to spur a technology-based economy, the
evidence indicates that it is the other 95 percent of the nation's student
population, those who are not science-oriented, who are falling behind.

Thus, in the educational community, there is rising sentiment that after two
decades of turning out specialists, science and math education should shift
gears and no longer concentrate on those who will create an era of technological
change, but rather on those who will live in it.

''We truly need a refocusing of what science should accomplish in the schools,''
said Richard Yager, president of the National Science Teacher Association and a
professor of science education at the University of Iowa. ''We have put all of
our dollars and effort into those who will enter a few chosen fields. In the
process, we have lost everyone else.''

The result of this debate is that math and science education is in the throes of
an acute identity crisis. Pressure mounts for courses directed at spurring
interest in the computer sciences, defense, and more efficient manufacturing
techniques. But concentrating limited education resources on those fields may
create an even wider gulf between the scientific elite and the scientific
illiterate.

''What we have to decide,'' said Alphonse Buccino, deputy director of the Office
of Scientific Engineering Personnel of the National Science Foundation, ''is
whether we are turning out scientists, or citizens who need some scientific
knowledge.''

Congress, at least, seems to favor the training of more scientists, in the hopes
of competing with the Soviets on defense and everyone else on high technology
trade. The House last month approved a $425 million bill directed at math and
science education. About $250 million would be devoted to grants to local school
districts, $100 million would be given to the National Science Foundation for
training programs and the remainder would provide scholarships and funds for
smaller programs. The Senate is likely to trim those appropriations.

Educators have largely supported the measure. But many have been critical of
lack of emphasis on curriculum development and funds for new equipment in aging
laboratories and classrooms. Some contend that Congress is moving blindly,
without studying the broader problem of bettering the scientific knowledge of
those not likely to pursue a job in nuclear physics or at I.B.M. ''This is not
something you can solve by simply throwing money at it,'' Professor Yager said.

Evidence that science and math have become fields for the high school elite is
easy to come by. Testing statistics show that talented students at the top of
their class are virtually the only ones who pursue math and science beyond the
10th grade, and their scores have steadily improved.

Meanwhile, National Science Foundation studies indicate that scores on
mathematics and science assessment tests, given to all students, have dropped
steadily in the last two decades. In addition, the proportion of public high
school students enrolled in science and mathematics has also declined, although
there has been a recent upturn in the number taking computer-related courses.
Compounding the problems is an acute shortage of educators qualified to teach
math and science.

The renewed concern about math and science seems to complete an educational
cycle that began with the Sputnik era. As quickly as interest in the sciences
rose in the 1960's, it declined in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate. Back to
basics meant back to reading and writing; the computational skills of the hard
sciences seemed less relevant.

Now that the pendulum has reversed direction, however, educators seem less
certain that computational skills and scientific formulas are the answer. ''What
we need are programs that embrace broader, science related issues,'' said
Professor Yager. Chief among such topics are the pitfalls of scientific
progress. Professor Yager and others argue that science must be related to the
issues of the day, from the dangers of nuclear war, to the social consequences
of prolonging the human lifespan or the potential for invasions of privacy
growing from the computer revolution.

But introducing such issues into math and science classes raises objections from
some teachers, many of whom feel threatened by classroom discussions that go
beyond formulas and textbooks.

''They oppose dealing with these broader issues because they view it as leading
to the study of 'general science', meaning something without rigor.'' said Dr.
Henry M. Levin, a professor of education and economics at Stanford. But properly
taught, he added, ''these kind of issues can require very tight logic and
reasoning.''

Moreover, in recent months the bloom has come off the rose of high technology,
as evidence mounts that the number of jobs created in the computer sciences,
biotechnology and similar fields over the next 20 years may fall well below
original expectations. As a result, Dr.  Levin contends that economic arguments
for better math and science education may be misdirected. ''A more convincing
argument is that math and science have been eclipsed in the schools,'' he said,
''and the time has come to return to a more classical education.''

Finding the teachers to provide such a classical education may prove no easy
task. A survey two years ago by the National Science Teachers Association showed
that only a half-dozen states reported an adequate supply of teachers qualified
to teach in the field, with the most critical shortages in the Pacific Northwest
and the South.

Other surveys by the group indicated that many long-time math and science
teachers are falling behind the times. About 79 percent of those surveyed said
they had not completed at least a 10-hour course or workship in 10 years. And 69
percent said they had never attended a computer course.

Educators contend that many of the best teachers are being drawn into industry,
where jobs are more secure and salaries more in line with talents.

''The way to attract good people to science and math and to keep them there is
to turn school teaching into a good job,'' said F.  James Rutherford, chief
education officer of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Some states are responding with proposals to employ teachers for 12 months
instead of 10, or to create a class of ''master teachers'' with commensurate
pay.

But before specific problems are solved, some educators are now insisting, math
and science will have to choose a direction. ''The result of Sputnik was that a
cultural aura built up around these areas,'' said Mr. Buccino. ''That's what
made math and science elite fields of study. We can't afford to keep it that way
much longer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of math and science teachers produced per U.S.
teaching schools

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

OLD U.S. WEAPONS AMONG ARMS FOUND ON A LIBYAN PLANE

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, April 24


The Brazilian Air Force today finished unloading four Libyan planes being
detained in Brazil, and a military spokesman said preliminary examination of the
cargo had turned up arms of both Soviet and United States manufacture.

The planes, which were originally said to have been carrying medical supplies
for Nicaragua, were detained last week after it was discovered that they were
carrying military supplies as well.

The Brazilian military spokesman, Col. Norberto de Castro Brum, spoke only of
the cargo of the first aircraft examined, an Americanmade Hercules C-130 being
held in the northeastern port city of Recife. He did not elaborate on the
remark.

3 Planes in Manaus

Reports in today's Jornal do Brasil and O Estado de Sao Paulo reported that
equipment taken off three other Libyan planes in Manaus, the capital city of the
Brazilian Amazon, included heavy arms, missiles, Czechoslovak rifles, a
dismantled Soviet training plane and at least five tons of bombs and grenades.

Jornal do Brasil reported that members of the inspection team were startled by
the dated nature of the weaponry. ''In terms of knowhow,'' the newspaper
reported, ''they considered the equipment far inferior to that made in Brazil.''

Langhorne Anthony Motley, the United States Ambassador to Brazil, suggested that
the American arms were weapons captured during the war in Vietnam. ''Since
Vietnam, American weapons turn up everywhere,'' he said.

Brazil is the sixth largest exporter of arms in the world, and its second
largest client is Libya. One of the potential embarrassments of the current
episode has been the possibility that Brazilian weapons might be found among
those Libya was shipping to Central America.

Planes Cleared for Departure

All but a few of the 200 soldiers in combat gear who had been guarding the
Manaus airport were removed this morning, and roadblocks were taken down at
entrances to the terminal.

Tonight the Government said the planes were cleared for departure, but there was
no word on when they would leave or what their destination would be.

Since the planes were detained, the more than 40 crew members and pilots,
accompanied by representatives from the Libyan Embassy, have remained in their
hotels in the two cities. On several occasions during the week, crew members
have fled from reporters who have tried to interview them. Of the crew, most are
presumed to be Libyan although one, Kenneth Price, the pilot of the Hercules in
Recife, is Irish.

The four aircraft have been held at the two airports since last weekend when the
Hercules was unable to resume flight due to a motor failure after a refueling
stop in Recife. The three accompanying Soviet-built Ilyushin 76T's set down in
Manaus shortly afterward.

The episode turned into a diplomatic encounter when it was discovered that the
planes were carrying arms instead of medical supplies for Nicaragua as the
Libyan landing permission documents had stated. The United States Central
Intelligence Agency reportedly advised the Brazilian Government of the true
nature of the cargo.

Libyan Leader Apologizes

Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan head of state, publicly apologized to the
Brazilian Government, blaming his own civil aviation service for misinforming
authorities here. Libyan diplomats and the crews of the four planes, however,
refused Brazilian requests that they assist in and observe the unloading
operation.

Brazilian technicians forced open the planes and removed the equipment during
the early hours of Saturday.  In Recife, the equipment, still in boxes, was
placed in a tightlyguarded warehouse near the tarmac, while the cargo taken off
the planes in Manaus was airlifted by military helicopters to an air force base
15 miles from the civilian airport.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Langhorne Motley

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE FERMENT OVER CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


The House Intelligence Committee is normally a discreet, disciplined group that
follows the lead of its chairman, Representative Edward P. Boland, a veteran
Massachusetts Democrat not known for rocking many boats.

That routine was shattered two weeks ago when one member of the committee,
Representative Wyche Fowler Jr., Democrat of Georgia, returned from a trip to
Central America and said at a news conference that the Reagan Administration's
covert operations in the area did not fully comply with the law.

Mr. Boland, who was traveling in China at the time, was reportedly incensed when
he learned about Mr. Fowler's comments. But by last week, after reviewing the
covert activities and learning that many other members of the committee and the
House shared Mr. Fowler's views, Mr. Boland himself broke with the panel's
tradition of discretion. He publicly announced that ''the evidence is very
strong'' that the Administration has violated the law by providing covert aid to
Nicaraguan rebels.

Like a Solar Eclipse

The ferment within the Intelligence Committee indicates a general climate of
unrest in the Government spawned by the Administration's policy on Central
America. Like a solar eclipse that temporarily disrupts the normal rhythms of
life, the deepening American involvement in Central America has shaken
Washington, producing undercurrents of dissent and rebellion that echo the
initial mis 1960's phases of opposition to the Vietnam War.

The effect is most pronounced in Congress. With national polls showing little
public support for United States involvement in Central America, Congress has
resisted the Administration's efforts to increase military aid to El Salvador
and raised objections to the covert activities, including the training and
arming of anti-Government forces in Nicaragua.

The Reagan Administration considers the problems so severe that the White House,
in an unusual step, asked Congressional leaders to schedule a special joint
session of Congress so President Reagan could talk about Central America.
Congress normally meets in joint seession once a year to hear the President's
State of the Union Message or in periods of national emergency. Mr. Reagan's
speech is scheduled for Wednesday.

Some Unexpected Alliances

Some of the Congressional opposition to Mr. Reagan's policy on Central America
has been predictably partisan, with Democrats leading the attack. But in both
the Senate and House, the issue has forged some unexpected alliances between
Republicans and Democrats.

In the Senate, for example, the Republican-controlled Foreign Relations
Committee, for the first time in memory, asserted jurisdiction over an
appropriations matter when members of both parties joined in sending a letter to
the State Department recommending that the Administration reduce by half its
request for $60 million in emergency military aid to El Salvador.

In the Senate Intelligence Committee, opposition to covert activities in Central
America is shared among Republicans and Democrats, and has created friction
between many members of the panel and its chairman, Senator Barry Goldwater,
Republican of Arizona.

Mr. Goldwater stunned many of his colleagues last week when he declared that
there was no reason to question the legality of the covert operations. ''Barry
is becoming increasingly isolated,'' one member of the committee said later.

In the House, the driving force behind opposition to the Administration's policy
is a group of 40 to 50 members, most young and Democratic, who have worked
behind the scenes during the last 18 months to persuade their colleagues that
current policies are dangerously misguided.

'The Leaders Followed'

Some leaders of this group have an institutional responsibility to deal with
foreign affairs, including Representative Michael D.  Barnes, Democrat of
Maryland, who is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Western
Hemisphere Affairs. Others, like Representative George Miller, Democrat of
California, say they have joined the opposition because they fear the
Administration's policies will lead to an ever-increasing American involvement
in Central America.

The concerns of Mr. Barnes, Mr. Miller and others is cited by members of the
House Intelligence Committee as one reason that Mr.  Fowler and Mr. Boland spoke
out against the activities. ''This was a case when the membership led and the
leaders followed,'' said one member of the committee.

Partly because of anxiety that the House leadership will not push the issue, Mr.
Miller and others advocate calling the entire House into a rare closed session
to review the covert activities and consider taking action to cut off funding
for them. Some House members said that Mr. Boland's criticism of the
Administration last week was an effort by the leadership to head off such a
session.  Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the Connecticut Democrat who is a leading
critic of the Administration's policy, has proposed that the Senate also hold a
secret session.

Calls From C.I.A. Employees

The stirrings are not confined to Congress. Officials within the Administration
who oppose the policy toward Central America started leaking national security
documents to reporters last year. And the pace of unauthorized disclosures has
quickened in recent months despite new regulations that increase the penalty for
releasing classified information.

There is even unrest at the Central Intelligence Agency, the organization
responsible for conducting the covert operations. A reporter recently received
calls from several employees of the agency who expressed concern about the
increased level of covert operations.

The employees reported growing fears in the agency's ranks that the debate about
covert operations could hurt the efforts to re-establish ties with the academic
community and might, if Congressional opposition escalates, undermine support in
Congress for the C.I.A.'s rapidly increasing budget.

In the case of opposition to the Vietnam War, the dissent and rebellion that
eventually developed became major forces in the nation's life and contributed to
fundamental changes in the institutions of Government. For example, the rigid
seniority system in Congress, was, in part, a casualty of the ferment.

No one involved with the current opposition has suggested that it will have such
a lasting impact. But ultimately, they say, the degree of unrest will be in
direct proportion to the level of United States involvement in Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edward Boland

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
MIDEAST: A NASTY WAIT

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 24


Secretary of State George Shultz's trip to the Middle East this week responds
more to an American need than to an opportunity for diplomacy.

President Reagan made the only possible decision when he refused to be
intimidated by the murderous attack on the U.S. Embassy in Beirut. The bombing
wasn't to win favor with the U.S. or persuade it to be tougher with Israel, but
to force American withdrawal.

It's natural for Americans to wonder what their diplomats and marines are doing
trying to impose peace on this tortured region, where so many forces rely only
on violence. There is likely to be a growing sense of disgust with the bloody
brawlers, and a desire to get out of the cross-fire.

That is just what the terrorists and their mentors are trying to promote. The
U.S. must not buckle. Quitting would be worse than the Vietnam debacle because
the cause is far better - peace, not dominion - and the West has far more at
stake. Mr. Shultz has a double task of demonstrating to others that the U.S.
won't walk away and of encouraging Americans to continue their support for a
vital but disagreeable operation.

The chance of doing both requires more than ever a clear-minded assessment of
gloomy prospects. Optimistic allusions are more pleasant and make it easier to
cajole the public than admitting to tough realities. But they lead to
disillusion and dismay.

In the longer run, the pretense of progress undermines the hope of achieving it.
One thing clear about the direction of events in the Middle East is that we are
in for a long, rough run. No amount of clever maneuver, of pressure or
persuasion, is going to replace the need for persistence in the face of
frustration.

The Arabs say the Reagan initiative for negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza
is dead. That really means that none of them are willing to risk pushing ahead
without impossible assurances beforehand that they will be satisfied with the
results.

The P.L.O. had its chance. Yasir Arafat's refusal to seize it can no longer be
taken as equivocation, sly bargaining for a better deal or imperative prudence
to make sure of his mandate. If he simply can't move, it means he is incapable
of moving, period.

Jordan's King Hussein, the leaders of Saudi Arabia, Morocco and others who
doubtless would prefer to be out of the Arabs' Palestinian bind than continue to
wallow in it have more freedom of action now than was available in years. The
P.L.O. is dispersed and to a large extent disarmed, though that may not remain
true for long. The Iraq-Iran war is paralyzing both. Syria failed in its gamble
to overthrow Iraq's Saddam Hussein by helping Iran. While it is being
re-equipped by the Russians in this phase of Middle East distress, Syria is a
menace only to Lebanon.

So why does no one dare to budge? The Arabs blame the U.S. for not bludgeoning
Israel into concessions. But the U.S. cannot and will not negotiate with Israel
on the Arabs' behalf. They still delude themselves that somebody else can be
wheedled or blasted into making their wishes come true.

The current Israeli leadership is determined, with substantial popular support,
to bring the whole of Palestine into the Israeli state. It doesn't want talks on
the future of the West Bank and Gaza.

Stalling negotiations for Israeli, P.L.O. and Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon is
a way of putting off pressure to accept West Bank talks, which in turn makes it
easier for King Hussein to refuse.  Meanwhile, Israel looks more and more
inclined to go for the partition of Lebanon with the southern area as a kind of
associate.

Time is working against a viable solution for all involved. The status quo will
not become stable. So it is time to see that the people who will not act in
their own rational interest are simply unable to do so. A sterner warning, a
little more urging, a little more reassurance won't make the difference.

This is a period in Islam's long history when its feuds and fancies have
paralyzed its genius, and a period in Israel's short history when ambition and
fear have shrouded its valued, humane goals.

One thing the U.S. could do now is to clarify issues. It could invite Israel and
Jordan to Washington to talk about procedures for starting talks, and set a
deadline in accord with President Amin Gemayel for removal of foreign forces
from Lebanon. The onus for rejecting the call would be undeniable, and neither
side could claim U.S. indulgence by blaming the other.

There is a slim possibility that somehow being made to confront the consequences
of dithering would provoke a breakthrough. But don't bet much on it. Otherwise,
we can only seek to limit violence and the Middle East arms race, and remain on
hand to help when at last the desire for peace swells to drown the fighters and
the waverers. The U.S. cannot force either Israel or the Arabs to save
themselves, and we may have a long, nasty wait until they are ready to come to
terms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR DUVALL, 52 IS ONLY HALFWAY IN HIS CAREER

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words


HE has been called ''the American Olivier,'' but although he has appeared in 33
films in the last 20 years - some of them major hits - and has acted on Broadway
as well, he can still walk down the street without being recognized.

He has played roles ranging from a retarded recluse in a small Southern town (in
''To Kill a Mockingbird'') to a ruthless television network head (''Network''),
from the detective brother of a corrupt priest (''True Confessions'') to a Mafia
consigliere (''The Godfather'') to an Air Force colonel who relishes the smell
of napalm and goes surfing in between incinerating Vietnamese villages
(''Apocalypse Now''). And yet despite his astonishing range and two decades'
worth of critical acclaim, he is still viewed more as a fine character actor in
supporting roles than as a major star around whom a movie can be built.

But at 52, Robert Duvall has reached what he calls a kind of halfway point in
his own career - and while he is not dissatisfied with what he has done so far,
he intends to operate differently in the future, steering his own course rather
than contenting himself with whatever jobs happen his way.

Praise for 'Tender Mercies'

He is in a good position to do so at the moment. As the star of ''Tender
Mercies,'' his latest film, Mr. Duvall has won high praise for his portrayal of
Mac Sledge, a has-been country-and-western singer defeated by alcohol and a
poisonous marriage, who achieves a kind of redemption through the tender mercies
of a new wife and stepson.

And this week will mark the New York premiere of ''Angelo My Love,'' a film
about a young gypsy, which Mr. Duvall wrote and directed. It opens at the
Lincoln Plaza II on Wednesday. Mr. Duvall has been working on it for five years,
since a day in 1977 when he was strolling past the corner of Columbus Avenue and
71st Street, and happened to overhear a pint-size child saying passionately to a
young woman in her 20's, ''Patricia, if you don't love me no more, I'm going to
move to Cincinnati!''

Mr. Duvall stopped to talk to the boy, a 7-year-old gypsy named Angelo Evans,
and found him so compelling that he decided to make a film about him. ''His
presence was so strange and magnetic, so different from any kid I'd ever seen,''
Mr. Duvall explains. ''I thought, 'This kid should be in a movie.' I figured
there was something special there, and I really wanted to do it.''

''Angelo'' marked Mr. Duvall's second experience as a director; his first,
''We're Not the Jet Set,'' released in 1977, was a documentary about a Nebraska
farm family.

Wrote the Story Himself

After some initial apprehension, Mr. Duvall wrote the story for ''Angelo''
himself, encouraged by Gail Youngs, who last year became his second wife. They
met when Mr. Duvall starred on Broadway in ''American Buffalo'' with her
brother, John Savage. Miss Youngs, an actress and singer, served as associate
producer of ''Angelo.''

The story line evolved gradually. ''Piece by piece, I got something together,
after doing a lot of research and traveling with gypsies,'' Mr. Duvall says.

He himself provided ''every cent'' of the million dollars needed to make the
film, which is scheduled to be shown at the Cannes Film Festival. Instead of
professional actors, Mr. Duvall used real gypsies, and Angelo's entire family
play themselves in the movie. ''I told them, 'I don't want anybody to ''act'' in
this movie,' '' Mr.  Duvall says. ''The whole experience reinforced what I had
always thought, which is that you should be as natural and truthful as possible,
and try to 'act' as little as you can.''

Mr. Duvall's own career is a testimonial to that credo; he seems to become a
character rather than to play a role, often transforming himself to such an
extent that he is almost unrecognizable from one movie to the next. One is never
conscious of watching Mr. Duvall act.

'You Get a Flavor, a Feeling'

He prepares carefully for each part. For ''Tender Mercies,'' he drove around
East Texas until he ''met a guy who talked the way I wanted to talk - and then
we started in,'' he says. ''When you go to a place like that and meet people,
you get a flavor, a feeling. It gives you an inner enthusiasm and a confident
base to start from.''

The role itself held a particular appeal. ''I had always wanted to play some
form of country-and-western singer,'' says Mr. Duvall, the son of a rear
admiral. ''I always enjoyed country-and-western music, and my family had all
been singers, one way or another.'' Mr. Duvall wrote several of the songs used
in the movie, in which he does all his own singing.

Many people have compared his portrayal of Mac Sledge to Willie Nelson, and when
the singer saw the movie, Mr. Duvall waited eagerly to hear his verdict. ''He
said, 'You really remind me of Merle up there,'' Mr. Duvall reports with a grin.

His next project will be a film called ''The Stone Boy,'' in which he plays the
father of a boy who involuntarily kills his older brother in a hunting accident.
For the future, however, Mr. Duvall is determined to exercise more control over
his career.

Wants to Do More

''I think I have to help generate projects, which I've never done before,
instead of just receive,'' he muses. ''Certain things you want to do, you've got
to go and get, rather than just wait for them to come to you. You have to make
them happen. I kind of feel I'm at the halfway mark. I've had a nice career, and
a varied number of parts, but I want to do even more things.''

At the suggestion of a new agent Mr. Duvall recently read ''Schindler's List,''
Thomas Keneally's book about a German industrialist who risked his life as well
as his fortune to save more than 1,000 Jews during World War II. Mr. Duvall is
now inflamed with the desire to play Schindler in the film; ordinarily laconic,
he talks passionately about the role, his feeling for it, and what an incredible
man Oskar Schindler must have been. ''I must play this part,'' he says urgently.

He may also play the Pope in a movie called ''Saving Grace,'' which contains a
part for Angelo Evans. Mr. Duvall is also interested in playing a Pentecostal
preacher some time.

''If you don't daydream and kind of plan things out in your imagination, you
never get there,'' he says. ''So you have to start someplace.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Duvall

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Such Good Guys

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 833 words


During the 1980 campaign, someone sent me a cartoon of Ronald Reagan, drawn by
Francis Brennan. Mr. Reagan is saying, ''Now here's what I think about this
world thing ...'' while pointing to a handsome fellow in a white hat labeled
''Us'' and a villainous chap in a black hat called ''Them.''

That's sharp and simple and perhaps unfair, as most good political cartoons are.
Just such cartoon-like qualities infuse Jeane Kirkpatrick's declaration that in
Central America the United States is ''supporting the good guys in every sense
of the word.'' Maybe the next shipment of military aid will include a
consignment of white hats.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick is not, however, a cartoonist. She is the chief United States
representative at the United Nations, and was recently described to Leslie Gelb
of The New York Times (in a survey of White House, State and Defense Department
officials) as the ''central intellectual force'' behind the Reagan
Administration's policy in Central America.

She had a good reason for including the Government of El Salvador and presumably
its armed forces among the ''good guys'' and for lumping that country with Costa
Rica and Honduras among the region's ''democracies.'' It's the same reason that
led the Secretary of State, George Shultz, to declare that the United States has
a ''moral'' obligation to support in El Salvador what he suggested were the
''ideals'' of ''freedom and human rights'' that the Salvadoran Government is
defending.

Behind these claims is the Reagan Administration's search for public and
Congressional support for its request for $110 million in additional military
aid to the corrupt, often murderous Salvadoran armed forces. The same desire to
whip up the public's juices has produced references by both Mrs. Kirkpatrick and
Mr. Shultz to a supposed Soviet threat to deploy nuclear missiles in the
Caribbean.

Actually, vague Soviet hints on that score appear to be a response to the idea
of American missiles in Europe, rather than a serious proposal for a move into
Central America. But politics is often a cartoon-like business, and it's
standard Washington practice to use the Soviet bogeyman to shore up failing
enterprises. All too often it works; but even if Congress should provide the
requested $110 million, it's unlikely that freedom and human rights will
therefore be advanced in El Salvador.

For one thing, senior United States military commanders studied the situation in
El Salvador two years ago and concluded (in a report so tightly held that only a
few members of Congress have seen it) that even with increased United States
military assistance the Government forces could not defeat the insurgents. Why?
Because its officers - some of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's ''good guys'' - are too
clannishly loyal to one another, too inept, too corrupt, and are responsible for
most of El Salvador's routine violence against civilians.

The last point is crucial, according to Samuel Popkin of the University of
California at San Diego, one of the best-informed students of the American
pacification effort in Vietnam. One of its lessons, he wrote in an article for
The Washington Post, was that ''the control of violence'' in the countryside was
more important than any reform.

But the two main sources of ''indiscriminate killing'' in El Salvador, he
pointed out, were the regular military and ''quasiofficial death squads'' acting
on behalf of the military or the landowners. In his view, Washington's belated
desire to build a ''political center'' around democratic reforms cannot succeed
while such officially tolerated violence continues.

''The price of any further aid to the Government of El Salvador must be its
readiness to deal ruthlessly with indiscriminate killing,'' Mr. Popkin wrote.
There is not the slightest indication that that Government is ready to do any
such thing.

Besides, if the United States had wanted to support the ideals of freedom and
human rights in Central America, it could and should have done so long ago - in
El Salvador, in Nicaragua, in Guatemala - with pressures on repressive regimes
that were too long supported, and with generous efforts to help achieve needed
reforms, higher standards of living and democratically chosen governments.

Now the opportunity is lost for Washington to help bring about peaceful change.
Salvadoran guerrillas predictably are seeking change through violence, and with
any help they can get. The Salvadoran Government, still dominated by landowners
and the military, the old repressive ruling elements, promises reform but does
little.

Mr. Reagan may think there's a case for staking the United States' ''national
interest'' on that Government's survival. But there surely is no ''moral''
obligation for Americans to provide guns and bombs to those Mrs. Kirkpatrick
calls ''good guys'' so that they can resist the insurgency their own repression
brought about. By that or any other name, their concern for freedom and human
rights is measured in body counts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BEIRUT LEGACY: HAVING TO COPE WITH PUBLIC DEATHS

BYLINE: By PHIL TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


When a terrorist bomb exploded at the American Embassy in Beirut last week, one
of many scenes shattered by the blast was a meeting of employees of the Central
Intelligence Agency.

The employees, including agents, analysts and support staffers, had gathered to
meet with Robert C. Ames, the C.I.A.'s top Middle East expert, who was visiting
the region. In the seconds it took for the fireball and blast wave to devastate
the Embassy, a large portion of the C.I.A. station in Beirut was annihilated.

The exact number of casualties is still unclear, but intelligence officials say
that a minimum of seven C.I.A. employees were killed and that the final total
may be higher. In the 36 years the agency has been in operation, there have
never been as many employees killed in a single accident, officials said. In
fact, according to one former C.I.A. director, more agency employees were killed
in Beirut than in the Vietnam War, in which the C.I.A. was heavily involved.

As the dimensions of the slaughter became clear to officials at the intelligence
agency's headquarters in suburban Virginia last Monday, they began a difficult
job - coping with public death in a clandestine profession.

'Sensitive Relationships' at Stake

The stakes, officials said, were incredibly high. Many of the employees killed
had worked in the Middle East posing as diplomats and representatives of other
American Government agencies, a common practice in the intelligence trade.
Identifying them, even in death, as C.I.A. employees could expose Middle East
sources whose association with the Americans had previously appeared innocent.

In some cases, according to intelligence officials, the sources knew the
Americans were intelligence operatives, and the diplomatic cover protected both
parties. In other cases, the people cultivated by the C.I.A. employees did not
realize they were actually dealing with intelligence agents.

''If you identify the dead as C.I.A. employees, you destroy sensitive
relationships. You blow sources left and right,'' a C.I.A.  official said.

As an example, he explained that if a dead agent was unmasked, key operatives,
usually foreigners, who were linked to the agent could be exposed. In turn, a
whole network of lower-level operatives could be linked to the C.I.A. ''You're
talking about matters of life and death,'' the official said.

Humanitarian Considerations

Yet, for humanitarian and practical reasons, the Government could not fail to
identify the Americans who died at the Embassy. Families needed to be notified
and comforted, the machinery of providing benefits and other assistance to
surviving relatives had to be set in motion, and, because of the destruction and
confusion at the site, it was impossible to control when and how some of the
bodies would be identified.

For these reasons, intelligence officials concluded that for most of the
casualties, they could not do what the C.I.A. had often done when secret agents
were killed - bury them anonymously and secretly.  Before last week's deaths, 17
of the 38 intelligence officers who died in the course of duty were memorialized
only with five-pointed stars carved into the north wall of the C.I.A. lobby in
Langley, Va.  Most of the world never knew them as agency operatives, in life or
in death.

In the case of Mr. Ames, who was director of the Office of Near East and South
Asian Analysis, the response was relatively simple.  Because he had played a
central role in development of the Reagan Administration's peace initiative in
the Middle East, meeting openly with Secretary of State George P. Shultz on
several occasions, there was no need to disguise his link to the C.I.A. As a
result, the State Department, acting in behalf of the intelligence agency,
identified Mr. Ames as a casualty the day after the explosion and provided a
brief summary of his C.I.A. career.

Dealing with the other intelligence agency casualties proved more difficult. The
question was how to identify the victims in Beirut without revealing that they
had worked for the agency. The answer was to continue using the cover of
employment at the State Department and other agencies.

Ambiguous Biographies

As last week progressed, the State Department made public the names of a number
of victims, providing terse, ambiguous biographies that often raised more
questions than they answered. Traditionally, such vague biographies have been
indicators of C.I.A. employment.

One woman, for example, according to the official account, began her Government
service in 1959 and joined the State Department in 1973. There was no mention,
however, of what she did in Government before she went to work at the State
Department, a curious and conspicuous omission, unless she worked for the
intelligence agency.

Other victims, according to the biographical sketches, had worked at embassies
in Iran, Vietnam and West Germany, but no dates of service or job descriptions
were provided. The C.I.A. maintains, or once maintained, large staffs in those
countries.

State Department sources said that in the rush to put together one biography
that identified a victim as a civilian employee of the Department of the Army,
no one notified the Defense Department.  Caught by surprise, Army officials told
callers that no one by the victim's name was listed in their records. Later, the
Army said there had been a mistake and that the man's records had been located.

C.I.A. officials were furious about the mix-up, and the failure of reporters to
accept the biographies of victims at face value. ''We will do anything we can to
prevent publication of stories about the intelligence connections of victims,''
one C.I.A. official shouted over the telephone.

In the end, however, many of the victims remained cloaked in mystery. The
ambiguity of the biographies hinted strongly at intelligence work but did not
prove affiliation with the C.I.A. And, although the State Department said at the
end of last week that 17 Americans had been killed, and 17 victims were
identified, it was not clear whether all the dead Americans had been named.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Envoy's Son Charged in Italy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 34 words

DATELINE: FLORENCE, April 26


Law enforcement officials said today that they had charged David Michael Martin,
son of Graham Anderson Martin, a former American Ambassador to Italy and
Vietnam, with raping three women this month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SAID TO ASK EX-SENATOR TO BE LATIN ENVOY

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


Administration officials disclosed today that President Reagan, in a move to
placate Congress, had asked former Senator Richard B. Stone of Florida to become
a special envoy to Central America.

The disclosure came on the eve of a major Presidential speech to Congress aimed
at regaining the initiative for the Administration's embattled Central American
policy.

After a Congressional vote today approving the transfer of $30 million in
military aid to El Salvador, Secretary of State George P.  Shultz advised
Congress that an envoy to Central America would soon be designated to ''assist
the Salvadorans in their efforts to find a basis for dialogue with their
opponents on the terms and conditions of free, fair and safe elections'' in El
Salvador.

But in a letter to Representative Clarence D. Long, Mr. Shultz rejected
Congressional pressures for the Administration to press for a negotiated
settlement to the civil war in El Salvador. The Salvadoran parties ''may raise
any issue they wish,'' Mr. Shultz said, but he declared that ''the U.S. will not
support negotiations for power-sharing'' with the guerrilla movement.

Officials said Mr. Stone, a conservative Democrat and a Spanishspeaking
Washington attorney who has been serving as a consultant to the State Department
on public diplomacy for several months, was weighing the President's offer late
today.

Working Out Responsibilities

They said Mr. Stone was talking with William P. Clark, the President's national
security adviser, to work out the envoy's specific responsibilities with the
hope that President Reagan would be able to announce the appointment in his
special address to Congress Wednesday night.

Representative Long, Chairman of the Foreign Operations subcommittee of the
House Appropriations Committee, was known to favor another candidate, Francis J.
McNeil, now Ambassador to Costa Rica, on the ground that he would be better able
to bridge the political gap between the Salvadoran Government and the guerrilla
movement than someone too closely identified with past Administration policy.

''The choice of the envoy will set the tone for the President's speech,'' Mr.
Long said in a telephone interview. ''You've got to have somebody who's
acceptable to the liberal element there, not someone on a short leash.''

Officials said the White House decided today to replace Mr. McNeil with Curtin
Winsor Jr., a long-time Republican and Reagan supporter who served four years as
a diplomat and now operates two coal companies. From 1979 to 1982, Mr. Winsor
headed the Alliance for Free Enterprise, a private organization in Washington
that promoted legislation favoring private business. Mr. McNeil's new assignment
was not disclosed.

The President's speech Wednesday night, before a joint session of Congress, is
widely regarded as a major test of whether Mr. Reagan can rally greater support
not only for the increases in military aid he now seeks for El Salvador but for
a larger, long-term effort in that country.

'Moment of Truth' for Region

''This is the moment of truth for Central America,'' said Representative Jack
Kemp, a Buffalo Republican. ''The President is going to have to convince the
people that Central America is critical to our future. You can't keep lurching
on an adhoc basis to these problems. There's got to be a regional approach to
these problems.  The answer cannot just be military aid.''

Among others, Senate Majority Leader Howard H. Baker Jr. and Senator Paul Laxalt
of Nevada, one of the President's closest Republican political friends, are
reported to have stressed to the White House the need for balance in the
President's approach to avoid arousing fears in Congress and the country of a
long Vietnam-like involvement in El Salvador.

''There might be some risk of alienating the undecided members of Congress,''
Senator Laxalt told reporters at breakfast today. ''The risk is that the speech
is so bellicose that some of the undecideds would say, 'Hey, don't Vietnam us.'
''

White House officials described the speech as a ''measured report'' on Central
America that does not offer new programs or strike a strident tone.

'An Educational Speech'

One official described it primarily as ''an educational speech'' in which Mr.
Reagan said he was appearing before Congress ''to prevent a crisis'' rather than
coming, as past Presidents have, to report on a crisis.

The indications were the President had rejected advice of some advisers for
broader American involvement in Central America and accepted the advice of those
who said he should merely urge Congress to approve what he has already proposed,
including $110 million in increased military aid this year and $85 million for
next year, and roughly three times that in economic aid.

A principal theme of the President's thinking, officials said, is that ''there
is a challenge to our ideals and national security everywhere in Central
America,'' both in the Salvadoran civil war and the activist Sandinist
Government in Nicaragua and in Soviet threats to put medium-range nuclear
missiles near American borders if the United States goes ahead with plans to
deploy such missiles in Europe this year.

In the wake of moderating actions toward the Soviet Union recently, the speech
is being watched as an indicator of whether the President now wants to improve
Soviet-American relations or repeat the sharp polemics he used against Moscow
last month.

According to some officials, his advisers have disagreed over whether the speech
should make the global Soviet threat the main target, using Central America as a
primary example of challenge, or whether it should deal mainly with regional
problems in Central America and treat Moscow's efforts to exploit them as a
secondary theme.

Officials said one speech draft focusing mainly on the Soviet threat ran into
objections from David R. Gergen, the Director of Communications, among others,
and that more recent drafts put greater emphasis on problems inherent in the
region being exploited by Moscow. With that thrust, some officials say, the
speech would add to some recent moderating moves toward Moscow.

Republicans like Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania say Moscow should be
encouraged by two of the President's recent actions and if the Soviet leadership
were to respond it could gradually build a climate for a summit meeting later
this year.

One was the President's announcement last Friday that he was lifting his ban on
negotiations for a long-term grain agreement with the Soviet Union. The other
was his indication at a news conference that he was backing away from a public
confrontation with Moscow over possible Soviet violations of strategic arms
agreements and would pursue American concerns through diplomatic channels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard B. Stone

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND NICARAGUAN BUILDUP: SOVIET-BLOC AID CITED

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


Nicaragua has converted an irregular guerrilla force into a sizable army with
the help of the Cubans, East Germans, Bulgarians, Russians and French, according
to Defense Department officials.

According to the officials, Nicaragua's regular army consists of 22,000 troops,
augmented by 25,000 reservists and some 30,000 militiamen. The reservists
receive three months of active-duty training; the militia, which is generally
organized by neighborhood or workplace, is given rudimentary military
instruction. Not all of the militiamen have rifles.

By way of contrast, the Salvadoran armed forces consist of about 32,000 men,
including some 10,000 in what are called the security forces. These forces,
whose officers are graduates of El Salvador's military academy, regularly
perform military functions.

In addition, there were at one time rural civil defense forces with 80,000 to
100,000 members. Although these civilian forces has officially been abolished,
members continue to patrol and to engage the guerrillas in combat in the rural
areas.

Cuban military advisers played a key role in organizing the Nicaraguan Army,
according to the defense officials, while East Germans did the same for the
country's internal security apparatus.  The Nicaraguans sent 70 pilots to
Bulgaria for training as jet pilots, according to the Pentagon. It said 30 had
returned to Managua. An intelligence specialist said he understood the 30 had
''washed out'' of the flight program.

U.S. Gives Figures

The Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, Thomas O. Enders,
testified before the Sentate Foreign Relations Committee recently that there
were ''currently no less than 2,000 Cubans, 50 Soviets, 35 East Germans and 50
P.L.O. and Libyan personnel'' in Nicaragua on security missions. Last week,
President Reagan, responding to a question at a news conference, said ''the
report was true'' that there were some 50 Palestine Liberaion Organization
pilots in Nicaragua.

Later, a United States military official said that the number of Cuban military
advisers was between 1,000 and 2,000. As for the P.L.O. advisers, he said there
were probably not more than 25 and that only a few were pilots.

The Defense Department also says that the Nicaraguans have some 50
Soviet-supplied tanks, 1,000 East German-made trucks, and 7,000 French-delivered
surface-to-air rockets. The Nicaraguan Air Force, it says, consists of 16
aircraft, including four transport planes, several propeller-driven training
planes and four helicopters. The Nicaraguans have no jet planes or bombers,
according to the Pentagon.

For more than a year there have been persistent reports that the Nicaraguans
would receive MIG fighters from the Soviet Union or Cuba, but the Defense
Department said none have arrived.

Army Called Regional Threat

President Reagan and other senior Administration officials, including the chief
United States delegate to the United Nations, Jeane K. Kirkpatrick, have said
that the Nicarguan Army is a threat to other nations in the region.

But John H. Buchanan, a retired Marine Corps lieutenant colonel and the only
American known to have been allowed access to the Nicaraguan military said, ''I
don't think the army is yet designed for offensive purposes.''

Colonel Buchanan said it was his ''impression'' that Nicaragua is ''developing
an army very loyal to the Sandinists, an army that will become like the army in
Poland, be used to control the people.''

Colonel Buchanan, who flew 223 combat missions in Vietnam, said that ''the might
of the Nicaraguan Air Force is infinitesimal'' and that the country lacked the
oil refineries and other facilitites needed to support a large air force.

In the event of a war between Honduras and Nicaragua, Colonel Buchanan said,
''for two to three glorious days the Honduran Air Force would run free,''
destroying airfields, oil refineries, port facilities and other primary targets.

He said, however, that the Nicaraguan artillery ''scares the hell out of the
Hondurans.'' Acording to the Pentagon, Nicaragua has approximately 100
antiaircraft guns. Colonel Buchanan said they also have some Soviet-supplied
heat-seeking missiles.

As for ground troops, Nicaragua's army is all-volunteer, young and without
experience in conventional warfare, something that the Hondurans and Salvadorans
acquired during their brief war against each other in 1969. Above all, Colonel
Buchanan said, the Nicaraguan Army is severely lacking in officers and whatever
training it has received does not match, in quality and quantity, what the
Salvadorans and Hondurans have received from the United States, Argentina, and
Chile.

Tanks Called Inferior

Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, who visited
Nicaragua this month, said he had been told by the United States military
attache there that the Nicaraguans had 25 to 50 tanks and that most were from
the 1950's and inferior to the more modern tanks that the Hondurans have.

Colonel Buchanan said ''the much-vaunted threat of the Soviet-built T-55 tanks
in Nicaragua is really a hollow threat.'' He cited their ''terrible mechanical
performance'' and the rugged terrain in the area, which he said ''is totally
unsuited to tank warfare.''

Most of Nicaragua's military equipment has come from Communist countries,
including the AK-47, an automatic assault rifle supplied by the Soviet Union.
But the French have also contracted to supply the Nicaraguans with military
equipment worth $13 million, including rocket launchers, air-to-ground missiles
and two missile-firing patrol boats.

Last week, four Libyan planes with military supplies destined for Nicaragua were
detained in Brazil. The planes contained heavy arms, missiles, Czechoslovak
rifles and some five tons of bombs and grenades. Some of the equipment was
American-made, apparently captured during the war in Vietnam.

Wayne S. Smith, chief of the United States diplomtic mission in Cuba from 1979
to last July, said in an interview that he thought the Nicaraguans were being
''prudent'' by having the arms shipped through Libya instead of Cuba. He added,
however, that the evidence did not support recent charges by the Reagan
Administration about the level of arms flow from Cuba to Nicaragua. He said that
in December 1981 senior Cuban officials told him they were no longer shipping
arms to Nicaragua.

An intelligence source said that while there was evidence of arms flowing from
Cuba to Nicaragua it was virtually impossible to measure the level and
Administration claims tended to be exaggerated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
WHO ADVISES REAGAN?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


President Reagan's White House staff is divided into three parts: the upstairs
part headed by the pragmatic James Baker; the downstairs part headed by the
conservative Judge Clark; and the backstairs part patrolled by their assistants,
who tell the press about the differences between upstairs and downstairs.

There have always been differences between most Presidents' advisers ever since
Thomas Jefferson was accused of relying on an ''invisible, inscrutable'' group
of associates that engaged in ''backstairs influence.'' So the current rumors of
a struggle for the President's mind among the Big Four - Baker, Clark, Deaver
and Meese -are not new, just more public.

They are the result of President Reagan's remoteness from the day-to-day policy
formation, of his habit of delegating authority, not to a single chief of staff,
as President Eisenhower did, and of his tendency to avoid getting his principal
aides together on a regular basis to listen patiently to their arguments and
differences.

Franklin Roosevelt managed to be a pretty good President, though even his
idolatrous supporters concede that he took his advice from inside and outside
the White House and even took a mischievous delight in playing off one staff or
cabinet member against another.

Ike followed the military staff system. He didn't spend hours listening to the
disputes of his principal aides, but gave Sherman Adams and later Gen. Bedell
Smith authority and responsibility for settling differences, and even when his
chief of staff couldn't settle them, he insisted on a one-page memorandum
defining the problem, no matter how complicated, and then made his decision.

President Truman didn't believe in the single chief of staff system. He had six
principal advisers, with whom he met every morning for up to an hour, had a
little bourbon and branch-water with one of them in the Oval Office to sum up
the day, and then took a bundle of papers upstairs, put on his green eyeshade
and read and studied reports until late in the night.

President Kennedy followed much the same system with his brother Robert, Larry
O'Brien, Kenny O'Donnell and Ted Sorensen at his side, though their assignments
were not as rigidly limited as those of Truman's six advisers.

President Johnson didn't invite criticism or differences within his staff or
Cabinet but bullied them into compli-ance, which helps explain his troubles in
Vietnam. There were few leaks out of the White House in those days, and even if
the leaks were true, he didn't hesitate to reverse a decision in order to
demonstrate that they weren't.

President Nixon ran his staff by stealth. He did his homework and mastered the
details of policy, but he delegated vast powers to Bob Haldeman and John
Ehrlichman in an atmosphere of Byzantine secrecy and intrigue. This is perhaps
the best recent example of the dangers of a staff loyal to the person of the
President rather than to the oath of office.

President Carter had his troubles between his White House staff and his Cabinet,
particularly over the conduct of foreign policy. But his White House staff was
drawn from a rather narrow group of Georgia friends who got along with one
another comparatively well. He met with the principal members every morning,
held a foreign policy meeting often for hours every Friday morning, invited and
listened to disputes, sometimes over the most intricate details of policy.

Mr. Reagan's way is a reflection of his character and his personality. he is
more interested in presenting policy than forming it. He doesn't have a
controlling chief of staff; he doesn't limit his principal advisers to a special
field of concentration like Truman, but lets the Big Four play the field and run
across one another; he doesn't dominate or intimidate his staff, like Johnson;
and he doesn't read and work like Mr. Carter.

Does it matter? Most observers here would say it does. There are some
advantages. It frees him to speak and perform, which he does better than any
President in recent memory, even when he's peddling nonsense. Also, since he
could stop the squabbling and most of the White House leaks by taking the Big
Four to the woodshed, it's conceivable that the leaks of his coming plans
provide him an oppportunity to test public and Congressional opinion before he
acts.

But it matters because one day he takes his advice from upstairs and the next
from downstairs. His speeches are more vivid and unyielding than his acts, which
is not necessarily a bad thing but creates a feeling of uncertainty and
incoherence at home and abroad, and is harmful to the President because there is
continuing doubt about whether he's really in command of a steady, continuing
policy.

Accordingly, his proposals are increasingly rejected by the Congress and the
allies. And the confusion of his staff is at least partly to blame.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS RELEASES ITS STUDY OF VIETNAM DOCUMENTARY

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1504 words


CBS News yesterday made public the text of an internal inquiry into charges that
it had violated its own standards in preparing a 90-minute documentary on the
Vietnam War, broadcast last year.

The network's inquiry concerned ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,''
which accused Gen. William C. Westmoreland of intentionally manipulating
information about the strength of enemy troops during the Vietnam War.

The 59-page text of the inquiry, accompanied by dozens of letters and
transcripts of interviews and of the documentary itself, was released after a
Federal judge ordered that it be turned over to General Westmoreland, who had
sought it in connection with his $120-million libel suit against the network.

Judge Pierre N. Leval of the Federal District Court in Manhattan rejected CBS's
contention that the report was an internal document, protected by First
Amendment free-press guarantees.

CBS, supported by several other news organizations, had argued that an order to
release the report would inhibit news organizations from initiating studies of
work they had produced. But Judge Leval said CBS destroyed its right to withhold
the report by disclosing portions of it last July to substantiate the points
made in its documentary.

The full report, which was prepared last year by Burton Benjamin, a CBS senior
producer, does not change substantially the conclusions contained in the summary
released in July. CBS, at that time, admitted that some of its own regulations
on documentary films had been violated in the program, but that the network
still stood by its documentary.

11 Principal Flaws

The full report provides additional detail on disagreements inside CBS over the
preparation of the documentary. In a tough summary section, it found that there
were 11 ''principal flaws'' in the preparation of the documentary, including
''coddling sympathetic witnesses,'' choosing to interview mostly witnesses who
supported the program's overall conclusions and failing to prove that there had
been a ''conspiracy'' to suppress information about enemy troop strength during
the Vietnam War.

The Benjamin report contained portions of unedited transcripts of interviews in
which witnesses seemed to be coached by interviewers, and it gave considerable
information on material, excluded from the broadcast, that might have undermined
the documentary's principal conclusions about General Westmoreland's actions in
the war.

The report by Mr. Benjamin was prepared before General Westmoreland brought suit
against the network. It was intended as an internal examination of the
preparation of the documentary, which TV Guide, in an article last year, had
said was a ''smear.'' Mr. Benjamin dealt one by one with a list of detailed
questions raised in the TV Guide article, and, in most cases, offered
conclusions on the accuracy of the magazine's assertions.

Contacted by telephone, a CBS spokesman declined to comment on the report. Van
Gordon Sauter, president of CBS News, said in a written statement about the
documentary that accompanied the report yesterday: ''We concluded that any flaws
in the preparation did not undermine the editorial integrity of the broadcast,
and that it is an accurate and important account of the distortion of enemy
strength estimates by the military in Vietnam.''

Information Given in Confidence

Mr. Sauter added that CBS had been unwilling to make the report public because
''those who contributed to it were told they would do so in confidence.''

The overall conclusion of the CBS documentary, which was narrated by Mike
Wallace, was that General Westmoreland, the commander of American forces in
Vietnam, systematically underreported enemy troop strength to the President and
the Congress, in order to show that he was winning the war. General Westmoreland
challenged these conclusions in a news conference held on Jan. 26, 1982.

The Benjamin report presented evidence that the producers of the documentary at
CBS from the beginning tended to believe the charges against General
Westmoreland and that they organized their presentation of witnesses and other
evidence to support that conclusion.

For example, it showed that an initial proposal for the documentary, called the
''blue sheet,'' used the word conspiracy 24 times and the word conspirator five
times. The word conspiracy was also used in promotional ads taken out by CBS
before the telecast.  The report showed that there was sharp disagreement within
CBS over the use of that word, which, presumably would have indicated wrongdoing
on General Westmoreland's part.

Ex-C.I.A. Agent Had Role

The report included the following portion of an on-camera interview, not used in
the documentary, between George Crile, the CBS producer who conducted most of
the interviews used in the documentary, and George Hamscher, a military
intelligence official who supported CBS's findings in the documentary.

Mr. Crile: ''It sounds like a full-fledged conspiracy to fake intelligence
reporting.'' Mr. Hamscher: ''Faking intelligence reporting is a different thing
entirely.'' Mr. Crile: ''It sounds like a full-fledged conspiracy.'' Mr.
Hamscher: ''If it were a conspiracy - which I don't think it was -it probably
had a good purpose.'' The Benjamin report provided details on the role of a
former C.I.A analyst in Vietnam, Sam Adams, who told CBS that General
Westmoreland suppressed intelligence reports. Mr. Adams, the report confirmed,
was paid $25,000 as a consultant on the project. In what the report said was a
confusion of roles, Mr. Adams was also a reporter on the project, who, according
to Mr. Crile ''was in and out of the cutting room.''

Selection of Interviewees

''Since he was also interviewed on camera,'' the report declared, referring to
Mr. Adams, ''he should have been identified in the script as a paid
consultant.''

Mr. Adams, the Benjamin report said, provided CBS with a list of 80 names of
individuals who could be interviewed for the documentary. It said a charge, made
by TV Guide, that CBS chose mostly those who would agree with the documentary's
premise, ''appears to be true.''

If Mr. Adams is assumed to be the principal adversary to General Westmoreland in
the program, the report said, the line-up of interviewees was ''eight supporters
for Adams and one for Westmoreland, and that one (Graham) was given 21 seconds
on screen.'' Lieut. Gen. Daniel Graham was the chief of the Army's current
intelligence and estimates division in Vietnam in the late 1960's

''Measured another way,'' the report said, ''Westmoreland and Graham spoke for 5
minutes and 59 seconds. Adams and the eight supporters of the premise spoke for
19 minutes and 19 seconds.''

TV Guide Charge True

The report found truth in another charge made in the TV Guide article; namely
that one witness, George Allen, a former C.I.A.  agent in Vietnam who supported
the documentary's premise on the air, was asked to do a second interview when a
first one proved unacceptable. He was also shown screenings of other interviews
before he appeared in front of the cameras for a second time.

''The double interview and the screenings are a violation of CBS News
Guidelines,'' requiring that interviews be ''spontaneous and unrehearsed'' the
Benjamin report said.

In an interview with Mr. Benjamin, Mr. Crile, the documentary's producer, gave
the following reason for allowing Mr. Allen to see screenings of other
interviews: ''Allen was caught in stage paralysis. He felt badly about doing the
interview ... he felt isolated as if he were a whistle-blower. I wanted to show
him he wasn't alone out there.''

At one point, the inquiry reproduced an unedited portion of the second interview
with Mr. Allen, which it says could have convinced TV Guide that sympathetic
witnesses were asked ''soft questions.''

Mr. Crile: ''There was more to it than that as you have explained it.
Remember?'' Mr. Allen: '' No, I don't remember. Refresh me.'' Mr. Crile: ''I'll
refresh you.'' Later in the same interview, the following exchanged occurred:
Mr. Allen: ''Is is really kosher to go over this?'' Mr. Crile: ''Oh, this is
what we do.'' In a summary of the inquiry, Mr. Benjamin, its author, listed 11
''principal flaws'' in the documentary, including the handling of Mr. Allen, the
''coddling of sympathetic witnesses'' and ''an imbalance in presenting the two
sides of the issue.''

''A 'conspiracy,' given the accepted definition of the word, was not proved,''
the inquiry concluded. CBS's July statement said, ''we now believe that a
judgmental conclusion of conspiracy was inappropriate.''

In its final portion, the inquiry argued that the key question in the
documentary - whether the books were ''cooked'' - cannot be answered
definitively.

''Even today,'' the report said, ''military historians cannot tell you whether
or not the Military Assistance Command Vietnam 'cooked the books' as the
broadcast states. The flow of definitive information is painfully slow and may
never be conclusive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT APPEALS BEFORE CONGRESS FOR AID TO LATINS

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


President Reagan, declaring that the security of all the Americas was at stake,
appealed to Congress tonight to support his program of military and economic
assistance to El Salvador and other nations in the region.

In an unusual address to a joint session of Congress, Mr. Reagan invoked the
memory of the 1947 request by President Harry S. Truman for aid to Greece and
Turkey, saying the turmoil in Central America posed a threat to the United
States comparable to what it faced in Europe after World War II.

He called on the legislators to set aside ''passivity, resignation, defeatism''
in facing ''this challenge to freedom and security in our hemisphere.''

U.S. Called in Jeopardy

With Congress deeply reluctant to approve his proposed aid package for the
region, Mr. Reagan sought to put the sum requested in perspective: He said the
$600 million he is asking for Central America for the 1984 fiscal year amounted
to ''less than one-tenth of what Americans will spend this year on coin-operated
video games.''

''The national security of all the Americas is at stake in Central America,''
Mr. Reagan said. ''If we cannot defend ourselves there, we cannot expect to
prevail elsewhere. Our credibility would collapse, our alliances would crumble,
and the safety of our homeland would be put at jeopardy.''

Mr. Reagan also repeated, with emphasis, his view that the rebellions in El
Salvador and other nations in the area are being assisted by Cuba, Nicaragua and
the Soviet Union.

He acknowledged there were ''still major problems'' in El Salvador on human
rights and civilian violence, but asserted that the country's economy was being
''deliberately sabotaged'' by Nicaragua to further its aim of exporting
revolution in the region.

The President, in effect, submitted a bill of particulars against the Sandinist
regime in Nicaragua, which came to power in 1979.  Despite the hopes of many,
Mr. Reagan said, the Sandinists had ''imposed a new dictatorship'' in Nicaragua
and had done ''everything they can to bring down the elected Government of El
Salvador.''

Despite this description of the Nicaraguan Government, Mr. Reagan said ''we do
not seek its overthrow.'' Then, in an apparent reference to reports that the
United States is giving covert assistance to rebels fighting against Sandinist
forces, he declared: ''We should not - and we will not -protect the Nicaraguan
Government from the anger of its own people. But we should, through diplomacy,
offer an alternative. And as Nicaragua ponders its options, we can and will -
with all the resources of diplomacy - protect each country of Central America
from the danger of war.''

U.S. Role Is Challenged

Thus the President left somewhat ambiguous the nature of American assistance to
anti-Sandinist forces while asserting, as he has in the past, that the United
States is not violating a law approved last December barring any effort to
overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.

Some in Congress, including Representative Edward P. Boland, the Massachusetts
Democrat who is chairman of the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence, have said the United States may be violating the law in assisting
the anti-Sandinist rebels.

Mr. Reagan's 34-minute speech marked the first time he had appeared before a
joint Congressional session to deal with a foreign policy issue. Despite his
appeal for bipartisanship, the President was applauded about a dozen times by
Republicans alone.  Only when the President said there was no need for American
troops in Central America did Democrats join in the ovation.

Republican leaders said they had advised against using a joint session for such
a speech, but the White House insisted it was the best way to make the public
more aware of the President's view of the stakes in Central America.

The speech was addressed to the public, on prime-time television, and the fact
that it was made before both houses of Congress insured that it would generate
continued discussion in the form of newsletters, speeches and direct mailings to
constituents.

The President spoke one day after a House Appropriations subcommittee approved
$30 million in additional military aid for El Salvador this year, half the
amount Mr. Reagan had sought.

Proposal in Trouble

The President's emergency package of $298 million in additional military and
economic aid for Central America for 1983 is acknowledged by Administration
officials to be in trouble among Republicans and Democrats in both houses of
Congress.

Members of Congress have expressed concern that the Administration is relying
too heavily on military assistance and overlooking the possibility of political
reconciliation through negotiations in El Salvador and elsewhere. Many are also
worried that the Administration is conducting a covert program to overthrow the
Nicaraguan Government.

Mr. Reagan sought tonight to meet these concerns and also to assure the Congress
that he did not foresee any direct United States troop involvement in the
region.

''Let me say to those who invoke the memory of Vietnam there is no thought of
sending American combat troops to Central America,'' Mr.  Reagan said. ''They
are not needed. Indeed, they have not been requested there. All our neighbors
ask of us is assistance in training and arms to protect themselves while they
build a better, freer life.''

Political Process Supported

The President said his Administration remained committed ultimately to resolving
the region's differences through the political process and through the
encouragement of an accord among all nations in the area that would eventually
bar all foreign troops and advisers as well as military intervention in each
other's affairs.

He offered four ''assurances'' that Administration officials said were designed
to please members of Congress who have worried that Mr. Reagan is not paying
enough attention to resolving the region's problems diplomatically.

First, Mr. Reagan said the United States would support ''any agreement'' among
Central American countries leading to the withdrawal of all foreign advisers and
troops. Second, he pledged ''to help opposition groups join the political
process in all countries.''

Third, he said he would support ''any verifiable, reciprocal agreement''
renouncing support of insurgencies in neighboring countries. Fourth, he said he
would support any accord ''on the nonimportation of offensive weapons.''

Special Envoy to Be Named

As expected, Mr. Reagan also announced that he would soon appoint a special
envoy to the region to be approved by the Senate to help carry out this process
of political reconciliation. He did not name the envoy, but Administration
officials said that former Senator Richard Stone, a Florida Democrat, was a
leading contender. However, Republican sources in Congress said Mr. Stone might
not be appointed because of opposition that had developed among Democrats.

In a briefing for reporters, Administration officials said Mr.  Reagan's
assurances on diplomatic and political actions did not mark a shift in United
States policy. Specifically, they said, it did not change the Administration's
position that armed rebels in El Salvador should not be able to circumvent the
electoral process to gain power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan and Thomas O'Neill Jr.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HONG KONG IS NOW A CHILLY PORT FOR 'BOAT PEOPLE'

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, April 27


One day in 1979, after the Vietnamese Government threatened to force him out of
Haiphong to the countryside, Tang Ming Shan climbed into a small boat with 100
other people and set off for Hong Kong.

As soon as he landed, he was put into the Kaitak refugee camp, a warren of
corrugated metal huts and worn concrete barracks where families sleep in narrow,
triple-tiered bunks. It was better, decided Mr. Tang, an ethnic Chinese, than
what he had before.

Four years later, however, he is still there. He could have emigrated to England
with his wife and a son, but he held out for the United States and hoped another
son could somehow leave Vietnam and join him.

So, at the age of 68, he waits. He is prepared to wait a long time. ''It is out
of my control,'' he says. ''I can't worry about it.'' Hong Kong, however, is
tired of the waiting. The favorite landing spot for years of the so-called boat
people from Vietnam, it has pulled down the welcome sign and made plain it does
not want to take in any more.

Closed Camps for New Arrivals

Since last July, new arrivals from Vietnam have been placed in closed camps run
by the colony's prison authorities. The main one, once a park with tennis
courts, is on Lan Tao Island, from which escape is difficult.

The population there is now over 3,000 and officials are planning to build more
camps. Life is regimented, with daily head counts and lineups for meals.
Programs are limited, and no one may leave. This is a major departure from
so-called open camps, such as Kaitak, which is administered by the Red Cross and
where refugees head for work during the day, usually at low-paying factory jobs.

''We will take them in, but Hong Kong is running out of space, if you like,''
said Clinton E. Leeks, a Government security official in charge of refugee
operations. ''We needed to make clear that they are our uninvited guests, and to
get word back to Vietnam that would discourage other boat people from coming
here.''

So far the policy of ''humane deterrence,'' as it is called, has had its effect.
The number of refugees arriving in the first three months of 1983 was 297,
compared with 1,474 for the comparable period last year. The decline in April,
however, has not been nearly as dramatic, and boat traffic normally increases
from this time of the year into summer because of favorable seasonal winds.

68,000 Refugees in Peak Year

In the peak year, 1979, more than 68,000 refugees fleeing Vietnam by boat passed
through here. Since then the annual figures have dropped to between 7,000 and
8,500, as getting out of Vietnam has grown harder.

What troubles residents of this densely packed territory is that they have never
seen Hong Kong as anything but a way station for the Vietnamese, much as Vienna
has been a point of passage for emigrating Soviet Jews.

But Western countries have imposed strict quotas and requirements, and so fewer
and fewer Vietnamese are leaving here. The United States accepted 12,219
refugees from Hong Kong camps two years ago. That number shrank to 5,330 last
year, and so far in 1983 it is only 339.

As a result, people like Mr. Tang, an ethnic Chinese who was a street hawker in
Haiphong, wait ever longer for a chance that may never come. Of the 12,500
refugees in three major camps, one-fourth have been here four years and 60
percent more than two years.

Hong Kong officials concluded that they had been left holding the bag and had to
do something themselves to shut off the refugee flow.

'Hong Kong Will Never Shoot'

''With them, it's a question of knowing Hong Kong will never shoot at them and
will never tow them out to sea, unlike other countries in the region,'' Mr.
Leeks said. ''But, frankly, people have lost patience.''

The tough policy has caused some uneasiness. This has long been a haven for
refugees, mostly from China, and a few people worry that earlier arrivals,
having climbed the ladder, now want to kick it over.

''I don't like the idea of locking these people up as if they had committed some
sort of crime,'' said John McPherson, a Salvation Army captain and one of the
few outsiders permitted to enter the closed Lan Tao Island camp.

'We Make Our Points in Private'

Members of the Hong Kong Christian Council have also expressed displeasure. But
even those who are unhappy quickly add that they are not sure the Government had
an alternative, in view of Hong Kong's overcrowding. Typically, there have been
no formal statements of condemnation. ''We make our points in private,'' the
Salvation Army officer said.

There are also many Cantonese here who think the authorities are too lenient,
especially since illegal immigrants from China are arrested and sent back at a
rate of 1,000 or more a month. Why help the Vietnamese, the argument goes, when
Hong Kong is not prepared to take care of fellow Chinese?

Among the questions with no immediate answer is how long the Government is
prepared to keep the refugees in confinement. Although they seem to have enough
to eat and do not lack for medical care, boredom runs high, as do tensions on
occasion.

Serious brawling broke out between rival factions at Kaitak last May. It led to
the sending of 2,800 Vietnamese, most of them from the south, to another camp to
separate them from 5,400 northern Vietnamese and ethnic Chinese who stayed
behind.

Threat of Sterner Measures

If the closed camps do not reduce the migration, Hong Kong officials say, they
are willing to impose yet sterner measures. The Secretary of Security, David
Jeaffreson, has suggested sending refugees home against their will.

The proposal was opposed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and there is no reason to believe Vietnam would accept these people. Still, the
idea of ''involuntary repatriation'' is under discussion.

''We cannot just go on providing unlimited accomodations to refugees who want
transit to the U.S. or to Europe,'' Mr. Leeks said.  For Mr. Tang, such issues
are not a big concern. Nor is he troubled by the prospect that he may never
become a prime candidate for resettlement in the United States.

''I don't think of that,'' he said. ''I just hope they will take me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of elderly Vietnamese man and girl washing food

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT REAGAN'S ADDRESS ON CENTRAL AMERICA TO JOINT SESSION OF CONGRESS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4465 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's address to a joint sesion of
Congress yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:

Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished members of the Congress, honored
guests and my fellow Americans: A number of times in past years, members of
Congress and a President have come together in meetings like this to resolve a
crisis. I have asked for this meeting in the hope that we can prevent one.

It would be hard to find many Americans who are not aware of our stake in the
Middle East, the Persian Gulf, or the NATO line dividing the free world from the
Commnist bloc. And the same could be said for Asia.

But in spite of, or maybe because of, a flurry of stories about places like
Nicaragua and El Salvador and, yes, some concerted propaganda, many of us find
it hard to believe we have a stake in problems involving those countries. Too
many have thought of Central America as just a place way down below Mexico that
can not possibly constitute a threat to our well-being. And that is why I have
asked for this session. Central America's problems do directly affect the
security and the well-being of our own people. And Central America is much
closer to the United States than many of the world trouble spots that concern
us. So we work to restore our own economy, we cannot afford to lose sight of our
neighbors to the South.

El Salvador is nearer to Texas than Texas is to Massachusetts.  Nicaragua is
just as close to Miami, San Antonio, San Diego and Tucson as those cities are to
Washington, where we are gathered tonight.

Strategic Importance

But nearness on the map does not even begin to tell the strategic importance of
Central America, bordering as it does on the Caribbean - our lifeline to the
outside world. Two-thirds of all our foreign trade and petroleum pass through
the Panama Canal and the Caribbean.  In a European crisis, at least half of our
supplie for NATO would go through these areas by sea. It is well to remember
that in early 1942 a handful of Hitler's submarines sank more tonnage there than
in all of the Atlantic Ocean. And they did this withouut a single naval base
anywhere in the area.

And today, the situation is different. Cuba is host to a Soviet combat brigade,
a submarine base capable of servicing Soviet submarines and military air bases
visited regularly by Soviet military aircraft.

Because of its importance, the Caribbean Basin is a magnet for adventurism. We
are all aware of the Libyan cargo planes refueling in Brazil a few days ago on
their way to deliver medical supplies to Nicaragua. Brazilian authorities
discovered the so-called medical supplies were actually munitions and prevented
their delivery. You may remember that last month, speaking on national
television, I showed an aerial photo of an airfield being built on the island of
Grenada. Well, if that airfield had been completed, those planes could have
refueled there and completed their journey.

If the Nazis during World War II and the Soviets today could recognize the
Caribbean and Central America as vital to our interests, shouldn't we also?

U.S. Defense of Area

For several years now, under two Administrations, the United States has been
increasing its defense of freedom in the Caribbean Basin.  And I can tell you
tonight, democracy is beginning to take root in El Salvador, which, until a
short time ago, knew only dictatorship. the new Government is now delivering on
its promises of democracy, reforms and free elections. It was not easy and there
was resistance to many of the attempted reforms with assassinations of some of
the reformers. Guerrilla bands and urban terrorists were portrayed in a
worldwide propaganda campaign as freedom fighters representative of the people.
Ten days before I came into office, the guerrillas launched what they called a
''final offensive'' to overthrow the Government. And their radio boasted that
our new Administration would be too late to prevent their victory. Well they
learned democracy cannot be so easily defeated.

President Carter did not hesitate. He authorized arms and munition to El
Salvador. The guerrilla offensive failed, but not America's will. Every
President since this country assumed global responsibilities has known that
those responsibilities could only be met if we pursued a bipartisan foreign
policy.

Progress in El Salvador

As I said a moment ago, the Government of El Salvador has been keeping its
promises, like the land reform program which, is making thousands of farm
tenants farm owners. In a little over three years, 20 percent of the arable land
in El Salvador has been redistributed to more than 450,000 people. That's 1 in
10 Salvadorans who has directly benefitted from this program.

El Salvador has continued to strive toward an orderly and democratic society.
The Government promised free elections. On March 28th, little more than a year
ago, after months of campaigning by a variety of candidates, the suffering
people of El Salvador were offered a chance to vote -to choose the kind of
government they wanted. And suddenly the so-called freedom fighters in the hills
were exposed for what they really are - a small minority who want power for
themselves and their backers - not democracy for the people. The guerrillas
threatened death to anyone who voted. they destropyed hundreds of buses and
trucks to keep the people from getting to the polling places. Their slogan was
brutal: ''Vote today, die tonight.'' But on election day, an unprecedented 80
percent of the electorate braved ambush and gunfire and trudged for miles, many
of them, to vote for freedom. And that's truly fighting for freedom. We can
never turn our backs on that.

Woman Wounded Before Voting

Members of this Congress who went there as observers told me of a woman who was
wounded by rifle fire on the way to the polls, who refused to leave the line to
have her wound treated until after she had voted. Another woman had been told by
the guerrillas that she would be killed when she returned from the polls, and
she told the guerrillas, ''You can kill me, you can kill my family, kill my
neighbors, you can't kill us all.'' The real freedom fighters of El Salvador
turned out to be the people of that country - the young, the old, the in-between
- more than a million of them out of a population of less than five million. The
world should respect this courage, and not allow it to be belittled or
forgotten. And again, I say in good conscience, we can never turn our backs on
that.

The democratic political parties and factions in El Salvador are coming together
around the common goal of seeking a political solution to their country's
problems. New national elections will be held this year and they will be open to
all political parties. The Government has invited the guerrillas to participate
in the election and is preparing an amnesty law. The people of El Salvador are
earning their freedom and they deserve our moral and material support to protect
it.

Problems Remain

Yes, there are still major problems regarding human rights, the criminal justice
system and violence against noncombatants. And, like the rest of Central
America, El Salvador also faces severe economic problems. But, in addition to
recession-depressed prices for major agricultural exports, El Salvador's economy
is being deliberately sabotaged.

Tonight in El Salvador - because of ruthless guerrilla attacks - much of the
fertile land cannot be cultivated; less than half the rolling stock of the
railways remains operational; bridges, water facilities, telephone and
electrical systems have been destroyed and damaged. In one 22-month period,
there were 5,000 interruptions of electrical power. One region was without
electricity for a third of a year.

I think Secretary of State Shultz put it very well the other day: ''Unable to
win the free loyalty of El Salvador's people, the guerrillas,'' he said, ''are
deliberately and systematically depriving them of food, water, transportation,
light, sanitation and jobs. And these are the people who claim they want to help
the common people.''

They do not want elections because they know they would be defeated. But, as the
previous election showed, the Salvadoran people's desire for democracy will not
be defeated.

The guerrillas are not embattled peasants armed with muskets. They are
professional, sometimes with better training and weaponry than the Government's
soldier. The Salvadoran battalions that have received U.S. training have been
conducting themselves well on the battlefield and with the civilian population.
But, so far, we have only provided enough money to train one Salvadoran soldier
out of 10, fewer than the number of guerrillas that are trained by Nicaragua and
Cuba.

Record in Nicaragua

And let me set the record straight on Nicaragua, a country next to El Salvador.
In 1979, when the new Government took over in Nicaragua after a revolution which
overthrew the authoritarian rule of Somoza, everyone hoped for the growth of
democracy. We in the United States did, too. By January of 1981, our emergency
relief and recovery aid to Nicaragua totaled $118 million - more than provided
by any other developed country. In fact, in the first two years of Sandinista
rule, the United States directly or indirectly sent five times more aid to
Nicaragua than it had in the two years prior to the revolution. Can anyone doubt
the generosity and good faith of the American people?

These were hardly the actions of a nation implacably hostile to Nicaragua. Yet
the Government of Nicaragua has treated us as an enemy. It has rejected our
repeated peace efforts. It has broken its promises to us, to the Organization of
American States and, most important of all, to the people of Nicaragua.

No sooner was victory achieved than a small clique ousted others who had been
part of the revolution from having any voice in the Government. Humberto Ortega,
the Minister of Defense, declared Marxism-Leninism would be their guide, and so
it is.

Effects of the Revolution

The Government of Nicaragua has imposed a new dictatorship; it has refused to
hold the elections it promised; it has seized control of most media and subjects
all media to heavy prior censorship; it denied the bishops and priests of the
Roman Catholic Church the right to say mass on radio during Holy Week; it
insulted and mocked the Pope; it has driven the Miskito Indians from their
homelands - burning their villages, destroying their crops, and forcing them
into involuntary internment camps far from home; it has moved against the
private sector and free labor unions; it condoned mob action against Nicaragua's
independent human rights commission and drove the director of that commission
into exile.

In short, after all these acts of repression by the Government, is it any wonder
that opposition has formed? Contrary to propaganda, the opponents of the
Sandinistas are not die-hard supporters of the previous Somoza regime. In fact,
many are anti-Somoza heroes who fought beside the Sandinistas to bring down the
Somoza Government.  Now they have been denied any part in the new Government
because they truly wanted democracy for Nicaragua and they still do. Others are
Miskito Indians fighting for their homes, their lands and their lives.

The Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua turned out to be just an exchange of one
set of autocratic rulers for another, and the people still have no freedom, no
democratic rights and more poverty. Even worse than its predecessor, it is
helping Cuba and the Soviets to destabilize our hemisphere.

Contrast in El Salvador

Meanwhile, the Government of El Salvador, making every effort to guarantee
demoracy, free labor unions, freedom of religion and a free press, is under
attack by guerrillas dedicated to the same philosophy that prevails in
Nicaragua, Cuba and, yes, the Soviet Union. Violence has been Nicaragua's most
important export to the world. It is the ultimate in hypocrisy for the unelected
Nicaraguan Government to charge that we seek their overthrow when they are doing
everything they can to bring down the elected Government of El Salvador. The
guerrilla attacks are directed from a headquarters in Managua, the capital of
Nicaragua.

But let us be clear as to the American attitude toward the Government of
Nicaragua. We do not seek its overthrow. Our interest is to insure that it does
not infect its neighbors through the export of subversion and violence. Our
purpose, in conformity with American and international law, is to prevent the
flow of arms to El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala and Costa Rica. We have
attempted to have a dialogue with the Government of Nicaragua but it persists in
its efforts to spread violence.

We should not - and we will not -protect the Nicaraguan Government from the
anger of its own people. But we should, through diplomacy, offer an alternative.
And, as Nicaragua ponders its options, we can and will -with all the resources
of diplomacy -protect each country of Central America from the danger of war.

Nicaragua's Buildup

Even Costa Rica, Central America's oldest and strongest democracy, a Government
so peaceful it doesn't even have an army, is the object of bullying and threats
from Nicaragua's dictators.

Nicaragua's neighbors know that Sandinista promises of peace, nonalliance and
nonintervention have not been kept. Some 36 new military bases have been built -
there were only 13 during the Somoza years.

Nicaragua's new army numbers 25,000 men supported by a milita of 50,000. It is
the largest army in Central America supplemented by 2,000 Cuban military and
security advisers. It is equipped with the most modern weapons, dozens of
Soviet-made tanks, 800 Soviet-bloc trucks, Soviet 152-millimeter howitzers, 100
antiaircraft guns plus planes and hlicopters. There are additional thousands of
civilian advisers from Cuba, the Soviet Union, East Germany, Libya and the
P.L.O. And we are attacked because we have 55 military trainers in El Salvador.

The goal of the professional guerrilla movements in Central America is as simple
as it is sinister - to destablize the entire region from the Panama Canal to
Mexico. And you doubt me on this point, just consider what Cayetano Carpio, the
now-deceased Salvadoran guerrilla leader, said earlier this month. Carpio said
that after El Salvador falls, El Salvador and Nicaragua would be ''arm-in-arm
and struggling for the total liberation of Central America.''

No Threat to Nicaragua

Nicaragua's dictatorial junta, who themselves made war and won power operating
fromn bases in Honduras and Costa Rica, like to pretend that they are today
being attacked by forces based in Honduras. The fact is, it is Nicaragua's
Government that threatens Honduras, not the reverse.

It is Nicaragua who has moved heavy tanks close to the border and Nicaragua who
speaks of war. It was Nicaraguan radio that announced on April 8th the creation
of a new, unified revolutionary coordinating board to push forward the Marxist
struggle in Honduras.

Nicaragua, supported by weapons and military resources provided by the Communist
bloc, represses its own people, refuses to make peace and sponsors a guerrilla
war against El Salvador.

President Truman's words are as apt today as they were in 1947, when he, too,
spoke before a joint session of the Congress: ''At the present moment in world
history nearly every nation must choose between alternaive ways of life. The
choice is not too often a free one.

''One way of life is based upon the will of the majority and is distinguished by
free institutions representative government, free elections, guarantees of
individual liberty, freedom of speech and religion and freedom from political
oppression.

''The second way of life is based upon the will of a minority forcibly imposed
upon the majority. It relies upon terror and oppression, a controlled press and
radio, fixed elections, and the suppression of personal freedoms.

''I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free
peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by
outside pressures.

''I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in
their own way.  ''I believe that our help should be primarily through economic
and financial aid, which is essential to economic stability and orderly
political processes.

''Collapse of free institutions and loss of independence would be disastrous not
only for them but for the world. Discouragement and possibly failure would
quickly be the lot of neighboring peoples striving to maintain their freedom and
independence.''

The Same Stakes Today

The countries of Central America are smaller than the nations that prompted
President Truman's message. But the political and strategic stakes are the same.
Will our response - economic, social, military - be as appropriate and
successful as Mr. Truman's bold solutions to the problems of postwar Europe?

Some people have forgotten the successes of those years - and the decades of
peace, prosperity and freedom they secured.  Some people talk as though the
United States were incapable of acting effectively in international affairs
without risking war or damaging those we seek to help.

Are democracies required to remain passive while threats to their security and
prosperity accumulate?  Must we just accept the destabilization of an entire
region from the Panama Canal to Mexico on our southern border?  Must we sit by
while independent nations of this hemisphere are integrated into the most
aggressive empire the modern world has seen?  Must we wait while Central
Americans are driven from their homes, like the more than a million who have
sought refuge out of Afghanistan or the one and a half million who fled
Indochina or the more than one million Cubans who have fled Castro's Caribbean
utopia? Must we, by default, leave the people of El Salvador no choice but to
flee their homes, creating another tragic human exodus?

In the Face of Challenge

I do not believe there is a majority in the Congress or the country that
counsels passivity, resignation, defeatism in the face of this challenge to
freedom and security in our own hemisphere.

I do not believe that a majority of the Congress or the country is prepared to
stand by passively while the people of Central America are delivered to
totalitarianism and we ourselves are left vulnerable to new dangers.

Only last week an official of the Soviet Union reiterated Brezhnev's threat to
station nuclear missiles in this hemisphere - five minutes from the United
States. Like an echo, Nicragua's Commandante, Daniel Ortega, confirmed that, if
asked, his country would consider accepting those missiles. I understand that
today they may be having second thoughts.

Now, before I go any further, let me say to those who invoke the memory of
Vietnam: There is no thought of sending American combat troops to Central
America. They are not needed - indeed, they have not been requested there. All
our neighbors ask of us is assistance in training and arms to protect themselves
while they build a better, freer life.

Backing Regional Efforts

We must continue to encourage peace among the nations of Central America. We
must support the regional efforts now under way to promote solutions to regional
problems.

We cannot be certain that the Marxist-Leninist bands who believe war is an
instrument of politics will be readily discouraged. It is crucial that we not
become discouraged before they do. Otherwise the region's freedom will be lost
and our security damaged in ways that can hardly be calculated.

If Central America were to fall, what would the consequences be for our position
in Asia, Europe and for alliances such as NATO? If the United States cannot
respond to a threat near our own borders, why should Europeans or Asians believe
that we are seriously concerned about threats to them? If the Soviets can assume
that nothing short of an actual attack on the United States will provoke an
American response, which ally, which friend will trust us then?

The Congress shares both the power and the responsibility for our foreign
policy.  Tonight I ask you, the Congress, to join me in a bold, generous
approach to the problems of peace and poverty, democracy and dictatorship in the
region. Join me in a program that prevents Communist victory in the short run
but goes beyond to produce, for the deprived people of the area, the reality of
present progress and the promise of more to come.

Let us lay the foundation for a bipartisan approach to sustain the independence
and freedom of the countries of Central America. We in the Administration reach
out to you in this spirit.

4 Basic Goals

We will pursue four basic goals in Central America: First, In response to
decades of inequity and indifference, we will support democracy, reform and
human freedom. This means using our assistance, our powers of persuasion and our
legitimate leverage to bolster humane democratic systems where they already
exist and to help countries on their way to that goal complete the process as
quickly as human institutions can be changed. Elections - in El Salvador and
also in Nicaragua -must be open to all, fair and safe.  The international
community must help. We will work at human rights problems, not walk away from
them.

Second, in response to the challenge of world recession and, in the case of El
Salvador, to the unrelenting campaign of economic sabotage by the guerrillas, we
will support economic development. By a margin of 2-to-1, our aid is economic
now, not military. Seventy-seven cents out of every dollar we will spend in the
area this year goes for food, fertilizers and other essentials for economic
growth and development. And our economic program goes beyond traditional aid:
The Caribbean Initiative introduced in the House earlier today will provide
powerful trade and investment incentives to help these countris achieve
self-sustaining economic growth without exporting U.S. jobs. Our goal must be to
focus our immense and growing technology to enhance health care, agriculture,
industry and to insure that we who inhabit this interdependent region come to
know and understand each other better, retaining our diverse identities,
respecting our diverse traditions and institutions.

U.S. Military Support

And third, in response to the military challenge from Cuba and Nicaragua - to
their deliberate use of force to spread tyranny - we will support the security
of the region's threatened nations. We do not view security assistance as an end
in itself but as a shield for democratization, economic development and
diplomacy. No amount of reform will bring peace so long as guerrillas believe
they will win by force. No amount of economic help will suffice if guerrilla
units can destroy roads and bridges and power stations and crops again and again
with impunity. But with better training and material help, our neighbors can
hold off the guerrillas and give democratic reform time to take root.

Fourth, we will support dialogue and negotiations - both among the countries of
the region and within each country. The terms and conditions of participation in
elections are negotiable. Costa Rica is a shining example of democracy. Honduras
has made the move from military rule to democratic Government. Guatemala is
pledged to the same course. The United States will work toward a political
solution in Central America which will serve the interests of the democratic
process.

Assurances of Support

To support these diplomatic goals, I offer these assurances:

- The United States will support any agreement among Central American countries
for the withdrawal - under fully verifiable and reciprocal conditions - of all
foreign military and security advisers and troops.

- We want to help opposition groups join the political process in all countries
and compete by ballots instead of bullets.

- We will support any verifiable, reciprocal agreement among Central American
countries on the renunciation of support for insurgencies on neighbors'
territory.

- And, finally, we desire to help Central America end its costly arms race and
will support any verifiable, reciprocal agreements on the nonimportation of
offensive weapons.

An Ambassador at Large

To move us toward these goals more rapidly, I am tonight announcing my intention
to name an Ambassador at Large as my special envoy to Central America. He or she
will report to me through the Secretary of State. The Ambassador's
responsibilities will be to lend U.S. support to the efforts of regional
governments to bring peace to this troubled area and to work closely with the
Congress to assure the fullest possible bipartisan coordination of our policies
toward the region.

What I am asking for is prompt Congressional approval for the full reprogramming
of funds for key current economic and security programs so that the people of
Central America can hold the line against externally supported aggression. In
addition, I am asking for prompt action on the supplemental request in these
same areas to carry us through the current fiscal year and for early and
favorable Congressional action on my requests for fiscal year 1984. And finally,
I am asking that the bipartisan consensus, which last year acted on the trade
and tax provisions of the Caribbean Basin Initiative in the House, again take
the lead to move this vital proposal to the floor of both chambers. And, as I
said before, the greatest share of these requests is targeted toward economic
and humanitarian aid, not military.

What the Administration is asking for on behalf of freedom in Central America is
so small, so minimal -considering what is at stake. The total amount requested
for aid to all of Central America in 1984 is about $600 million; that is less
than one-tenth of what Americans will spend this year on coin-operated video
games.

In summation, I say to you that tonight there can be no question: The national
security of all the Americas is at stake in Central America. If we cannot defend
ourselves there, we canot expect to prevail elsewhere. Our credibility would
collapse, our aliances would crumble and the safety of our homeland would be put
at jeopardy.

We have a vital interest, a moral duty and a solemn responsibility.  This is not
a partisan issue. It is a question of our meeting our moral responsibility to
ourselves, our friends and our posterity. It is a duty that falls to all of us -
the President, the Congress and the people. We must perform it together. Who
among us would wish to bear responsibility for failing to meet our shared
obligation?

Thank you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dan Rostenkowski photo of Ernesto Rivas-Gallont

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LATIN TALK: RISKY ACT;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 946 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


President Reagan used the extraordinary platform of a joint session of Congress
tonight to try to preserve his Central American policy rather than to proclaim a
broad new strategy or to signal a shift in his position.

Privately, his advisers acknowledged that the President had felt compelled to
resort to this risky political tactic in order to get his case before the
American people and to try to arouse both the public and Congress to the
magnitude of the United States' stakes in the region and what he called the
''minimal'' cost of defending the nation's southern flank.

The drama of his appearance before Congress parallels the urgency of the current
diplomatic mission of Secretary of State George P.  Shultz, who has flown to the
Middle East to try to rescue the Administration's peace initiative and long
campaign to free Lebanon of foreign forces.

For, as several officials acknowledged, the President and Secretary Shultz felt
the need to put their personal prestige on the line in unusual ventures because
the Administration found itself on the political and diplomatic defensive in
both Central America and the Middle East.

Little Change in Policy

The President offered Congress and the people of the United States little of
substance that differed from the policy outlined in his last major speech about
Central America on March 10, when he called for a significant step-up of
American economic and military aid to El Salvador.

Tonight Mr. Reagan offered conciliatory gestures and language to his
Congressional critics. But he offered no real shift on the substance of policy,
and in the first official Democratic response, from Senator Christopher J. Dodd
of Connecticut, he won no indication of new support.

As before Senator Dodd called for a negotiated political settlement in El
Salvador, and if his response is a harbinger of Democratic sentiment Mr.
Reagan's appeal tonight fell short of its objectives.

Another indication of the political difficulties the President faces came in his
inability tonight to name a special envoy to work with governments in Central
America in the cause of peace. Senate Republican sources said Democrats objected
to the President's preferred choice, former Senator Richard B. Stone of Florida,
a conservative Democrat.

'Resignation' and 'Defeatism'

That reaction illustrated the risk that President Reagan took tonight. For,
Administration officials said in advance, they hoped his speech would stir the
nation out of what the President called a mood of ''passivity, resignation,
defeatism'' on Central America to rally behind him and stop what he termed ''the
fire that is burning in our own front yard.''

The White House hoped for quick Congressional support for the President's aid
request to show the United States' will to Salvadoran insurgents and increase
the pressure on them to join in elections later this year. The President himself
starkly set out the stakes:

''I say to you tonight there can be no question: the national security of all
the Americas is at stake in Central America. If we cannot defend ourselves
there, we cannot expect to prevail elsewhere. Our credibility would collapse,
our alliances would crumble, and the safety of our homeland would be put at
jeopardy.''

As if to underscore that point, other officials cited severe military
difficulties in El Salvador. One said that at this moment the leftist guerrillas
had the military initiative, and ''if current trends were to continue we would
lose.''

But others pinned their hopes on the President's appeal tonight. If Congress now
goes along with the President's request for $136 million in military aid for El
Salvador this year and another $85 million next year, these officials said, the
surge of aid will enable Government forces to recapture the military initiative.


'Humane Democratic Systems'

Alert to public worries about another involvement like the one in Vietnam, the
President treated military aid as only one component of his program. He
described it as ''a shield'' for democratic reforms, economic development and
the establishment of ''humane democratic systems'' that he called the primary
American objective.

Although his appearance before a joint session of Congress was intended to be
dramatic, his words were intentionally undramatic and low-key. Matter of factly,
he said he had come before the nation not to proclaim a crisis but to prevent
one, and he avoided the sharp polemics he used recently against the Soviet
Union.

Deliberately returning to the bipartisan tone of his State of the Union Address
in January, he cited only two politicians, both Democrats, to bolster his
argument that his Central American policy followed a bipartisan line from
President Truman's post-World War II aid to Greece and Turkey to President
Carter's original aid to El Salvador in 1980.

''This is not just an appeal for bipartisanship,'' one White House official
contended. ''This is the substance of bipartisanship.'' Nonetheless, Mr. Reagan
rejected Democratic pressures for a negotiated political settlement in El
Salvador, and denied Congressional charges that covert American aid in Nicaragua
was intended to overthrow the Sandanist Government.

His firmness prompted a sharp partisan rejoinder from Senator Dodd. Unmoved by
the President's appeal, he renewed calls for a negotiated settlement in El
Salvador and immediate cease-fires there and in Nicaragua.

''With the ante going up, with no end in sight, with no hope for any real
change, the time has come for a different approach,'' the Senator declared,
reasserting the very deadlock that brought President Reagan before Congress
tonight.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
CAN IT WORK?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, April 27


The United States has spent hundreds of millions of dollars on military aid to
El Salvador. The Government's security forces now total more than 30,000 men.
Yet they are hard-pressed to oppose an estimated 5,000 guerrillas, and U.S.
officials speak of grave danger that the war will be lost.

Why? That is the question that hangs over President Reagan's call for a deeper
U.S. commitment in El Salvador. Why hasn't the effort produced a military
solution so far? Why should it do better from here on? And if it does not work,
what follows?

Numerous American military experts have visited El Salvador and found faults in
the organization and tactics of the Government forces. They are a 9-to-5 army,
it is said, with many indolent or corrupt officers. The soldiers are often
unwillingly pressed into service, and care so little about winning this war that
they sell arms and ammunition to the guerrillas.

But the problem is obviously deeper than poor officers or undisciplined men. It
goes to the attitudes of the Salvadoran public. Many people simply do not
identify with the Government's cause: do not see it as their own. And that is
not so hard to understand, given the facts of life - and death.

El Salvador has about the same population and area as Massachusetts: something
over five million people in 8,260 square miles. In the last three and a half
years, in that small country, Government security forces have killed more than
35,000 civilians. An additional 2,000 have ''disappeared'' after being taken
into custody by the security forces. And not one member of the forces has been
successfully prosecuted.

The figures come from offices established by the Catholic Archdiocese in San
Salvador to keep track of the violence. Its Office of Legal Oversight tallied
these ''murders of civilian noncombatants by security forces'' during the first
three months of 1983:

January - 430 February - 537 March - 329

The same office records murders of civilians by the guerrilla forces. It found 7
in January of this year, 13 in February, 6 in March.

Those of us who live safely under authority restrained by law must find it hard
to imagine life in such conditions. At the barest minimum people want some
expectation of security -of life - from their government. How can a regime whose
armed forces kill 100 of its citizens week after week expect attachment to its
cause? How can it win a war, whatever aid it gets?

The questions I raise here are practical ones. I have no illusion that the
guerrilla forces and their leaders are all noble democrats, believers in
government under law. But they evidently are powerfully motivated: by a desire
to change a society long marked by brutality and exploitation. What U.S. policy
will marshal a successful opposition to them?

One possibility would be to change the character of the Salvadoran Government
and its forces so that people would identify with them, would see in them a hope
of elementary protection. But for an external power to bring about such a
transformation is an enormously large order. What precedent is there for the
United States succeeding in such an enterprise? How much time and money would it
take?

Alternatively, the United States could take over the war. Public feeling against
any dispatch of U.S. combat forces to El Salvador is so great that it is hard to
see how any President could send them.  But the more President Reagan talks
about the threat to U.S.  national security in Central America, and the more
palpable are the problems of the Salvadoran forces, the more his logic points to
U.S.  military involvement.

The President takes a moral view of the conflict in El Salvador, seeing a United
States responsibility to stop Communism in this hemisphere. Otherwise, he told
the joint session of Congress, ''the safety of our homeland would be put at
jeopardy.'' What is not so clear is the how, the practical means to the end in
El Salvador.

Leslie H. Gelb of The New York Times explored our Salvador policy in an
important recent article based on extensive talks with Administration officials.
They said it would take two to seven years before a big U.S. effort started to
produce results. But they did not have answers to such practical questions as
these: Will Congress wait that long for progress on Salvadoran ''death squads''?
Will it keep voting money for a war of indefinite duration? If all else fails,
will the Administration advocate sending U.S. forces?

Vietnam is the shadow over El Salvador, for all the differences in the two
countries. We got into Vietnam originally, I believe, for honest reasons of
opposing a Communist takeover. But we did not weigh the practicalities, and our
intervention ended by doing terrible injury to the Vietnamese and ourselves.
Commitments made without reckoning the consequences are neither moral nor wise.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRINT AND TV JOURNALISTS GIVE EACH OTHER ADVICE

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 841 words


Three television journalists and three of their newspaper counterparts gave each
other advice yesterday on how each would like to change what the other did.

They agreed that celebrity journalism was bad and that acknowledging errors was
good. In generally polite terms, they disagreed on how much each had to teach
the other.

The panel discussion was the final session of the 97th annual convention of the
American Newspaper Publishers Association, which drew a record number of
registrants, 2,888, to its three days of meetings at in the Waldorf-Astoria
Hotel. At noon, the publishers, their spouses and their guests jammed the grand
ballroom to applaud a short address by President Reagan.

The panelists were Barbara Walters of ABC, John Chancellor of NBC, Dan Rather of
CBS, A.M. Rosenthal, the executive editor of The New York Times, Eugene C.
Patterson, editor of The St. Petersburg (Fla.) Times, and Peter M. Macdonald,
the head of a group of 11 Kansas newspapers.

Limits of Television

The television journalists acknowledged that their medium was not effective in
covering complicated subjects.  ''I don't know what we would have done if we had
been offered the Pentagon Papers,'' said Mr. Chancellor, referring to the secret
study of the Vietnam War that was published by The New York Times and other
newspapers.

Mr. Rosenthal said good newspapers gave readers ''a full menu'' while most
television offered only ''snacks.'' But, he said, ''the unhappy secret of the
newspaper business'' is that many American newspapers are losing to television
by refusing to hire enough staff members or to provide enough space for the
enormous volume of local, national and international articles they had
available.

Mr. Chancellor said that most newspaper readers knew the day's major news from
watching television and that the newspapers should tailor their coverage on that
assumption. But Mr. Rosenthal said that unless newspapers maintained their own
values and techniques, they would lose ''the continuity which is the essence of
history.''

Broader TV Coverage Noted

The panelists agreed that the documentaries, weekend talk shows and new late
night programs had deepened and broadened television coverage. But the print
panelists said more was needed, particularly more time for the evening news.

''Quit tinkering with existing formats,'' Mr. Patterson said. ''You have to
explain the bewildering world we live in as well as report the headlines.''

Miss Walters said the celebrity of television broadcasters was unavoidable
because ''you can't go on television and not be recognized.'' But Mr. Chancellor
said the celebrity was not a function of the medium but of the newspaper and
magazine writers who focused on the personalities rather than the content of
news shows.

Mr. Patterson said readers had written him to say they wanted to see ''more of
the news and less of the newscaster.'' He noted that one letter writer had
noted, ''I know that a picture is worth 1,000 words, but why am I looking at a
picture of a newscaster reading 1,000 words?''

Mr. Rather said he told young reporters ''you should care about your reputation
but not about your image.'' He said he was worried by a new generation of
broadcasters who had not been throughly trained by working for newspapers and
who often failed to read any daily newspaper.

A Word for 'Middle America'

Mr. Macdonald said the networks often overlooked the concerns of middle America
and said they should keep correspondents in smaller cities to assure coverage of
those concerns.

Mr. Rosenthal talked about The Times's recently adopted feature ''Editor's
Note,'' which deals with what the editors consider to be errors of substance,
tone and interpretation in articles, headlines or pictures. He said he had
started it because simply correcting factual errors, as The Times and most
newspapers do, often did not deal with more substantial mistakes of judgment
about fairness or display.

Mr. Chancellor called the new policy ''an interesting religious practice,''
adding quickly, however, that he hoped television would do the same thing to
show viewers ''that we care about them and don't want to mislead them.''

The panel session was the among the best attended of the ''working'' functions
during the convention, with a standing-room only crowd overflowing the Empire
Room. Afterward several publishers approached the television journalists to get
their autographs.

In the morning the publishers were criticized for assertedly not making strong
efforts to hire more black, Hispanic and other minority employees. Nancy Hicks,
president of the Institute for Journalism Education at the University of
California in Berkeley, said the recession had ''slowed the aleady snail-like
pace'' of such hiring and asked the A.N.P.A. to create a special program to deal
with the issue.

William C. Marcil, the president of the publishers' association, said that it
was ''a legitimate concern of the industry'' and that the board of directors
would study the request.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, IN NEW YORK, DEFENDS CURBS ON DISCLOSURES

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section B; Page 19, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


President Reagan, contending that some news articles based on unauthorized
disclosures of Government information had endangered American relations with a
foreign country, yesterday defended his attempts to restrict the flow of some
information to the news media.

''We're not trying to hide anything that shouldn't be hidden,'' Mr. Reagan said
in remarks at the convention of the American Newspaper Publishers Association in
Manhattan. He offered no specific examples of articles that had endangered
American relations abroad.

''I really am pretty upset about leakers,'' Mr. Reagan said in defending his
Administration's policy. The White House has suggested legislation that would
impose jail sentences on Government employees and former employees who disclose
secret information without permission, and would require Government workers to
submit to polygraph tests to prove their innocence.

Questions About Disclosures

Fielding questions at a luncheon appearance at the publishers' convention, Mr.
Reagan was asked whether his Administration had been so unnerved by unauthorized
disclosures that it was attempting to increase the volume of information
classified as secret for ''political convenience.''

He replied that, on the contrary, the White House was ''working to reduce
unnecessary classification,'' but that his freedom to settle sensitive policy
questions was compromised by premature and inaccurate disclosures.

''With regard to national security, we're not doing anything that I think
unfairly imposes a restriction on the right of the people to know,'' Mr. Reagan
said in his speech in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria.

In response to other questions, he defended the behavior of Interior Secretary
James G. Watt, saying his record was strong but had been distorted.

''Maybe sometimes he asked for it by careless remarks or something,'' Mr. Reagan
said. But, he added, ''I don't know of anyone in that department who has done a
better job.''

Beach Boys Flap Recalled

''On the musical side, Nancy had to tell me that the Beach Boys weren't a rock
group,'' he continued, drawing laughter with his allusion to Mr. Watt's abortive
attempt to dictate the kind of musical groups that could perform at the Fourth
of July celebration on the Capitol Mall.

Asked what criticism he might have about the performance of Paul A. Volcker as
chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Mr. Reagan replied, ''Not a thing.'' He
said he was surprised by articles, clearly based on remarks to reporters by his
own aides, speculating that he was not likely to reappoint Mr. Volcker in
August. ''There has been no consideration or talk of any kind about that,'' Mr.
Reagan said.

Mr. Reagan was well received by the publishers. Even when defending his
information policy from the news executives' skepticism, he was applauded when
he told how he preferred to keep option papers private so he could maintain a
''board of directors'' approach to decision making.

''The only difference being, we do not take a vote,'' he said of his prerogative
as President. The publishers laughed approvingly.

Large Crowds Turn Out

Sizable crowds waved at Mr. Reagan as his motorcade moved through the city.
Outside the hotel, a group of demonstrators chanted, ''No Vietnam War in El
Salvador.''

Mr. Reagan gently hinted that the publishers might do more to cover the economic
recovery. Citing a list of positive data, he said the recovery was so clear
that, ''pretty soon they won't be calling it Reaganomics any more.''

In response to a question about the estimate of large Federal deficits in the
$200 billion range for the next five years, Mr.  Reagan said it was important to
note that his budget plan projected deficits on a ''downward path.'' Private
savings are being stimulated by the recovery, he said, and so interest rates
will not rise drastically again because ''the Government is not going to be
hogging all the private capital that is available.''

Mr. Reagan's earnest, smiling defense of his information policy was in contrast
to the appearance Monday by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New
York. He had warned the publishers that a ''truly menacing atmosphere'' now
threatened First Amendment freedoms because of attempts by the Reagan
Administration to restrict the outward flow of Government information.

In response, Mr. Reagan said yesterday, ''the law provides'' for prison terms of
up to three years for anyone who releases secret information without authority.
The White House later corrected this to note that it was only a proposed penalty
and not yet law.

Before arriving at the convention, Mr. Reagan visited the Manhattan South police
precinct to honor some of the New Yorkers who have resisted criminals and
received awards in the crime fighters campaign sponsored by The Daily News.

Mr. Reagan later recounted heroic tales of hand-to-hand street combat by a
grandmother who grabbed a robber by his scarf, and by a rabbi who resisted a
machete-wielding mugger. ''You looked and you said, 'This is just Americana,' ''
Mr. Reagan told the publishers with a genial bob of his head. ''There must be
something right about this society of ours.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of police officer checking area of Presidents
arrival

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOW TV HIT 'THE A TEAM' WAS BORN

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 780 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


One weekend afternoon last summer, Brandon Tartikoff, president of NBC
Entertainment, watched a videodisk of the film ''The Dirty Dozen.'' That
evening, he went to the movies and saw ''The Road Warrior.''

The next morning, Mr. Tartikoff recalled in a recent interview at the Beverly
Hills Hotel: ''I said there's gotta be a way to combine the two for
television.'' On a piece of paper, Mr. Tartikoff wrote: '' 'The A Team: The
Dirty Dozen,' 'The Magnificent Seven,' 'The Road Warrior,' 'Mission Impossible.'
The people you go to to do something when no one else can, using the off-center
characters people respond to on 'Hill Street Blues.' ''

Thus began ''The A Team,'' the hottest television show of the year and the only
runaway hit, out of 45 new series that have appeared in prime time so far this
season. Last week the show achieved its highest rating ever, when it ranked
third out of 73 shows in the weekly ratings, with 34 percent of the audience. At
the same time, the show has earned top billing on the list of the most violent
shows on television compiled by the National Coalition on Television Violence.
According to the coalition, ''The A Team'' has 39 violent acts an hour, more
than last year's most violent show, ''The Fall Guy'' on ABC-TV.

'Get the Blood Pumping'

Appearing on Tuesdays at 8 P.M. since mid-January, ''The A Team'' features the
adventures of a group of vigilantes, outlaw Vietnam veterans who punch, shoot,
connive and crash their way toward defeating an array of villains. It stars
George Peppard as the smooth-talking leader of the gang, John (Hannibal) Smith.
Mr. T, a muscular, jewel-bedecked boxer who appeared in ''Rocky III,'' stars as
B.A. (for Bad Attitude) Baracus, the enforcer and mechanical wizard.

Even NBC executives acknowedge that ''The A Team'' is not high quality
television. ''I am not going to sit here and say I am very proud of 'The A
Team,' '' said Mr. Tartikoff. ''We are not looking for Emmy Award nominations,
but to get the blood pumping at the network. In that, 'The A Team' has exceeded
my expectations.''

For NBC, which trailed ABC and CBS in the prime-time ratings once again this
season, ''The A Team'' thus signals a tilt in NBC's programming strategy away
from the more high-toned fare exemplified by ''Taxi,'' ''Hill Street Blues'' and
''Cheers'' and toward ''high-concept'' shows, those programs whose one-sentence
summary can elicit excitement in viewers polled by the network's researchers.

Network executives and producers alike also expect the success of ''The A Team''
to stimulate an increase in offbeat crime-fighting shows on all three networks
next fall. ABC has already tried two versions this spring: ''High Performance,''
about specialists in such skills as precision driving, surveillance and the
martial arts, and ''The Renegades,'' about a Guardian Angels-style group of
teen-agers.

Other Action Shows Failed

With its cartoon characters, screeching cars and goofy jokes, ''The A Team'' has
gathered a large following of teen-agers and children aged 6 to 11. It also
attracts more male viewers than female viewers. Overall, however, ''it has much
broader appeal than we thought it would,'' said Jerry Jaffe, vice president of
research projects at NBC.

Why did ''The A Team'' hit so quickly when other action shows introduced this
season such as ''Tales of the Gold Monkey'' and ''Bring 'Em Back Alive'' fail to
catch on? No one in television knows the precise answer, but everyone seems to
have a theory. One reason may be that its competitors, ''Walt Disney'' on CBS
and ''Happy Days'' and ''Laverne and Shirley'' on ABC have been on the air for a
number of years.

Other reasons can be found within ''The A Team'' itself. ''These are crazy
times,'' said Mr. Tartikoff. ''These are underdogs, outcasts of society at a
time when there are a lot of disenfranchised people. The show is escapist and
fun to watch.''

Stephen Cannell, the executive producer of ''The A Team,'' cited the bizarre
personalities of the show's characters as the main ingredient for success. ''The
show isn't working because we are flipping jeeps over, but people are getting a
kick out of the characters, who have specific things that make them funny,''
said Mr. Cannell, whose faded work shirt and jeans contrast sharply with the
opulence of his wood-paneled suite of offices, once occupied by Howard Hughes,
at Paramount Pictures.

The most appealing character of all is Mr. T, television officials say. The
reason, said Mr. Cannell, is: ''He is supposed to be angry.  He doesn't like
anybody, but he can project a warmth. He glowers but he has a great smile. He is
a wonderful television star.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mr. T

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Issue Is Salvador, Not the Alamo

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 594 words


The notable thing about President Reagan's latest rendering of policy in Central
America was its extraordinary definition of the stakes and its skimpy account of
the realities. Mr. Reagan gave a dozen inflated reasons for defending the
isthmus, yet said almost nothing about the practical problems involved or how he
proposes to solve them.

If $1 billion a year, even for a decade, can improve the lot of Central
Americans and keep any more of their countries out of the Soviet bloc, we say by
all means try it. But if that's what the President was urging, why not just say
it? His underlying instinct may be reasonable. Overstating commitments while
minimizing the costs is not.

Washington's political dilemma in Central America has been plain.  With Cuba and
probably Nicaragua lost to the Soviet bloc, any President will do his utmost to
prevent the loss of another country.  Yet after Vietnam, every Congress will
fear pouring lives and billions into a new quagmire. Both branches respond to
the same electorate; we are schizoid in these matters. What, then, is the
obligation of leadership?

To teach.  To teach that Central America is neither the Sudetenland nor South
Vietnam: neither the place to draw rigid lines against big-power aggression nor
the certain graveyard of good intentions . . . that our concern for who rules
those backward nations arises naturally, from history and geography . . . that
direct intrusions of Soviet power can be met directly, and by other means, but
that Marxist-Leninists who would serve Soviet purposes are nonetheless unwelcome
and worth resisting.

These are legitimate, important interests. They justify exertion.  They do not
justify open-ended commitments. They argue for a patient, enduring effort, with
goals and restraints accepted by both branches.

Mr. Reagan acknowledged this American reality only when he emphasized that no
one is thinking of sending American combat troops. But if the stakes are as he
says, why on earth not? He began by defining them as the Panama Canal and vital
wartime shipping lanes, went on to talk of the ''national security of all the
Americas'' and concluded with this sweeping peroration: ''If we cannot defend
ourselves there, we cannot expect to prevail elsewhere. Our credibility would
collapse, our alliances would crumble and the safety of our homeland would be
put at jeopardy.''

And what, really, was the impulse for this extravagant rhetoric? If you believe
Mr. Reagan's spokesmen, as we do, it was to spur Congress to add $50 million
more in military aid for El Salvador and to enlarge America's corps of military
advisers there from 55 to maybe 150. That stands Teddy Roosevelt on his head:
speaking loudly, on behalf of a very small stick.

Mr. Reagan would have been wiser to teach, like his Ambassador in San Salvador,
Deane Hinton. He argues for more aid in a very different tone. The chances for
democracy and land reform and a professional, civilized army are far from lost,
he says; the deadlock between Government and guerrillas can be slowly broken,
but ''you're going to have to somehow keep democracy and the economy going here
for 10 years'' and aim for a ''generational change.''

Such aims, if openly pursued and candidly monitored, would deserve support. It
would give hope to Central Americans who depend on our staying power and
discourage enemies who bet against it. It would pierce the arrogance of
reactionaries who long misgoverned Central America and now pine for the Marines.
Above all, it would match affordable means to defensible ends.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Oil On The Fire

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 28


President Reagan is right in saying that spreading revolutionary war in Central
America is a ''fire in our front yard.'' It's a bit of relief, too, that for
once an American leader doesn't relegate our Southern neighbors to a ramshackle
''backyard.''

But he is pouring oil on the fire. Increased militarization, increased United
States activism can only aggravate disputes in a region where the United States
is part of the problem but not of the solution, by the definitions of history
and geography.

Despite many important differences, it is accurate to compare El Salvador to
Vietnam, Central America to Indochina, in the sense that Washington's policy has
no positive goal. That ''light at the end of the tunnel'' that President Johnson
claimed to glimpse is no more than a vague hope that things won't get much
worse, in no way a prospect or a plan to find a settlement.

Mr. Reagan himself only offers making the situation ''manageable,'' whatever
that means. It isn't even clear whether the United States or the local
governments are expected to do the managing.

Things may not yet have reached the point in El Salvador that Henry Kissinger
described in a clear-minded article on Vietnam written shortly before he met
Richard Nixon in 1968 and set off for the White House.

By then, Mr. Kissinger said, the guerrillas could count on winning if they
managed not to lose, while Saigon could count on losing if it failed to win
overwhelmingly. He was right, and he knew there was no chance of winning because
the United States was planning to withdraw.

Nonetheless, the Nixon Administration stepped up the war in Laos and Cambodia so
that when the end came, Hanoi won not only South Vietnam but all of Indochina.
The extremists on both sides had reached dominance, as they always do when
violence is the master of decision.

It probably still isn't that late in Central America, but that is the direction
President Reagan's policy is going. There are still moderates in the coalitions
of both left and right. In Salvador they have more in common with each other
than with extreme allies, and so do the extremists have a common interest in
repressing moderates. The real challenge to policy is to hive off the ultras on
both sides so that those who want reconciliation and the great bulk of the
people who want out of the crossfire can have a chance.

There are two reasons why the United States is not in a position to do this. The
main one is the historic weight of the North American colossus on a socially
divided, deeply troubled continent. The New York Times's correspondent Alan
Riding gave it brilliant illumination in a recent Sunday magazine article on
Latin American intellectuals.

He quotes the Mexican writer Carlos Fuentes, who lives in the United States,
saying: ''The day the United States stops attacking Cuba, it will no longer be
possible for Cuba to mobilize intellectual opinion in the region. All Latin
Americans have felt they must keep silent so as not to help imperialism.''

The Argentine novelist Julio Cortazar explains why he is reluctant to voice his
own doubts about the Cuban model, and its proteges. ''A confidential,
unpublished criticism can be useful, while if you make it public, you can be
giving weapons to the enemy.'' And it is the intellectuals who shape the
political strivings of Latin America.

The second reason the United States is badly placed to lead the effort against
extremists is the little-known but intense collusion that goes on between
hard-line rightists in the United States and to the south. There is constant
going and coming, with former U.S.  officers, some politicians and some
officials blatantly encouraging Latin rightists not to believe what Washington
says about human rights and moderation. That is only for public consumption,
they explain, promising that Congressional threats to withdraw support can be
averted by pressure and subterfuge.

At times these hidden intrigues reach a level that seems a clear breach of the
Logan Act, which makes private subversion of U.S.  foreign policy a crime. But
the people involved have never been denounced. It would help Mr. Reagan's
credibility if his Administration, which knows about them, were to expose them.

The most effective way to promote a serious effort for reconciliation in the
torn countries, however, is to let friendly Latin American governments take the
lead. Mexico, Panama, Colombia and Venezuela, already involved, have at least as
much at stake in preventing Communist control of the region and growth of Soviet
influence as does the United States. And they know more about the politics and
personalities.

The U.S. should actively but quietly support their efforts and take a
deliberately back-seat, low-profile role, so as not to taint and destroy the
very people on whom a chance for political settlement depends.

To avoid the all-or-nothing quagmire of Vietnam, the answer cannot be more
United States intervention. But neither can it be United States indifference.
The risks are real. Our interest is to stop fueling the flames and help regional
firefighters take over.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
WEIGHING THE THREAT

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


The man who led the opposition to returning the Panama Canal Zone to the people
of Panama has now urged other Americans to recognize the importance of Central
America and to accept the ''moral responsibility'' of supporting the
independence and freedom of its peoples.

If Ronald Reagan's position on the Canal treaties had prevailed, Panama might
well be added today to the list of Central American nations torn by strife and
insurgency, and the United States' position in the Caribbean and Latin America
would be far less favorable than it is.

Mr. Reagan's concern, therefore, seems to be less for the rights of campesinos
or for territorial integrity than for the Marxist threat to the security of the
United States that he has suddenly discerned in El Salvador and Nicaragua. But
this was not the only contradiction or confusion in his speech on the subject to
a joint session of Congress.

He suggested, for example, that ''democracy is beginning to take root'' in El
Salvador, citing last year's elections and the beginning of a land reform
program. But he devoted only one sentence to El Salvador's ''major problems
regarding human rights, the criminal justice system and the violence against
noncombatants.'' Other competent observers see these as primary reasons why the
Government has been unable to establish control of the countryside.

Ambassador Deane R. Hinton, on the day before Mr. Reagan's speech, told The
Washington Post that putting an end to the human rights abuses of the Salvadoran
military is ''a question, in my view, of years,'' perhaps a decade, until
''generational change'' makes over the officer corps.

As for last year's elections, Mr. Hinton acknowledged that only the influence of
the military had caused the elected assembly to reject the right-wing leader,
Roberto D'Aubuisson, and to choose the centrist Alvaro Magana as president. The
military forced the choice of Mr. Magana only because the United States
threatened to cut off aid if they did not.

The rooting of democracy in El Salvador does not seem, therefore, quite as
certain as Mr. Reagan pictured it; but on good authority, the violence and human
rights abuses he barely mentioned seem likely to continue for some time. Nor did
he have much to say, or any new proposals, on the subjects of poverty and
injustice - without which, as Senator Dodd pointed out in the Democrats'
response, ''There would be nothing for the Soviets to exploit'' in Central
America.

Turning to Nicaragua, Mr. Reagan presented what sounded like nothing so much as
a bill of particulars for a declaration of war.  But instead of asking for such
a declaration, he conceded that the United States was waging covert war against
Nicaragua to ''prevent the flow of arms'' to El Salvador and to stop ''the
export of subversion and violence.''

Whatever Nicaragua's sins, such a covert war is in violation of international
law and regional agreements -perhaps also of U.S. law.  And wherever the
Salvadoran insurgents get their arms - Drew Middleton, The New York Times's
military correspondent, recently wrote from El Salvador that they capture most
of them from Government forces - a covert war in Nicaragua is not likely to put
an end to a civil war in El Salvador.

Mr. Reagan also permitted himself some devious polemical flourishes, to wit:
''Must we accept the destabilization of an entire region from the Panama Canal
to Mexico on our Southern border?  ''Must we sit by while independent nations of
this hemisphere are integrated into the most aggressive empire the modern world
has ever seen?''

Of course not. But Americans who are just beginning to focus on Central America
should be advised that these are not clear and present dangers; they are Mr.
Reagan's nightmares. Increased military aid may not be the only or the best way
to stop them from coming true.

The deepest contradiction in the President's televised address, however, arose
from his declaration that ''there is no thought of sending American combat
troops to Central America.'' If ''the national security of all the Americas,''
including the United States, is ''at stake in Central America,'' if ''we cannot
expect to prevail elsewhere'' if we're unable to ''defend ourselves'' in Central
America, if failure to keep that region from falling to Communism would destroy
United States credibility and threaten United States alliances including NATO,
then how can Mr. Reagan pledge not to send troops to fight in Central America?

That's the Vietnam trap all over again. If the nation's vital interests are so
deeply threatened, no responsible President can rely on a weak and uncertain
ally to defend them, or exclude the use of U.S. forces in extremity. In weighing
the true gravity of the threat in Central America, Congress must not lose sight
of that truth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 30, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OUTLOOK IN THE ARMY BRIGHTENS WITH SOME PROBLEMS RESOLVED

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words

DATELINE: FORT HOOD, Tex.


Command Sgt. Maj. Ronald J. Hammer, the top noncommissioned officer at this
sprawling Army post, leaned across his desk and said, ''I'm telling you, we are
so damn much better today than we were a year ago.''

In his small, wood-paneled office lined with the pictures, plaques and mementoes
of 33 years in the Army, Sergeant Major Hammer continued, ''We're better because
we've eliminated so many problems that sucked up so much of the time before.''

Eliminating problems, he said, meant bringing into the Army new soldiers ''with
the ability and the willingness to perform,'' training and keeping good young
sergeants, and getting rid of soldiers or sergeants who could not or would not
measure up.

Sergeants are the backbone of the Army's training effort. They take the rookies
under tow and work with them through basic training and training in skills. In
recent years, not only has the quality of recruits been under question, but also
that of the sergeants.

Quality of Recruits Up

The latest recruiting reports show that 90 percent of the young men and women
enlisting today are high school graduates, the highest percentage since World
War II and far above the 50 percent of 10 years ago when the draft ended. Over
the years, the Army has found such graduates the easiest to train and motivate.

Until this month, the Army has been short of sergeants and skilled technicians.
The shortage was about 17,000 in 1979 but has dropped steadily since then and
was down to 500 last month. With the April promotions, that has ended, according
to an Army spokesman.

In addition, the Army has gone through what Lieut. Gen. Maxwell R.  Thurman, the
Army's chief personnel officer in Washington, has called a ''purge.'' Since last
April, about 17,000 soldiers have been denied re-enlistment or given
''expeditious discharges'' because they did not meet standards.

Thus, said Lieut. Gen. Walter F. Ulmer Jr., the Third Corps commander here, for
the first time since the end of the draft, the Army has become a truly volunteer
force. ''There are few soldiers remaining in the Army today who really don't
want to be here,'' he said.

New Mood in Ranks

That seems to have contributed to a new mood that is evident here.  A battalion
commander, Lieut. Col. Richard P. Dacey, perhaps put it best: ''We've stopped
apologizing to ourselves for Vietnam. It's more of an Army looking to the future
than looking to the past.''

After the end of the war in Vietnam and the draft in 1973, the Army had trouble
recruiting and keeping competent personnel.  Consequently, the service lowered
its standards to take in many unschooled and poorly motivated young men and
women. The Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward S. Meyer, called it a ''hollow army.''

At this most populous of Army posts, where 38,000 soldiers and the First Cavalry
and Second Armored Divisions are stationed, officers and sergeants alike
asserted that the hollow army was filling up.  ''We're moving in the right
direction,'' General Ulmer said.

But in the next breath, he added, ''We're not there yet.'' Among the remaining
problems is that some of the younger sergeants, who were recruits in the late
1970's when less qualified people enlisted, were promoted because there was no
one else to promote.

As heads of small fire teams and squads, those sergeants have not shown the
leadership the older soldiers demand. ''We probably haven't gotten rid of all
the bad ones hiding in the woodwork,'' Sergeant Major Hammer said, ''but they
show up faster than they did before.''

Reasons for Enlisting Change

In the Army, sergeants major, each with more than 20 years of soldiering, know
more than anyone else about what really goes on and take pride in telling it the
way they see it. They, and first sergeants at the next rank down, run the Army,
say generals and privates alike.

The sergeant major of an artillery battalion, Malachi Mitchel, said he had asked
2,000 soldiers over the last two years why each had joined the Army. He ticked
off several reasons: because they want to learn a skill or save money for
college, because they cannot get civilian jobs, and because pay is roughly
comparable to that outside.

''One thing you don't hear is that old standard: I came in the Army to keep from
going to jail,'' he said.  An armored battalion sergeant major, Lawrence J.
Holley, said: ''Five years ago, a soldier was someone who couldn't make it on
the outside. But that trend is reversing now. These guys are trainable.''

Sergeant Major Holley said his battalion recently took in 27 new soldiers from
Fort Knox, Ky., the armored force training center. Of those, 26 were high school
graduates and the other had an 11th-grade education and was eager to finish high
school while in the Army.

Over Quota on Recruits

The Army does not lack for recruits these days. In the fiscal year 1982, which
ended Sept. 30, the Army enlisted 104 percent of its quota. So far this year,
the Army has already signed up 125,000 of the 141,000 men and women it will need
by Sept. 30.

In the eyes of officers and sergeants alike, the Army is attracting a better
than average young person. On the battery of entry tests, 64 percent score above
the norm. In the nation's youth population, only 53 percent do as well.

To lead those soldiers, the Army has begun a program that senior sergeants here
call ''power down,'' which is intended to return to them the authority they lost
in those years after the war in Vietnam.

''We are getting our credibility back,'' said Sgt. Maj. E.L. Byrum, who heads
the Noncommissioned Officer Academy here. He has two tasks, to train those
sergeants who got promoted when recruiting was below standard and to teach new
soldiers how to be sergeants when their time for promotion comes. Both must
attend what had been an optional school until recently. They get four weeks of
what he called ''how to'' instruction: How to talk to people, to manage time, to
drill troops, to teach the use of weapons, to inspect.

'He Can Take It'

The sergeant major said that when his students begin, ''they're not sure of
themselves, they don't know how to take action, they don't know how to correct a
soldier.''

''When he goes back to the unit,'' he said of the sergeants, ''he can take it
whether it comes from up above or down below.'' The Army has also given new
authority to battalion commanders, the lieutenant colonels who lead units of 600
to 800 men. The battalion commanders have been authorized to promote lower
ranking soldiers, to award a medal and to dismiss unqualified soldiers. The
authority to dismiss soldiers with less than six years' service or to deny
reenlistment at the end of three years has shaken soldiers who had been sliding
by.

Lieut. Col. Robert L. Friedrich said that recently two soldiers who had been
repeat offenders stood before him as he informed them of their latest
punishment. Then he said: ''Gentlemen, you are out of the Army.''

The effect was electric, because ''the soldiers were not seeing the yardbirds
getting away with things anymore,'' he said.  ''Three times soldiers have
stopped me to say they were glad the goof-offs were out of the Army,'' he added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ronald Hammer photo of Lawrence Holley photo of
E.L. Byrum

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 30, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DECISION IN CBS CASE RAISED NEW PRESS CONCERNS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words


A new area of legal, practical and philosophic concern for journalists has been
opened by a Federal court decision compelling CBS News to publicly disclose how
it investigated itself and its controversial documentary about Gen.

William C. Westmoreland and enemy forces in Vietnam.  As a matter of
journalistic principle, news organizations say that they have to be able to take
a look back at their own work when questions arise so that they can correct
mistakes. They say employees will not be candid about their failures if they
know those admissions might later be publicized.

Legally, they worry that the existence and availability of such internal
investigative reports will encourage libel suits by plaintiffs who think they
can use the reports to flesh out their cases. They say efforts to be honest with
themselves and the public could be subverted unless the post-publication
investigations are given the same constitutional protection that now shields
their work before and during publication.

On the other side of the argument are the plaintiffs, subjects of news coverage,
who see little difference between a news organization and any other business
that does not want to admit its mistakes. They say it is inconsistent for news
organizations to urge openness on others while insisting on privacy for their
own decision-making processes. They also say that news organizations do not
uniformly correct their stories even when the internal inquiry suggests they
should.

Network's Rules an Issue

The Westmoreland case involves a January 1982 program, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception,'' which said that military leaders in Vietnam, anxious to
avoid creating domestic dissent, understated the number of enemy troops they
faced before the 1968 Tet offensive. General Westmoreland, the American
commander in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968, rejected the program's charge of
conspiracy.

CBS directed a senior executive producer, Burton Benjamin, to look at how the
program had been put together -after a TV Guide article said the documentary's
producer, George Crile, and its chief narrator, Mike Wallace, had violated some
of the network's rules on journalistic practices. When CBS later said it stood
behind the program, and that the Benjamin report supported that decision,
General Westmoreland sued for $120 million and demanded that he be given a copy
of the report.

A Federal judge, Pierre N. Leval, agreed that CBS had no right to keep the
report confidential since it had cited its conclusions publicly. CBS released
the 59-page document last Tuesday. It generally said what CBS said it had said,
while painting in more dramatic terms than CBS had used the instances in which
Mr. Crile apparently coached interviewees. It also clarified some of the
internal debate about the use of the word ''conspiracy.''

Ombudsman Comments

In briefs filed before Judge Leval's decision and in interviews after it,
journalists said they were not so much worried about the content of the report
as they were concerned about the principle of maintaining internal confidences
on the frequent occasions when they are investigating complaints about articles
or programs.

''I recognize the need for members of the press to be able to critique their
performance without fear that their assessments of themselves will be used
against them in a judicial proceeding,'' said William L. Green, a former
ombudsman at The Washington Post. Two years ago, Mr. Green investigated a Post
reporter, Janet Cooke, who had fabricated a story that won a Pulitzer Prize. The
Post was criticized for allowing the hoax but praised for publishing Mr.
Green's candid report.

All three networks have designated executives to investigate complaints and to
assure that their procedural codes are obeyed.  Thirty-one newspapers have
designated ombudsmen or reader representatives such as The Post's to handle
complaints, but most newspapers rely on their senior editors to examine
questions of fairness and accuracy.

Dave Lawrence Jr., the executive editor of The Detroit Free Press, said Judge
Leval's order was ''a frightening development.'' Internal investigation of
complaints is ''automatic and important,'' he said, adding that the decision
would ''inhibit our pursuit of what went wrong'' if the facts discovered by that
pursuit could later be used against the newspaper.

Because Judge Leval specifically avoided ruling on whether there was a
constitutional privilege for internal investigations, and because CBS did not
appeal the ruling, the legal issue is in limbo.

Voices of Dissent

James C. Goodale, a New York lawyer who has specialized in First Amendment,
free-press issues, noted that such investigations could generally be kept
confidential if they were performed by the news organization's lawyer or as
preparation for defending a lawsuit. But he said ''everyone is afraid of having
the newsroom overlawyered,'' and editors agreed that they wanted to retain the
final decision on whether their stories had been fair and correct.

Some of those who have fought with the press said the case could be a useful
precedent. Jonathan W. Lubell, a New York lawyer who represents Col. Anthony
Herbert in a 10-year-old landmark case against CBS, likened the Benjamin report
to Ford Motor Company's studies of safety defects in the Pinto automobile. Those
reports were finally made public, and ''I'm not sure why CBS should be treated
any differently,'' he said.

A United States Supreme Court decision in the Herbert case affirmed that libel
plaintiffs who are public figures have a right to examine reporters' notes and
files for evidence of malice, the process that General Westmoreland is pursuing
now. The Herbert case may be tried later this year.

Herbert Schmertz, a vice president of the Mobil Oil Corporation who has
frequently criticized press conduct, said the press should voluntarily disclose
its internal investigations. He said reporters were often unfair and
irresponsible because ''they know they are not going to be exposed.''

Increase of Caution Seen

News organizations worry about the recent substantial increase in the number of
libel cases filed and the large awards juries have made. And they say that
plaintiffs will be newly tempted to sue, believing that they can subpoena the
spadework that has already been done by the editors.

Mr. Schmertz, however, said the number of libel cases would diminish because the
Westmoreland decision and other rulings that have gone against media defendants
create a more careful, selfanalytic press that is less likely to libel
individuals in the first place. The news organizations say the public will be
the losers because the press will not be more careful, merely more cautious and
less willing to pursue controversial issues if the end of the road is the
courtroom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nakasone Starts Tour Of 5 East Asian Lands

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, April 30


Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone left here today on a 10-day, 5-nation tour of
Southeast Asia during which he is expected to shore up confidence in the region
with offers of economic aid.

Officials said he would also use the trip to criticize Vietnam's attacks on
camps of refugees and guerrillas on the Thai-Cambodian border this month and to
express full support for non-Communist nations in the region.

Mr. Nakasone is to give a total of about $800 million in aid to the Philippines,
Indonesia and Thailand on a tour that is also scheduled to take him to Singapore
and Malaysia.

''Since he is doing this there is really no political issue to fight over in
this tour,'' a Foreign Ministry official said. ''All that matters to the
Southeast Asian countries is how much aid Japan can give.''

These nations negotiated hard for new aid packages in recent months after Mr.
Nakasone rushed through a $4 billion aid package for South Korea in January, the
largest single amount of aid ever granted by Japan at one time.

Japanese officials said the Government here was unable to meet all requests from
Southeast Asia, but they said Tokyo made a special effort to comply, knowing
that economic aid is considered vital by the United States, Japan's major ally.

----

JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 30 (UPI) - Prime Minister Nakasone arrived here today
on the first stop of his tour.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN WAR ISN'T OVER BUT SOVIETS SEEM TO BE WINNING

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


The snow is melting in the high passes through which refugees flee to Pakistan
and arms shipments filter in the starlight to the waiting insurgents. Around
Kabul and provincial towns, Soviet troops gas their vehicles, load heavy
ammunition and prepare for the fourth summer of the occupation campaign in
Afghanistan.

Last week marked the fifth anniversary of the bloody coup that overthrew
President Mohammad Daud and led to a Soviet puppet regime.  A balance sheet on
how well that regime has entrenched itself against insurgent opposition is
difficult but the conclusions of experts in the West appear to favor the Soviet
Union.

Generally, the military situation, in the view of experienced intelligence
analysts, does not compare with that of United States forces in Vietnam. The
insurgents still lack unity of command and training. Generations of tribal and
personal enmities remain strong.  After one recent operation in which two
insurgent groups combined, the Afghan guerrillas fired on each other as freely
as on the Russians, according to a Western source.

Soviet reports on the campaign to eliminate Afghan resistance are fragmentary
and weighted with propaganda. Insurgent claims of Russian losses often appear
grossly exaggerated. Sifting claim and counterclaim, intelligence analysts in
Washington say that Soviet casualties for the entire operation probably are
5,000 dead and 10,000 wounded. Moreover, although 200,000 Afghan rebels are
under arms, these sources doubt whether more than 10,000 are engaged against the
occupying forces at any one time.
Russians Have the Cities

The Soviet army and air force seem to have established control of the major
cities and towns and the communications network. They have also built a number
of major airfields capable of taking the most advanced jets in the country,
Mig-25's and Su-24's.

The methodical tightening of the Russian grip on the country has been hampered
but not diverted by the insurgents' operations. Last winter, for example,
Kabul's electrical system was sabotaged after the insurgents thoughtfully warned
Western diplomatic missions.  Afghanistan's puppet Prime Minister, Sultan Ali
Keshmand, announced on April 11 that half of the country's schools and hospitals
had been destroyed by guerrilla action.

Internally, the Afghan army is eroding rapidly but probably not enough to affect
the Soviet conduct of the war. According to three Afghan insurgents interviewed
recently, the army's strength is down to about 20,000 men compared with 40,000 a
year ago. These sources reported that the Russians, worried over mutiny, disarm
Afghan units at night and return the weapons in the morning.

Demographic shifts within Afghanistan in the last three years have helped the
Russians. Successive Soviet campaigns have driven the resistance and its
supporters out of some of the country's most fertile areas. These have been
replaced by workers chosen for their loyalty to the Communist regime.

Another favorable factor for Russia is the massive program for training Afghan
students - between 6,000 and 10,000 - in the Soviet Union who will replace the
often suspect administrators who now run the country under the guidance of the
K.G.B. According to a former colonel in the Ministry of Interior, 200 officers
from the Soviet security service work in that ministry and nearly 1,000 are in
the Defense Ministry.

The vigor of the resistance and unexpected losses forced a Soviet army trained
for European war to learn the techniques of counterinsurgency. In the process,
the Russians lost a large number of tanks and trucks and a smaller number of
helicopters. Today, according to the Afghans interviewed, truck convoys are
guarded by helicopter gun ships flying over the column. Raids on insurgent
positions are carried out by major forces led by 200 or more tanks and preceded
by heavy air and artillery bombardment. But what the Russians have learned about
fighting a resistance movement, a Western analyst said, ''isn't applicable
anywhere else.'' In Iran, for example, they would face much more sophisticated
forces.

Weapons captured from the Afghan army or turned in by deserters make up almost
80 percent of the insurgents' arsenal. Few weapons appear to be crossing the
frontiers. An Afghan insurgent colonel said, ''We need almost everything -
ammunition, food, clothing, medicine.''

There has been no massive Soviet reinforcement. American estimates are that
there are 105,000 soldiers and airmen in the country with an additional 30,000
stationed just north of the frontier. The Russians also have built a major
airfield in this area.

Soviet troops rotate through Afghanistan every six months.  Recently there have
been signs that more Central Asian units are moving in just as they did in the
initial invasion. The reason may be, according to a Washington view, that losses
to Uzbeks and Kazakhs create fewer ripples in their isolated communities than
the death of a young man from big cities like Moscow or Kiev.

Some defections among Central Asian troops, particularly Tadzhiks, have been
reported. Afghan sources also claim that the Russians have sent Bulgarian units
into northern Afghanistan to guard the gas fields there and that Cubans and
Vietnamese also have been identified.

Intelligence sources believe resistance at varying levels is bound to persist
but they do not believe it will be heavy enough to divert Moscow from what they
believe is its long-term solution: the absorption of Afghanistan into the Soviet
Union as a Soviet Socialist republic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Afghan resistance fighters

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHO AMONG US?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


On Nov. 3, 1969, President Nixon spoke to ''the great silent majority of my
fellow Americans'' about Vietnam. He warned that ''defeat and humiliation''
there would destroy U.S.  credibility. ''A nation cannot remain great,'' he
said, ''if it betrays its allies and lets down its friends.'' Rejecting American
withdrawal, he said we would stop the Communists by building up South Vietnamese
forces.

''It is not the easy way,'' he said. ''It is the right way. It is a plan which
will end the war and serve the cause of peace.'' President Reagan went to the
same well of rhetoric when he addressed Congress and the country on Central
America. If we did not prevail, he said, ''Our credibility would collapse, our
alliances would crumble ...'' To avoid that we must build up anti-Communist
armies in El Salvador and elsewhere.

The other thing likely to prove similar is the outcome: disaster.  For like the
Nixon approach of 1969, the Reagan formula for Central America is unrelated to
the facts on the ground. It is built on bombast and wishful thinking.

Mr. Reagan's premise is that revolution in El Salvador threatens our vital
interests. Yet to meet that threat he relies on a corrupt and brutal Salvadoran
Army that by every criterion is failing. It is not only faltering militarily; it
is further alienating the brutalized population of the country.

The idea that the Salvadoran military can fight successfully for humane values
is a travesty. The U.S. military experts who have studied the situation say it
would take years, and massive doses of aid, to get the security forces into
shape. The U.S. Ambassador, Deane Hinton, has spoken of a decade to bring about
''generational change'' in the officer corps.

Some informed observers think time is already running out. They say the
Salvadoran Government is sliding toward collapse. What then? If U.S. national
security hangs on defeating the revolution, can Mr.  Reagan really refrain from
sending combat forces? I would not bet on it.

The President, making a major speech on the subject, gave no indication that he
has a clue to the reality in El Salvador. Instead he offered demagogy: a mixture
of half-truths, Red-baiting and jingoism.

His main effort was to paint Nicaragua as the villain. The Sandinist Government,
he said, denied Catholic priests ''the right to say mass on radio during Holy
Week.'' It drove the Miskito Indians from their villages. ''It condoned mob
action against Nicaragua's independent human rights commission and drove the
director ... into exile.''

The Sandinists do indeed have human rights violations on their record. The worst
is the forced removal of the Miskitos. But what has happened in Nicaragua in the
last few years is pretty tame stuff compared to what has happened - and is still
happening - in El Salvador.

In Nicaragua, priests were unable to broadcast. In El Salvador, Archbishop
Romero was murdered at the altar. Right-wing killers are universally believed to
have shot him and four American churchwomen - and no one has been brought to
justice.

A human rights organization in Nicaragua has suffered some instances of
harassment. In El Salvador, Government soldiers have murdered two employees of
the human rights commission, and its president was killed under disputed
circumstances last month. Several other human rights workers, including one
American woman, disappeared after abduction by the security forces.

Over the last few years in Nicaragua 100 civilians have reportedly been killed
by soldiers. In El Salvador, the security forces have murdered more than 35,000
noncombatants since 1979. They are still killing about 100 a week.

Mr. Reagan's praise for El Salvador was cynical - and, worse than that,
dangerous. By proclaiming that U.S. national security depends on the Salvadoran
forces, he was in effect telling the oligarchs who control that society that
they really do not have to reform. They can say to themselves: ''We're too
important to the Reagan Administration. They'll never let us go.''

As a substitute for facts, the President offered scare politics.  ''Who among
us,'' he asked, ''would wish to bear responsibility for failing to meet our
shared obligation?'' The implication was plain: If the Democrats block U.S. arms
and covert war, they will be blamed for ''losing Central America.'' Demagogy
kept the United States in Vietnam for a long time after the facts were clear.
The 1969 Nixon speech was a success in that sense; it dampened the protesters.
But of course the ''plan'' of relying on South Vietnamese forces did not win the
war or bring peace.

The Reagan speech was successful the other night, too, arousing Republican
cheers. But I think the reckoning will come very soon. The American public is
not going to stand for deepening involvement on an unrealistic basis. It may
even be that leading Democrats, this time, will have the courage to say no.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SOUTH AFRICAN POET ON HIS IMPRISONMENT

BYLINE: By DONALD WOODS; DONALD WOODS, a journalist now living in England, is
the author of the autobiographical ''Asking for Trouble: The Education of a
White South African.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3425 words

DATELINE: PARIS


IN 1975, at the height of his literary acclaim, South Africa's leading poet in
the Afrikaans language, the 36-year-old Breyten Breytenbach, was imprisoned by
the Government of his fellow Afrikaners for clandestine activities against their
apartheid system of racial laws. Released last December and now back in his
Paris home with his wife, Yolande, Mr. Breytenbach is still numbed by his seven
years in prison and the shock of reentry into freedom. But he consented to talk
about how he came to ''invade'' his own country to campaign against apartheid,
how he was caught, and how his jailers treated him before sending him into
exile.

Even now, Mr. Breytenbach remains a thorn in the side of South Africa's
Afrikaners, whose resentment of his dissidence conflicts with their respect for
his artistic eminence. As with most small nationalistic groups that feel their
language and culture are under threat, Afrikaners have a heightened regard for
their poets and writers, especially those who achieve international fame. In
addition to winning both of South Africa's principal literary prizes, which are
given by the country's news agencies, Mr. Breytenbach's ironic, often satiric
poetry, dealing mostly with politics, sex and death, has been well received in
translation in Great Britain and Holland.  One volume each of his poetry and
journalism has been published in the United States.

Mr. Breytenbach, now 43, looks thin and his hair is flecked with gray. Relishing
his return to the food and wine of France, he toasts the culinary contrast with
South African prison food: ''Spare diet in the punishment cell is a handful of
dry gruel, so dry you have to mix it with toothpaste to get it down,'' he says,
and confirms that food in South African prisons is still graded according to the
race of the prisoner. ''Even the condemned man's last meal is subject to
apartheid. Before being hanged, the white prisoner gets a whole roast chicken.
The black prisoner gets half a chicken. Strangely enough, from the time they are
condemned the blacks get the same food as the white - except for that last meal.
It's like a kind of reaffirmation of apartheid in the final moment before the
gallows.''

There is pain in Mr. Breytenbach's eyes as he talks of the condemned prisoners.
''On average about seven a week are hanged, and you hear it all, every week,
hear them walking to the gallows, always singing, usually in Xhosa or Zulu,
stamping their feet with every step. Sometimes there would be a young voice in
the group, quavering with fear, and the older voices would sustain it, lift it
up. Then you'd hear, muffled in the distance, the thud of the trapdoor, the
instant of death. But the singing would go on to the end.''

Often the song is the black resistance anthem, ''Nkosi Sikelele iAfrika,'' (God
Bless Africa) and sometimes the condemned prisoners sing hymns. But one prisoner
who always sings alone in Pretoria's maximum security prison is Dimitri
Tsafendas, the Greek immigrant who was declared insane and sentenced to life
imprisonment for stabbing Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd to death in 1966.
Every Friday night at precisely the same time Mr. Tsafendas sings ''Sarie
Marais,'' the ballad from the Boer War, followed by ''Roll Out the Barrel.''
Then he is silent for another week.

Mr. Tsafendas and Mr. Breytenbach were the only long-term prisoners not
condemned to death, and Mr. Breytenbach says that Mr. Tsafendas is subjected to
a daily ritual of hate for killing ''the architect of apartheid.'' His food is
routinely spat in or scattered on the cell floor and his slop bucket overturned.

Mr. Breytenbach served the first two years of his sentence in solitary
confinement in a cell 6 feet by 9 feet by 22 feet deep. ''It's like being in the
bottom of a well. The depth emphasizes the narrow confines. You can touch both
sides with your outstretched arms and the only space is upward. At the top is an
opening onto a catwalk so the warders can look down on you any time.''

Though often subjected to verbal abuse, Mr. Breytenbach was never assaulted
physically during the seven years he served in prison, but the relish with which
prison officials attacked him psychologically was most painful for him. ''If my
mother's letters had more than the number of words allowed, the prison censor
got a kick out of waving the letter in front of me and counting the number of
excess words he had cut, just snipped off the end. And when my mother died, I
was given no privacy to cry - the warders stared in at me constantly to watch my
reaction.''

Mr. Breytenbach writes in Afrikaans, which is one of the newest languages in the
world, having evolved over the past 300 years from the Dutch spoken by the first
white settlers in South Africa. Because it is the first language of three
million white Afrikaners - the group that has ruled South Africa since 1948 in
varying degrees of domination over two million English-speaking whites of
British descent, two million ''Coloreds'' (of black and white ancestry), one
million ''Asiatics'' (mostly descendants of Indian laborers) and more than 20
million blacks - Afrikaans is identified with the 317 apartheid laws and
regarded by most blacks as the language of their oppression. Conversely, most
Afrikaners regard it as the language of their survival, and the relatively few
Afrikaners who reject apartheid and refuse to conform to Afrikaner Volkspolitiek
are branded as outcasts and verraaiers - traitors.

For a minor language, Afrikaans has a remarkable literature, and successive
waves of writers and poets, roughly identified by the decades of their emergence
to prominence, have influenced the language's development beyond the measure
possible for poets writing in more established languages. Thus, from the
dertigers (so called because they emerged in the 30's), who include Van Wyk
Louw, Dirk Opperman, Elisabet Eybers and Ernst van Heerden, there followed the
viertigers, the vyftigers and Mr. Breytenbach's own group, the sestigers, still
regarded as the most innovative and challenging of all these categorizations
within the Afrikaner cultural spectrum.

Mr. Breytenbach reflects sadly on the number of leading Afrikaner poets who have
been personally destroyed by the clash between the broad challenges of their art
and the narrow demands of Volkspolitiek: Not only the self-imposed termination
of careers but alcoholism and suicide have been the fates of many of them.

Badly spoken, Afrikaans is an ugly language which rasps like sandpaper to the
ear. Well spoken, it is one of the gems of the linguistic store, rich in vivid
imagery and musical sounds.  Political orators such as J.D. Basson make it sound
like a cello, full of fruity tones and cadences, and its innovative modernity
gives its newer words a special import - an aircraft carrier is an abbaskip
(piggyback ship) and a subway rail is a moltrein (mole train). Mr.
Breytenbach's contribution has been to push Afrikaans beyond its own confines,
expanding its boundaries of poetic vocabulary and making it sing with a new
confidence. He and his contemporaries have shown they can raise orthodox
Afrikaans lyricism to new heights. In prison he wrote: In die middel van die nag
kom die stemme van die wat binne enkele dae gehang sal word en in die klanke 'n
dun benoud- heid reeds soos van stywe toue In the middle of the night come the
voices of those who within mere days will be hanged and in the sounds is a thin
anguish as of stretched ropes

The translation is crudely inadequate to the beauty of the line in Afrikaans,
conveying only a hint of Mr. Breytenbach's poetic power.

HOW did this nationally acclaimed poet, his brother a general in the South
African army and his background deeply rooted in the Afrikaner
group-consciousness, come to declare a private war on that group's innermost
political values?

Descended from a distinguished old Cape family - the Breytenbachs were among the
early settlers of the 17th century - Breyten was graduated from high school in
the Afrikaner heartland of the western Cape Province but then deviated from the
Afrikaner norm by eschewing the academic shrine of Afrikanerdom, Stellenbosch
University.  Interested in art and poetry from the age of 15 and impressed by
the reputation of the fine arts faculty of the University of Cape Town, he
enrolled in this English-language university.

At the age of 20 he left school and set out for Europe, working as a porter at
London's Euston station before drifting into a variety of jobs on the Continent.
But Paris was his destination and he settled there in 1962, painting, writing,
teaching English and becoming fluent in French. In Paris he met and married
Yolande Ngo Thi Hoang Lien, who was born in Vietnam and raised in the French
capital and whose father was Vietnam's Finance Minister under Prime Minister Ngo
Dinh Diem. In 1964, he published his first book of poems, followed by others in
1967, 1969 and 1970.

When Mr. Breytenbach wanted to return to South Africa to collect the awards he
had won in 1967 and 1969, his wife was refused an entry visa as a ''nonwhite''
and Mr. Breytenbach was told he could face arrest under the Immorality Act which
makes interracial marriage a crime.

Then in 1973 the Breytenbachs were both issued three-month visas to visit South
Africa. The poet found his homeland ''a paradise poisoned and polluted,'' and
after being approached by security police to be an informer, he returned with
his wife to Paris where he was already involved with anti-apartheid groups.
Ultimately he joined with two other white South Africans, Barend Schuitema and
Don Morton, to plan an organization they proposed to call Okehela. They decided
that Mr. Breytenbach should travel incognito to South Africa to contact
anti-apartheid whites and some black spokesmen, such as Steve Biko, in order to
channel money from European church groups to black trade unionists in South
Africa, to ''help develop a political infrastructure among anti-apartheid whites
and to project to other whites inside South Africa the ideal of an alternative
society free of racial barriers.''

In August 1975, with the help of a French anti-apartheid organization that
supplied a French passport in the name ''Christian Galazka,'' Mr.Breytenbach
shaved off his beard and flew to Johannesburg. But the French group must have
been infiltrated, because from the time ''Galazka'' obtained his visa the South
African security police had him under surveillance. The police shadowed the poet
in Johannesburg and Cape Town, noting his contacts, before arresting him and
charging him under the Terrorism Act. Initially Mr. Breytenbach wasn't unduly
concerned because he believed he hadn't done anything more illegal than use a
false passport. But he was sentenced to nine years in prison for the intent with
which he had entered the country. The court took the view that trade union
campaigns against apartheid constituted a threat to the safety of the state.

IN November 1975 Mr. Breytenbach began his solitary confinement in Pretoria's
maximum security section - a confinement interrupted only by three bizarre
events. After repeated petitioning by Afrikaner writers such as Andre Brink, Mr.
Breytenbach was allowed to see a new edition of his work. The prison authorities
interpreted this literally, however - he was allowed to see the volume but not
read it. On another day Mr. Breytenbach was removed from his cell by the senior
security police officer, Colonel Broodryk, and taken to the latter's home. The
colonel, who admired Mr. Breytenbach's writing, walked with him in the garden
and introduced him to his two daughters, who asked for and received his
autograph. Colonel Broodryk later allowed Mr. Breytenbach to write a book of
poetry in prison and, without consulting the author, arranged for the printers
to dedicate the volume to himself.

The most bizarre incident began when a warder broke all the rules of the prison
to whisper into Mr. Breytenbach's cell that he was a secret ally named
Groenewald, who wished to help the prisoner escape and was prepared to smuggle
letters and messages to friends outside.  It was such a crude attempt to win his
trust that Mr. Breytenbach made his responses sound absurdly naive or
indistinct, guessing, correctly, that he was being tape-recorded by Groenewald.
Mr.Breytenbach played along, accepting writing materials and sending out several
letters to Yolande and others, hoping some might get through as part of the
official campaign to win his trust, and he verbally led Groenewald into ever
wilder realms of speculation about sabotage targets.

The result was a second trial under the Terrorism Act in June 1977, when Mr.
Breytenbach was formally accused of planning an escape, recruiting a warder for
such a purpose, illegally sending letters from prison and plotting to blow up
targets such as the Afrikaans Language Monument in Paarl. The state officials
realized all too late that they had been sent up by their prisoner, and the
patent absurdity of the charges quickly became embarrassing. Mr. Breytenbach was
acquitted of all charges except smuggling letters out of prison, for which he
was fined a nominal 50 rands.

He smiles at the memory. ''On the first day of this trial the court was full of
big shots from the Special Branch and the Bureau of State Security, and during
the early recesses they were openly betting that I'd be hanged - but as the case
went on they started vanishing from court one by one until eventually there were
hardly any left. All that could be heard from Groenewald's tapes sounded like
someone at the end of a tunnel mumbling. Then the Boere moved me to Cape Town.''
Mr. Breytenbach constantly refers to his warders as the ''Boere'' (plural for
Boer), explaining that this is prison terminolgy; he is aware of the irony
whereby he, an Afrikaner or Boer himself, so describes them.

The poet was taken in shackles a thousand miles, from Pretoria to Pollsmoor
Prison, near Cape Town, where he spent the next five years of his captivity,
though in a larger cell. And he was allowed to write. In this period the French
Government was bringing diplomatic pressure to bear on Pretoria, pressure that
was intensified when the Socialist Government of Francois Mitterrand came to
power. In December 1982 the South African Government finally relented and Mr.
Breytenbach became one of 27 political prisoners, and the first white, to be
released before full expiration of sentence in the first such commutation in 30
years.

MR. BREYTENBACH says the remission of his sentence from nine years to seven, to
which the South African authorities attached no conditions beyond requiring that
he leave the country, was sudden and unaccompanied by any prior indications by
officials. Indeed, when he was taken to the superintendent's office, he thought
he was to be punished for some infraction of rules.

His release was delayed for four hours because no box could be found in the
prison for his original clothes and belongings. Then he was allowed a brief
visit with his father before flying to Johannesburg and on to Paris. Although
the older man, as the result of a stroke, hadn't spoken a word in years, he
looked at his son and cried ''Magtig!'' (Wonderful!). It was the only word he
could manage, and he repeated it several times as they shared a bottle of wine
before Mr. Breytenbach's supervisor indicated it was time to leave.

On the way to the airport, the nearly freed man was allowed to run into the sea
for a quick swim. (Emerging from the water, he noticed a sign proclaiming that
the beach was segregated.) His clothes were still wet when he arrived at the
plane. He had forgotten about routine boarding procedures, and when an airline
official reached for his parcel of manuscripts to put it through the security
screen there was a tug of war until the poet was assured that this separation
from his manuscripts was only temporary.

In Johannesburg his wife was waiting for him with the French Ambassador and a
bottle of champagne. Then, after seven-and-a-half years of separation the
Breytenbachs flew to Paris. There, even after some weeks of reunion, they were
sitting close together as we spoke of his first impressions of freedom. ''I
couldn't get used to things on the walls, like pictures and ornaments,'' he
said. ''Walls looked cluttered after the bareness of the cells. I kept opening
doors and leaving them open -the joy of an open door, to walk through whenever
you like. Telephones were exotic things I had forgotten about. Colors
overwhelmed me, the bright colors of clothing, flowers, books. And the voices of
children - I hadn't heard the voice of a child for seven years. To see the stars
at night! And the moon! To ride in a car, and see other cars going by, traveling
so fast. And not knowing the value of money, not knowing what things cost after
seven years.''

For him, the worst moments of imprisonment came when he woke up every morning.
''After the freedom of dreams, you open your eyes to the reality of the cell and
the realization that this is your reality for years and years to come.'' He
hallucinated. He would be sure that Yolande was speaking to him and he would
answer out loud. He had an imaginary companion in the cell, Don Espejuelo (Sir
Mirror), a sardonic old Spaniard he invented who criticized his poetry and
scoffed at his views on books, painting, cinema and music.

''After a long time in solitary confinement I also started getting visits from
Dostoyevsky, which was terrific,'' Mr. Breytenbach said.  ''I came to know him
quite well, and to call him Fyodor. In fact, I owe Fyodor a poem, the poem
refered to in 'The Brothers Karamazov,' about Christ returning to Spain where he
meets the Grand Inquisitor.  One of the brothers Karamazov describes the poem,
but it's never written. That's the one I promised to write for Fyodor.''

Mr. Breytenbach also speaks of a letter he wrote to Colonel Broodryk, offering
to spy for him if released. ''I thought I was being so clever, to secure release
with such a promise, then to repudiate the promise after getting out. You think
strange things and do strange things in that strange place, incredibly naive
things which seem subtle at the time.''

Have his political views changed at all? ''Not in the slightest. In fact, I'm
even more revolted at what's going on in South Africa than before, having
experienced such things as the horror of all those hangings, and racial
differentiation even in the condemned cells. My perceptions of the system have
deepened, and I'm more inclined now to see the culprits also as human beings,
prisoners of their own responses. My basic response to apartheid is the same as
before, but my method of response will now be different. I'm going to stick to
my own way, through writing.''

HE plans to write mostly in French and English. Is this a rejection of
Afrikaans? ''Not as a language, no. I'd never reject Afrikaans as a language,
but I reject it as part of the Afrikaner political identity. I no longer
consider myself an Afrikaner. Actually, I prefer to consider myself a citizen of
the world. I feel at home here in Paris. I'm a Parisian! But Afrikaans - I've
long felt there was hope for it only if it were used in resistance to apartheid,
but I think it is now too late. For blacks, it is a denial of reality and a
humiliation. Afrikaans as the youngest prince of the Germanic languages? The
prince has been poisoned. What remains is a language for use on tombstones.''

He speaks of the years of separation from Yolande, the pain of isolation and the
early part of his imprisonment when he wasn't allowed to write. But he also
speaks of the strange sensation of missing some aspects of prison life, of an
occasional pang of homesickness for his cell with its certitudes and reassuring
routines. ''The other night I dreamed I had to go back, and my biggest worry was
that I'd given away my spoon and plate and bit of soap. Would I be able to get
them back?''

But, as a writer and artist, he counts it an advantage to have been imprisoned
and feels that his writing has been improved by the experience. His imprisonment
helped him to square accounts with himself as part of what he regards as a
necessary process for white South Africans opposed to apartheid - the need to
pay an expiative price for it. ''We need this for ourselves, independently of
any general wish to serve the black cause and see justice done,'' he said. ''It
is for our own inner selves as well. We need it for our own redemption.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Breyten Breytenbach

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YOKNAPATAWPHA COUNTY OF THE MIND

BYLINE: By Ivan Gold; Ivan Gold is the author of ''Sick Friends,'' a novel, and
''Nickel Miseries,'' a collection of short stories.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


THE TENNIS HANDSOME, By Barry Hannah.  166 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
$11.95.

IN fashioning his fifth book of fiction, Barry Hannah, a fine, frugal writer,
has reached back to plunder his third, the highly regarded collection of stories
called ''Airships'' (1978). He has made off not only with characters, themes and
situations but with the bounty of the prose itself. Which is to say that the
first two chapters of ''The Tennis Handsome'' are scarcely altered versions of
what appeared to be unconnected stories in ''Airships,'' bearing the titles (in
both places) of ''Return to Return'' and ''Midnight and I'm Not Famous Yet.''
Some novelizing adhesive has been daubed on here and there, and beyond that the
stories are worth repeating.

''Return to Return'' follows the baroque adventures of the world class tennis
player French Edward, so extraordinarily handsome that ''Women anguished to
conceive of his departure from a tournament,'' and the parallel bizarre doings
of his unsavory companion and sometime caretaker, Baby Levaster, wag and
self-defrocked M.D.  ''Midnight and I'm Not Famous Yet,'' which was regarded on
its initial publication in Esquire and subsequent appearance in ''Airships'' as
one of the best short stories to come out of the Vietnam War, is a first-person
account by Capt. Bob Smith -who hails, as do French and Baby, from the environs
of Vicksburg, Miss. - of the capture by his company of a North Vietnamese
general, Li Dap, and Smith's unavoidable murder of this valuable prisoner almost
immediately after. Li Dap was a student of the military strategy of the
Confederate general Jeb Stuart, underscoring the parallels Mr. Hannah drew
between the Vietnam and Civil Wars in his short novel ''Ray'' (1980); while Ray,
the raucous, randy, sensitive hero of that book, was, like Levaster, a medical
doctor and a graduate of Tulane Medical School.

Such canny parsimony isn't new for Mr. Hannah. One of the most moving stories in
''Airships,'' called ''Mother Rooney Unscrolls the Hurt,'' takes a bit farther
down the road the woman who ran the boardinghouse in Mr. Hannah's first novel,
''Geronimo Rex'' (1972), winner of the Faulkner Prize; and the hero of
''Geronimo Rex,'' Harry Monroe, plays a not insignificant role in Mr. Hannah's
second novel, ''Nightwatchmen'' (1973).

It seems sensible of this author to husband his considerable resources. There is
endless instruction and delight in watching him refine his idiosyncratic vision,
chipping away at the block of marble, fashioning a Yoknapatawpha County of the
mind. Born in 1942 in Clinton, Miss., a serious writer for half his life, Mr.
Hannah may well want to cry ''Enough!'' to the comparisons to Eudora Welty,
Flannery O'Connor, Samuel Beckett and Guy de Maupassant that have dogged his
career. As for Faulkner himself, Baby Levaster likes to barge into Elaine's
(when his and French Edward's crisscrossing of the country brings them to New
York), usually in a pugnacious frame of mind, hoping to punch out some famous
actor or writer, but is reduced at last to flinging insults at the multitude:
''Not one of them could hold a candle to William Faulkner, Levaster shouted,
having never read a page of the man.''

French Edward is intermittently feebleminded, having almost drowned in an
attempt either to save from suicide or speed the departure of Dr. Word, his
former tennis coach. Word was jolted out of lifelong homosexuality some years
earlier by the sight of French Edward's mother, Olive, whom he then seduced,
clandestinely observed by French himself. A monster of vengefulness, Edward
forces the aging Dr. Word to play tennis so far beyond his capacity that he has
a stroke, which damages his vision and obliges him to speak thereafter at the
top of his lungs.

This does not, however, diminish his enthusiasm for Olive, nor his admiration
for French Edward's tennis skills: ''The man was crazed with partisanship.''
French's faculties are temporarily restored when he is struck by lightning
during a match. The bolt also brings with it a gift of partial second sight and
the inclination to turn out verse, cloying doggerel that becomes scatological in
time.

MEANWHILE, Capt. Bob Smith has returned from the wars to become integrated into
the story. He has an affair with his own aunt, who, before she runs off with a
very Southern senator, is nearly raped by a walrus. Levaster, who had himself
made merry with Olive in her mellower years (''a dreadfully beautiful old
lady''), is dispatched with a crossbow by French Edward's wife. There is issue
from a brief union Edward had with an oversexed polio victim. This is a girl
named Murphy, who grows up to marry a tennis player.

Time flies. (''Some years passed and Levaster was forty.'') Language is made to
juggle with its snout, standing on its tail. I can hardly tell you how bizarre
things really get or why the weirdness is usually satisfying. While ''The Tennis
Handsome'' may not be his ''best'' book already assembled or yet to come, it's
as good a place to start reading Barry Hannah as any. He is an original, or if
names are to be dropped, Carson McCullers rewritten by Groucho Marx.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

54 WHO CAME HOME AND 6 WHO DIDN'T

BYLINE: By Tom Buckley; Tom Buckley was a correspondent in Vietnam for The New
York Times.  He has just completed a book on Central America, ''Violent
Neighbors.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 959 words


CHARLIE COMPANY, What Vietnam Did To Us.  By Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller.
With Richard Manning, Stryker McGuire, Wally McNamee and Vern E. Smith.
Illustrated. 358 pp. New York: A Newsweek Book/William Morrow & Co. $15.95.

IN December 1981 Newsweek published a 25,000-word report based on lengthy
interviews with 54 men who were serving with an infantry company in Vietnam on
April 30, 1969, and with the families of six others who were subsequently killed
in action or died after returning to civilian life. The article, which was
widely praised, became the basis of a CBS television documentary and has now
been updated and expanded into this book.

Its publication is welcome. Ten years after the withdrawal of the last American
combat troops and eight years after the fall of Saigon, the long silence
compounded of rage, shame and confusion is ending. The first of what will be
many scholarly re-examinations of the Vietnam War has begun. The dedication last
year of the memorial in Washington was a formal expression of the nation's
gratitude to the more than 57,000 Americans who died in the war, but the event
evoked emotions among veterans, their families and the public that were far more
profound.

''Charlie Company'' gives flesh-and-blood existence to a few of the names on
that memorial and to another 50 or so troopers of the First Infantry Division
who more or less survived their year in Vietnam.  Infantrymen are by definition
the hard-luck soldiers of any war, and while combat may have been less intense
and prolonged in Vietnam than in the two world wars or during the first 18
months of the Korean War, it was far more debilitating emotionally.

The men who figure in the book joined and left Charlie Company singly or
occasionally in twos and threes. They had no reason to doubt that they were
expendable items of humanity carried on the conveyor belt of the Army's
morale-crushing individual replacement system. They went into combat just as the
withdrawal of American forces was beginning - a strategic retreat that went on
for four years - and as the strength of the North Vietnamese forces in the South
was increasing reciprocally.

Finally, they were at least dimly aware that they did not by any means
constitute a cross section of young America. With only a couple of exceptions,
they came from working class families. Their betters were still safe on their
university campuses, demonstrating against the war - or was it the draft? - or
safely enrolled in the noncombatant National Guard and Army Reserve. They knew
also that they could expect no public testimonials when they returned home, and
few of them were proved wrong.

The company was shuffled from one firebase to another in the important ''iron
triangle'' sector north-west of Saigon, sending out patrols that were nothing
more than live bait, setting up their listening posts in the jungle and sweating
through the endless nights. Their officers were unable to give a persuasive
explanation of why that endless year of combat service was necessary.

Under the circumstances, it is astonishing that the men of the company performed
as well as they did and not astonishing at all that many of them suffered
serious emotional injury, which manifested itself after their return to civilian
life in at least one suicide, several confinements in mental hospitals,
alcoholism and drug abuse, and a high incidence of divorce. Few who have
required its services have a good word to say about the Veterans Administration.

The story of David Rioux is one of several that evoke deep sympathy. A former
seminarian from Lewiston, Me., he volunteered for service because he thought the
cause was just. So did his younger brother, Michel. They got special permission
to serve together. David was blinded and crippled by the explosion of a booby
trap. Since then, sustained by his own courage and faith and helped by Michel,
he has completed college and is working toward his doctorate.

Like many of his comrades, David Rioux thinks that once the United States had
become engaged in Vietnam, it made a mistake in not fighting the war to a
finish. ''Michel and I saw clearly a lot of things that other people didn't
see,'' he told a Newsweek reporter.  ''We both knew why we were in Vietnam, and
the men around us didn't, for the most part, or saw it only confusedly, but we
saw why we were there and we were proud to be there, defending a people who were
being oppressed by Marxist Communism. We were doing something that was
commendable, in the eyes of God, our country and our family,''

MOST of the men of the company, it should be said, returned to their hometowns
and picked up their former lives more or less successfully. Some attended
community colleges for a year or two, but few received degrees. Even if they had
wanted to, the inadequacy of their veterans' benefits would have made it
difficult.

Instead, they found jobs in the post office, in law enforcement, construction,
sales and so on, got married and fathered children. By now they are nearing
their 40's. They seldom see their old comrades or talk about the war, even to
their wives. Few have joined veterans' organizations. They seem to agree in
these interviews that if the United States were to become involved in another
such ambiguous conflict, they would urge their own sons, one way or another, to
stay home.

''Charlie Company'' is most eloquent when it permits the men and their families
to speak for themselves, especially about their lives since the war. One wishes
that the authors had resisted the impulse to couch the lengthy narrative
sections of the book in the hip, hectic language that was used so effectively by
Michael Herr in ''Dispatches'' but that now seems flat and strained.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ETERNAL BEACH

BYLINE: By Richard Halloran

SECTION: Section 10; Page 45, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


RICHARD HALLORAN is a reporter in the Washington bureau of The Times.

S ometime in the dead of winter, during those days that in college were called
the Dark Ages, the mind turns to the beach. The cold and wind, the slushy and
dirty snow, the long nights and short days, the accumulation of pressures at
work or in school since Labor Day awaken a longing for sun, sand and sea.

The urge is not just for summer vacation, but for the beach. Those who would
escape the rigors of winter and the telephone and television can relax in the
mountains or on the road or by visiting a foreign land. But the beach has a
special appeal for certain people, for there the imagination runs free, the
heart opens, the spirit is at peace.

Not that the beach takes over as soon as toe hits warm sand. It takes time and
only gradually does one surrender to its hold. Anne Morrow Lindbergh, in her
book, ''Gift from the Sea,'' says that but slowly does one become ''like the
element on which one lies, flattened by the sea; bare, open, empty as the beach,
erased by today's tides of all yesterday's scribblings.'' Then, after a week or
so has passed, the mind ''begins to drift, to play, to turn over in gentle
careless rolls like those lazy waves on the beach.'' She cautions: ''The sea
does not reward those who are too anxious, too greedy, or too impatient.''
Rather: ''Patience, patience, patience is what the sea teaches. Patience and
faith. One should lie empty, open, choiceless as a beach -waiting for a gift
from the sea.''

That gift seems to me to come from the sense of space at the beach. Sitting on
the sand and watching the horizon can be mesmerizing. But that gaze also
releases the mind to roam - what's out there; if I went straight across the
ocean, where would I land, who would I meet, what would happen? The unobstructed
expanse of the sea draws out the ideas, the jumble of thoughts and impressions
that have been locked away while life raced through the fall and winter. The
vast surface of the sea makes the mind supple and lets it skim like a sailboat
running before the wind. Some of the ideas may eventually lead to something but
many of them, good as they might seem at the time, later fade like New Year's
resolutions.

Then, there's something about the distance to the horizon and how far one can
see up and down the beach that seems to clear the channels of communication that
may have gotten clogged during the rush of daily life. Somehow, the best
conversations I've had with my wife and my children have been at the beach,
especially late in the afternoon just before sundown, when people drift off and
seabirds come to feed. The lengthening shadows and the still of the day, broken
only by the rhythmic roll of waves, make it easy to talk of hopes and
disappointments, of frustrations and plans for the future.  Mostly, that time of
day renews affection that so easily gets set aside in the drive of urban life.

In another realm, the beach quietly but insistently puts life into a perspective
different from that in the concrete of the city or in the green lawns of the
suburbs. Perhaps it's a bit too metaphysical, but the uncounted grains of sand,
the immeasurable sea, the unnumbered stars in a sky whose dark has a special
quality remind one of his basic insignificance in the order of things. All of
us, maybe journalists most of all, can profit from an occasional touch of
humility.

The special appeal of the beach came to me naturally, I guess. My father was in
the Navy for 27 years and we followed him from seaport to seaport, including a
tour on the South Pacific isle of Samoa when I was a boy. It was then a tropical
paradise. High school years were spent in Newport, R.I. with its wonderful
variety of beaches, and in Norfolk, Va., not far from Virginia Beach before it
became wall-towall motels and cafes.

Later, I wandered across the Pacific to the littoral of Asia. My wife and I
first got to know each other on Waikiki in Hawaii and, at another time, we went
to the beach at Hanalei on the island of Kauai, the most beautiful we have seen.

Farther west, on the beach by a lagoon on Saipan, are stunning sunsets. One
evening, as the sun dipped behind billowy white clouds banked on the horizon,
the sky turned flaming red, then copper, and finally bronze while an ever
deepening silver light bounced between the clouds and the shallow lagoon.

A Sunday afternoon at Cap St. Jacques in Vietnam nearly 30 years ago was
intriguing as lithe Vietnamese girls walked with tall, muscular, blond young
men, many of whom had tattoos on their inner arms. They were Germans, former
storm troopers who had been recruited into the French Foreign Legion after World
War II.

For the last five summers, my family and I have spent our vacation on the spare
dunes of the Outer Banks of North Carolina.  Beyond happenstance, maybe there's
something primeval about the attraction of the beach. My wife says it's because
I am a Pisces.  Another tug may come from ancestry; my family name, so far as
can be determined, derives from an ancient Celtic word meaning a stranger from
across the sea; another interpretation is pirate. Be that as it may, John F.
Kennedy, in a speech in Newport in 1962, touched on the universal appeal of the
beach. ''All of us have in our veins the exact same percentage of salt that
exists in the ocean, and therefore we have salt in our blood, in our sweat, in
our tears. We are tied to our oceans and when we go back to the sea, whether to
sail on it or to watch it, we are going back whence we come.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of sand dunes photo of sea shell

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY GUIDE;
JAZZ FOR PICKNICKERS

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 21, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


It would be hard to drive past Montclair High School on Park Street without
noting the rustic charm of its amphitheater: level after level of rock-slab
seats sunk into a grassy hillside.

On Saturday at 8 P.M., Bob Wilber, the jazz clarinetist and saxophonist, and his
seven-piece band will perform in the high school's auditorium, but the audience
is invited to pack a picnic supper and come early.

At 6:45 P.M., the high school's band will play in the amphitheater, and no one
will mind a bit if - between bites - you keep time with a chicken drumstick.

Appearing with Mr. Wilber in the Unity Concerts offering will be Pug Horton, the
vocalist. The evening's program will feature the work of Sidney Bechet, Louis
Armstrong and Duke Ellington.

Thirty-six years ago, Mr. Wilber, then 19 years old, was Mr.  Bechet's protege
and deeply absorbed in the Bechet style. Since then, he has found and developed
his own musicial personality, but Mr.  Wilber is still probably more immersed in
the Bechet way than anyone playing today.

Concert tickets are $10 and $12.  Information: (201) 744-6770.

RAMSEY CLARK TO SPEAK

Ramsey Clark will discuss ''El Salvador and Central America'' Tuesday evening in
the Student Center at Ramapo College in Mahwah.  Mr. Clark will focus on the
current political situation in the Caribbean and what policy choices confront
the United States. (A spokesman for the college said that Mr. Clark would hold a
news conference after his speech.)

Mr. Clark's career has not been without controversy. As Attorney General under
President Lyndon B. Johnson, he prosecuted Dr. Benjamin Spock and other activist
foes of the Vietnam war. But in 1980, Mr.  Clark won left-wing praise when he
defied President Jimmy Carter by leading a 10-member American group to Iran to
attend a conference on United States ''intervention in Iran.''

For that trip, Mr. Clark faced up to 10 years in prison as a violator of the
International Economic Powers Act, but Mr. Carter declined to press the case.

Mr. Clark's talk will begin at 7:30 P.M., and the public is welcome.
Information: (201) 327-3441.

AN EVENING OF MOZART

The Princeton Pro Musica, 100 voices strong, will present an evening of Mozart
in Trenton's War Memorial Auditorium on Friday.  On the program is the
''Requiem'' (K. 626) and ''Vesperae Solennes de Confessore'' (K. 339). The
chorus, under Frances F. Slade, will be joined by a full orchestra. George Jones
and Viktoras Prizgintas will play the basset horns in the ''Requiem.''

Soloists are Marilyn Moore, soprano; Sandra Rains West, contralto; Frederick
Urrey, tenor, and John Powell, baritone.  The concert starts at 8 P.M. Tickets
are $8 ($6 for students and the elderly).  Information: (609) 655-0460.

FOR MORE-USABLE PARKS

Parks, which are among the great places to visit in the spring, are offering
some special enticements in Essex and Union Counties.  For example, three Essex
parks have banned cars - at least on Sundays - and at several parks in the
county police officers on horseback will provide color as well as security.

Brookdale Park (which straddles the Montclair-Bloomfield border), Verona Park
and Orange Park will be closed to motor-vehicle traffic every Sunday through
Oct. 9. In addition, the park in Orange is banning motor vehicles on Saturdays,
as well as on holidays celebrated on Mondays.

Mounted police officers will be assigned to the Essex County parks on an
as-needed basis, with special attention given to patrolling the remote areas of
the largest parks. Eagle Rock Reservation has 408 acres; South Mountain
Reservation, 2,047 acres; Branch Brook Park, 359 acres; West Essex, 1,303 acres,
and Verona, 54 acres.

The officers assigned to the new mounted unit are two Livingston residents,
Robert McCracken and Preston Schaub, and Tony Misale of South Orange.

Cricket, baseball's British cousin, is a special offering of the Union County
parks system. Matches will be played in Warinanco Park, Elizabeth, in the field
behind the former Parks Department headquarters at Acme and Canton Streets.

Two teams, the Union County Cricket Club and the Combined Islands Cricket Club,
will share the field, with home games at 9 A.M. on Saturdays. The season ends
Sept. 24.

During last year's trial season, the local teams not only took on visitors from
Philadelphia, Connecticut and New York, but also from India and Britain.

Information: (201) 527-4900.
uf5512Frank Emblen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME THOUGHTS ON DISRESPECT

BYLINE: By RICHARD SIGAL

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 34, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2047 words


RECENTLY, a man in Alabama alerted the police and the press that he was about to
attempt suicide. He set himself afire in front of cameras, and for several
minutes two youngish cameramen filmed the incident until one finally decided to
intevenne.

After the story was brought up in an introductory sociology class, the response
in general was: ''Why should we get involved? If a guy wants to commit suicide,
that's his decision.'' During the semester, a psychic and her husband performed
in the Student Center, and the decorum of the students might best be described
as rude.When finally asked to quiet down, one student immediately challenged the
performer - a display of neither understanding nor consideration for what it
meant to walk out on stage.

As for this incident, one secretary, who has watched student audiences change
over the last 13 years, commented that she got embarrassed for what students did
to performers nowadays.

''Political speakers may as well not even bother,'' she said.  This subject has
been written about before. However, it comes out shaped a bit differently when
examined in the context of the forces molding today's generation.

I'm talking about respect, or the lack thereof, emanating from the youth culture
of today, which presumes, of course, that youth actually has ''a culture'' that
is understandable, recognizable and definable in generally acceptable terms.

In the 50's, lack of respect came out by listening to rock 'n' roll; in the
60's, fingers began being waved disrespectfully at the Establishment for
creating the need for a civil-rights movement.

Disrespect was cranked up even more as the Government sleazed its way into
Vietnam. It peaked with Watergate, when disrespect poured forth as total
repugnance for the established order, its leaders and everything they stood for.

But that lack of respect was a means to an end. With many in today's college
generation, it appears to be more an end in itself.  They have no issues - no
causes -not even any heroes to unify and signify this era. Oh, some may say that
they're concerned about ''the bomb'' or ''nukes,'' but that's an old tune. Ask
them how many have participated in antinuke rallies, and only a few hands will
pop in a 30-student class.

As for heroes, there are many significant individuals, but none representing a
generation.  I'm not characterizing all students this way. But from feedback
about students at a recent convention, from colleagues at other institutions and
from what I know of my own students, I believe that I'm on solid ground.

This article, which will probably raise more questions than it answers, will
look for the meaning and origins of today's version of ''disrespect.''

I recall a class discussion last year regarding the social dynamics at rock
concerts. The students spoke of hostility, and sometimes violence, in the
audience; it was similar, some said, to the type of thing often encountered at
sports events.

Somewhere along the line, an understanding of what the performer is risking
seems to have been lost. Between the lines, a performer's message is:

''This is what I do. I may not do it as well as you'd lke, but at least I'm
willing to try.'' I sense no empathy from students. It appears that many prefer
being entertained by attempting to disrupt those on stage, rather than by what
the performers are transmitting.

At a college perfomance of ''Carousel'' in the 60's, I remember the looks
shooting among many of us in the audience when the star sang the 'Soliloquy.''
His voice had broken in an earlier number and our collective, unspoken message
urged him to drop an octave, rather than try to hit the high note at the climax.
He didn't, and cracked in the finest Alfalfa tradition.

We cringed, but there was no put-down for him. In fact, the applause was
deafening.  In contrast, you need only attend one of today's rock concerts and
witness the interaction between performer and audience to understand what I mean
by ''disrespect.'' Any performance short of that by the Rolling Stones is
greeted with hoots, off-color shouts and, often, projectiles.

Ask the students, and they'll tell you that they go for the ''main act'' and
that it's open season on warmup bands.  When I asked a rock musician-friend
recently when he planned to perform again, he said: ''Never would be too soon.
They're animals. I need an army of bodyguards to protect my band and the
equipment.'' In the 60's, crowds pushed through guards to touch the Beatles.
Today, it seems, they push through to wreak havoc upon anyone on stage.

Punk music and all that it entails -from costumes, through masochistic
experiments, to destruction of property - may not symbolize the entire
generation, but it is its product.

Drugs are still available, although their use seems more selective and
sophisticated. Current statistics contend that the most-abused drug is alcohol,
with more being used and at earlier ages. This might easily be interpreted as a
sign of ''disrespect'' for laws, parental standards and self.

Teen-age suicide has almost tripled in the last few years. This is the ultimate
form of disrespect for one's self.  It's not just one event. If one stands back,
as sociologists tend to do, and views the whole package, a pattern emerges. It
becomes our charge to construe the message.

Where are the roots of this pervasive lack of respect? I'm not really sure, but
here are some possibilities.  Isolation seems to symbolize the members of this
generation. They are the fallout of a ''do your own thing'' era following
Watergate.  After the overwhelming disillusionment of the 60's and 70's,
students tended to back off and look inward.

Enough energy had been spent on others. Now it was ''our'' turn.  ''I'm
important.'' ''Let people recognize me - know that I'm around.''

And so it's not unique for the students of 1983; they've been conditioned to be
this way for the last 10 years.  They report feelings of isolation. Families are
splitting in greater numbers, and those remaining intact often lack cohesive
internal connections. The so-called generation gap continues to widen in a
computerized technocracy characterized by rapid social and cultural changes.

Today's students seem separated from family and from the concerns and needs of
others. Their focus is limited to themselves and their cliques.

I asked how they would respond if they knew about housing discrimination against
a minority group in their town. Here's a sampling of replies:

''We're busy, we work.'' ''What could we do?'' ''I'd write a letter.'' ''I'd do
something, if it were my friend.'' Kiddingly, I told them that if I had to
conjure up an image representing their generation, it would be someone playing a
video game, someone wearing a Walkman. Alone. Detached. Having no connections
with other people.

They laughed, but thought it accurate.  Transiency is another possible variable.
Several students have told of their inability to commit themselves to things -
to others, to communities - because they and various temporary friends have
moved so often.

This next one seemed novel. Some complained of too many earlychildhood
responsibilities, such as having to take care of younger siblings because both
parents worked. Now, older, the ''disrespect'' is interpreted as childlike
acting-out that seeks to recreate a missed childhood.

The opposite strain is heard more often. Rather than too much responsibility,
many more report a lack of discipline, rules and responsibilities in school and
at home.

''There's a decline of manners,'' some said. ''There was always disrespect, but
it was condemned. Now it's accepted - tolerated.'' In sociology, this is anomie:
Anything goes when the constraints are absent.  Several blame parents for not
setting clear, consistent standards.  With isolation come isolated parents as
well. Rather than showing a united front with fellow child-rearers and making
group decisions about acceptable standards, many parents cave in to their
children: ''Don't call Mrs. So-and-So about whether there will be drinking at
the party. I'll be so embarrassed.''

Interestingly, interviews with high school students reveal a desire for more
rules and stricter discipline.  A corollary: Colleagues have suggested that
disrespect may be a defense mechanism to cover anxieties produced by an
inability to deal with a society having uncertain boundaries of acceptable
behavior.

This leads to the next point, a notion derived from theories in the area of
deviant behavior. People often tend to ''test the boundaries'' to find the
limits of acceptable behavior, possibly to provoke change. In this case, the
issue becomes: ''How much disrespect can we show before they dig in?''

Another angle might be the absence of a feeling of threat. Barring flagrant
violations of law, students believe that they can get away with almost anything.

Through the early 70's, part of the consciousness of male students was the very
real possibility of being drafted. With this threat removed, today's students
have greater leeway within which to operate.

Don't misinterpret this as a pitch for another draft or more punitive sanctions.
Consider it but another potential variable producing an accent on
self-indulgence.

Students have expressed concern as to where this is all heading.  ''I think it
will get worse,'' said one. ''The younger ones are worse than we were at their
age.'' It would be comforting to imagine the pendulum swinging back in a few
years. But will that happen in a computerized society symbolized by isolation
and alienation? We will only continue to become even more technologically
compartmentalized.

What response would you anticipate from young people conditioned by
razzle-dazzle video games, floor-to-ceiling speakers and the most advanced,
high-powered computers when they receive less than exceptional quality
entertainment?

And isn't that what this is all about? Being entertained is clearly one of their
most important values. Over and over, the theme was repeated:

''Our values are that we want to have good times ... sensual, not spiritual
gratification ... self gratification ... We are the best ... strive to live in a
productive manner for ourselves ...''

And when unsatiated, the results are ''boredom,'' itself often a form of
disrespect, and a general lack of respect manifested in other ways.

A final note to students: I can picture some of you finding this article
objectionable and, from where you sit, incorrect. Of course, if you've bothered
to take time to read it, then I'm probably not describing you. The students I'm
focusing on wouldn't consider exerting the effort to read; TV is so much easier.

All I'm asking is for you to capture some of these seemingly isolated pieces of
life's social puzzle, fit them into the broader mosaic of society and attempt to
glean the message. What does it mean?

This only begins to scratch the surface.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Richard Sigal is an associate professor of sociology at the County College of
Morris.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DR. SPOCK, AT 80, STILL GIVING ADVICE

BYLINE: By ROY REED, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: FAYETTEVILLE, Ark., May 1


Dr. Benjamin Spock, the nation's baby doctor in spite of everything, will be 80
years old Monday.  He will celebrate at his solar-heated home in the Ozarks,
where he and his wife, Mary Morgan, who is 39, have lived since 1976.  If the
weather is decent, the white-haired, barrel-chested old athlete will hurl his
6-foot, 4-inch body into a boat on nearby Beaver Lake and row his customary
eight miles. Maybe, because it will be his birthday, he will stop fretting about
the future of the world for a few minutes and let his memory drift - say, to
1924, when his crew from Yale won the Paris Olympics.

Not likely, though. He made a birthday speech here today, and when one of the
200 or so people at the party hollered, ''Give us advice,'' he responded with 10
minutes of instruction on working for nuclear disarmament.

''Write letters!'' he urged. ''Every month I write to the President, and to both
of my United States Senators, and to that right-wing Congressman who represents
me. Sometimes I write every two weeks. Every time I get scared again, or angry
again, I write letters.''

Good-Humored but Blunt

Fire appeared in his eye, and in spite of the good-humored tone and the
infectious pediatrician's smile, his words were blunt.  ''People say to me, 'But
I don't know how to express myself,' It doesn't matter. The President doesn't
call in the Secretary of State every time he gets a letter from a citizen and
say: 'Look at that spelling! Look at that punctuation!' ''

Then the fire faded (minutes before, he had told an interviewer that he was no
longer angry at anyone except President Reagan), and neighbors and admirers once
again saw the other side of him: the reassuring doctor, the friend millions
still turn to when the baby wakes up with colic, the man many will always
consider the uncle of his country.

He laughed and had the listeners laughing as he recalled some of his dozen
arrests for civil disobedience. There was a scene from a Washington jail when he
and a group that included numerous clergymen had been arrested for protesting
the Vietnam War. They sang hymns until 3 A.M. ''The acoustics in a jail are
marvelous,'' he said.

Hopes for Civil Disobedience

Looking out at the men, women, children and babes in arms, he said, ''I hope
that sooner or later you will all commit civil disobedience.'' He smiled, as a
doctor smiles when advising a worried mother.

Dr. Spock, son of a proper Connecticut family, cast his first vote for Calvin
Coolidge for President. He has been moving to the left since and now advocates
the decentralized socialism of the People's Party platform. He is dismayed by
the apolitical nature of many of the nation's young.

''I'm very disappointed that so few young people are interested in politics,''
he told a local reporter last week. ''They seem to keep their noses to the
grindstone, interested only in getting good grades and getting a good job.''

His book, ''Baby and Child Care,'' has sold more than 30 million copies. Sales
fell off in the late 1960's after the Rev. Norman Vincent Peale and others
attacked Dr. Spock and attributed the permissiveness of the time to the famous
book. Dr. Spock had just been indicted for antiwar activities. He was the
People's Party candidate for President in 1968.

Many Critics 'Never Use Book'

He bristles when he speaks of Dr. Peale. The man obviously had never read the
book he was denouncing, Dr. Spock says.  ''People who call the book 'permissive'
never use the book,'' he said. ''They never read it. I've never been told by
people who use the book that it advocates permissiveness.''

The only apology he has ever made for the book was for its sex labels. In the
original edition, all the parents were presumed to be female and all the babies
male. He revised that language in the third edition in the 1970's ''to eliminate
the sexist biases of the sort that helped create and perpetuate discrimination
against girls and women.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dr. Benjamin Spock and his wife

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN MAKES HIS FIRST VISIT TO VIETNAM MEMORIAL ON MALL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


President Reagan paid his first visit to the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial today,
placing a bouquet between the granite walls bearing the names of 57,939 dead and
missing soldiers.

He spent seven minutes at the memorial on the Mall after attending services at
National Presbyterian Church.  When the monument was dedicated nearly six months
ago, Vietnam veterans were angered that the highest-ranking official at the
ceremonies was Edward Alvarez, deputy administrator of the Veterans
Administration.

Mark Weinberg, an assistant White House press secretary, said that the President
had ''wanted to go for a long time'' and that ''this was the first opportunity
he had.''

Chats With Two Volunteers

Mr. Reagan made no public comments but did stop to shake hands with tourists and
chat briefly with Jeanne Trabulsi, a National Park Service volunteer who told
him there were three men named Reagan memorialized on the wall. He also talked
with a volunteer in a group maintaining a vigil there.

The President, whose wife was spending the weekend in California, was
accompanied by the White House chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d, and several
members of Mr. Baker's family.

The President's visit to National Presbyterian Church was his eighth church
visit since he took office nearly two and a half years ago. Aides have said he
has avoided church services because he thinks his presence there disrupts the
congregation.

In an unrelated development, an aide has quoted Mr. Reagan as saying that if he
runs again he will definitely ask Vice President Bush to be on the ticket.

'A Combination That Is Working'

''You don't break up a combination that is working,'' Mr. Reagan said, according
to Anson Franklin, an assistant White House press secretary.

Mr. Reagan, who has not announced whether he will seek re-election, told The
Houston Post that he thought conservatives who once opposed Mr. Bush should be
over their objections by now. If not, he said, ''Then it is their fault because
he has really been, without any reservation, a total team player.''

Mr. Bush said he was unconcerned whether he would be on the ticket in 1984, The
Houston Post reported today. ''I could take it or leave it,'' he was quoted as
saying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM CONSEQUENCE: QUIET FROM THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


In the widening and increasingly intense debate over the Reagan Administration's
policy on Central America, one voice has been noticeably quiet. The nation's
senior military officers have had little to say in public.

The reason, in a word: Vietnam. Not the Vietnam of a bloody war a long way from
home, but the Vietnam of what they see as an absence of a national commitment,
of a solid consensus supporting a carefully devised and executed policy.

Many military officers bear emotional as well as physical scars from being in
Vietnam and feeling that nobody at home was behind them. The generals and
colonels at the top today were the lieutenant colonels and captains who fought
in Vietnam yesterday.

''We were the scapegoats of that conflict,'' said a senior officer. ''We're the
ones pulling back on the reins on this one.'' The reluctance among military
officers was reinforced by a reaction in Congress to the President's address
Wednesday night. Military officers pointed to the applause President Reagan got
when he said that no American combat troops would be sent to Central America.

Advice from the Joint Chiefs

The reluctance, staff officers said, has shown up in advice from the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, who are the senior military advisers to the President and to
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger. They said the chiefs had strongly
recommended against looking for military solutions. Aides to Mr. Weinberger said
he had agreed.

The lack of enthusiasm for dispatching American military forces to Central
America has been compounded by what some officers consider privately to be
disarray in the Administration and a wide gap between policy and action.

They said that top officers enthusiastically supported a policy paper entitled
''U.S. Policy in Central America and Cuba Through F.Y.84'' that was drawn up a
year ago by the National Security Council. It outlined a strategy to foster
political reform, regional cooperation, economic aid, military assistance and
public information.

But the officers complained that the policy had not been executed, largely
because no one in the Administration was in charge of carrying it out, They
hoped the President's speech would correct that. ''They're trying to get their
act together now,'' said one officer.

Issues Called Political

Several senior officers were critical of the Administration for failing to
nurture a public consensus. ''The military and the C.I.A.  are doing as they're
told but that hasn't been coupled with public affairs or persuading Congress,''
said an officer. ''We're not presenting the American people with the facts.''

Many military officers said the problems in Central America were basically not
military problems and that the military therefore shouldn't be asked to solve
them. They asserted that the issues were mainly political, economic and
internal.

Many officers said they had learned from Vietnam that if a foreign government
was either unwilling or unable to undertake political action and economic reform
or to provide internal security, there was little the United States could do.

Internal security is for police and paramilitary forces to provide, the officers
said, and not for regular troops. If United States help was requested, that
would be a task for the Army's Special Forces and similiar units in the Navy and
Air Force, they said.

Moreover, several officers argued, the real threat was not in Central America
but from Cuba and the Soviet Union. They contended that it would be useless to
get bogged down in a fight in Central America unless the nation was willing to
confront the main adversaries.

Question of the Draft

Officers in the Army, which would bear the brunt of a battle in Central America,
said their service was just getting new weapons to replace obsolete equipment or
arms burned up in Vietnam. They said they didn't want that supply consumed in
Central America when they might have to fight more threating enemies.

The military services, particularly the Army, are just getting the volunteer
force on its feet, 10 years after the draft ended. Fighting in Central America
could well lead to a return to the draft, the officers said, with all the
divisiveness that would entail.

The Chief of Staff of the Army, Gen. Edward S. Meyer, once summed up in a speech
a bit of ancient military philosophy that seemed to lie behind the thinking of
officers today. ''Armies don't fight wars,'' he said. ''Nations fight wars.''

On another occasion, he expanded on that thought, saying: ''When the United
States Army, which is genuinely a people's army, is committed, the American
people are committed. And when the American people drop that commitment, then
the Army cannot remain committed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FEARING ILLNESS, 15 SUE TO BAR SPRAYING OF DIOXIN

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Nova Scotia


A small group of residents who fear for their future health were preparing to go
to court Monday to block the planned spraying of herbicides containing dioxin on
the forests of Nova Scotia.

In a case of broad significance because of the growing worldwide interest in the
safety or lack of safety of the so-called phenoxy herbicides, the group has sued
the Nova Scotia Forest Industries, a subsidiary of the Stora Kopparbergs of
Sweden.

If the ruling goes against the company, ''it should make it more difficult to
use the herbicides in other places,'' said Lennart Hardell, a Swedish cancer
expert who is expected to testify in the case.

Willard L. Dillon of the Nova Scotia Wildlife Federation says he is distressed
about the possible effects of the herbicide on rabbits and salmon. ''The whole
world's watching what's happening here,'' he said.

Supporters Cite Advantages

Proponents of the spraying argue that some scientific studies attest to the
herbicide's safety; that the use of the chemicals has been approved by the
Canadian Government, and that they are vital to the pulp industry as a quarter
of the work force of Cape Breton Island remains unemployed. The provincial
government is supporting the industry in the court proceeding.

Most of the spraying would be done on about 15,000 acres of craggily beautiful
woodlands of the island, which is northeast of the Nova Scotia mainland.

The 15 plaintiffs say they may be risking financial damage by going to court,
because Canadian law requires them to pay legal costs, estimated to be more than
$250,000, if they lose. They say they have received some foreign contributions,
including five crisp $20 bills from the Japanese Friends of the Earth. But most
of the $100,000 or so they have raised so far has come from Canadians, and the
bulk of the first $30,000 was raised at local bake sales, quilt auctions and
bean suppers.

Risk to Health Feared

But the residents maintain, too, that they will face a bigger risk than
financial loss if the spraying is allowed to proceed. Victoria Palmer, an artist
who is one of the 15, said she and the others all live near the proposed
spraying sites. And she said of the defendants, ''They're under attack in the
courts because we're under attack in the woods.''

Medical researchers contend that dioxins, which are byproducts in the
manufacture of phenoxy herbicides, are perhaps the most deadly chemicals
produced by man. Phenoxies are a class of chemicals derived from hydrocarbon
compounds.

Some scientists hold that although it is correct to assert that there is no
scientific proof of a direct health threat to humans, mounting epidemiological
evidence does suggest an association between human exposure to dioxins and
development of birth defects, miscarriages, sterility and cancer. Moreover,
dioxins have now been found to be powerful promoters of cancer in laboratory
animals.

Weak Form of Agent Orange

The herbicide to be sprayed in Nova Scotia is a combination of chemicals known
as 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D. It is this mixture that, in a stronger dosage, was
referred to as Agent Orange, used as a jungle defoliant in Vietnam. It would be
used, as a part of a Canadian reforestation program, to protect new softwood
seedlings from overgrowth by hardwoods. The herbicide in question kills only
broadleafed plants.

One of its components, 2,4,5-T, considered the more dangerous, has been
restricted or banned in the United States, West Germany, Sweden, Italy, Denmark,
the Netherlands and three Canadian provinces. And 2,4-D was recently banned in
California. This dispute illustrates the level of emotions raised by the use of
herbicides. And in the opinion of spraying foes, it shows, too, the growing
frustration of coping with man-made products that are suspected as dangerous but
that have not been scientifically proved so.

'Things Got Switched Around'

''It should be those guys who have to prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that it's
not going to hurt you before they use it,'' insisted John Roberts, a lobster
fisherman who is active in the opposition.  ''I can't figure out how things got
switched around this way.''

Some of the proponents of the spraying, on the other hand, question the motives
of the opposition. ''I wouldn't be a bit surprised if these plaintiffs had
worldwide ambitions to destroy forest in other places than Nova Scotia,''
charged John Dickey, a lawyer for Nova Scotia Forest Industries, although he did
not indicate why he thought that would be the case.

Similarly, Nova Scotia's Minister of Lands and Forests, George Henley, has
suggested that herbicide opponents are financed by ''subversive foreign
elements.''

Studies Called Faulty

The proponents contend that the various bans or restrictions imposed elsewhere
are based on faulty and inadequate evidence, and they insist that use of the
herbicide is not dangerous. Mr. Henley sparked the environmentalists' ire last
summer by calling the chemicals as ''safe as cold water.''

The reforestation is partly an attempt to revive woodlands that have been
ravaged by the spruce budworm. Proponents of the spraying lay part of the blame
for the damage by the budworm on the previous successful campaign against the
spraying of pesticides on Cape Breton Island.

''The budworm has harvested a lot more wood than the industry has,'' said John
Smith, senior director of program planning for the Department of Lands and
Forests. Experts calculate that the budworm may have destroyed as much as 50
percent of the softwood trees on the island.

Some Spraying Has Been Done

A relatively small amount of herbicide spraying has been done on private lands
owned by the Scott Paper Company and the Bowater Mersey Paper Company in the
south and central portions of the Nova Scotia mainland. Nova Scotia Forest
Industries harvests the bulk of its wood from public lands; hence, it is more
vulnerable to citizen action.

Opponents of the spraying said they are distressed that, even if they are
ultimately successful, all they will gain is the right not to be sprayed; if
they are unsuccessful, the financial loss could be heavy.

''We could lose everything and end up getting sprayed anyway,'' said Connie
Schnell.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Nova Scotia

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RYAN'S STRUGGLE TO GLORY

BYLINE: By PETER ALFANO

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1589 words


LOOKING back, as one is often asked to do after reaching a milestone, Nolan Ryan
finds it easier now to be philosophical about the early days of his baseball
career. He has accomplished a great deal in 16 seasons and there have been no
lingering side-effects from those four uncomfortable years among the masses in
New York.

Ryan never could quite acclimate himself to city life. On rainy days, for
instance, when the neighbors in Bayside, Queens, were driven indoors, he would
take his Labrador retriever to a local park so that he could enjoy the solitude.

He was accustomed to Texas and wide-open spaces, to a ranch and a herd of
cattle. He never thought seriously about devoting 15 or 20 years of his life to
a baseball career. ''It wasn't a goal of mine to be a major league pitcher,''
Ryan said recently. ''People like Tom Seaver, that's all he thought about when
he was a little boy. I had no burning desire to do that.''

That is why in the early days, when he struggled with the Mets, Ryan was ready
to retire and take his 100-mile-an-hour fastball back to the ranch in Alvin,
Tex. It was his wife, Ruth, who talked him out of it. ''She knew I wasn't
thrilled by the big league situation,'' he said, ''but she never gave up. I had
doubts about my ability. I was so frustrated that I just wanted to hang it up.''

Last Wednesday, Ryan became the major league career strikeout leader with 3,509,
one more than Walter Johnson, whose record stood for more than a half century.
Ryan will begin to add to that record tonight when his current team, the Houston
Astros, faces the Mets at Shea Stadium. Ryan also has pitched five no-hitters,
the most ever, and he holds a number of other strikeout records in addition to
winning 207 games for the Mets, California Angels and the Astros.

What is ironic is that in the beginning, he wondered whether he would ever
measure up to the standards being set by Seaver, Jerry Koosman and Gary Gentry,
who, with Ryan, were four of the best pitching prosects in baseball in the late
1960's. And all of them were with the Mets. Now, in some categories, the
36-year-old Ryan stands alone.

The romantics among Met fans will not forget 1969 and the team's first and only
world championship. The Mets were led by their quartet of young, talented
pitchers whose strong arms excited the fans and stirred the imaginations of
baseball executives.

Seaver and Koosman were in the forefront and appeared to have the most talent.
Seaver was polished and already a pitching technician when he was 23 years old.
Koosman was an affable left-hander who saved his grittiest performances for the
most important games. Gentry had the right stuff, too, although he was an
emotional type who often smoldered on the mound and caused his own undoing. Arm
trouble ended his career before he reached the age of 30.

Ryan, was a lanky, quiet cowboy who knew more about raising cattle than
pitching. He was unquestionably the one who had the most to learn. If he were to
be successful, baseball people said, he would have to harness that magnificent
fastball. Other young pitchers had learned that the fastball was a gift but also
could be an albatross.

''I was a raw talent,'' Ryan said. ''I had as good an arm as there was and the
Mets were drafting arms. But when I came up to the Mets, I had to learn how to
throw a curveball. I had to learn how to pitch. The other guys were more
advanced.''

''I was from a small town in Texas and it was football-oriented,'' Ryan said.
''The football coach was designated baseball coach, too, and although he took an
interest, he really didn't think of it as part of his obligation.

''I was a wide receiver in football and actually was thinking of going to
college on a basketball scholarship. I'm 6-foot-2, but I could dunk then. I
played the post.''

The Mets changed his mind and his future after they saw his fastball. No one can
be taught to throw that hard. It comes naturally. When the Met scout Red Murff
saw Ryan throw that fastball in a high school game, he immediately called home
and excitedly told his superiors about the kid who could throw harder than Sandy
Koufax.

Ryan weighed only 150 pounds in high school and some of the other scouts thought
he did not have the body to continue to throw that hard for much longer.

''There aren't many 150-pound power pitchers,'' said Ryan, who now weighs 195.
''But Red Murff did his homework. He visited my family and saw that my father
was a big man. And my brother was welldeveloped. I was going to fill out.''

Ryan, however, said he had no understanding of how hard he would have to work to
become a major league pitcher. The Mets, for their part, perhaps rushed him,
hoping he could cash in on that fastball while learning on the job.

He was used as a sometimes starter and part-time reliever, and this did not
help. Also, because it was during the Vietnam War years, Ryan was in the
military reserves and had to spend every other weekend attending meetings in
Houston. One month every summer he had to attend camp.

''We all see things differently, but it was a combination of things that hurt
him in New York,'' said Tug McGraw, now with the Phillies but once the blithe
spirit and relief pitcher who saved a few games for the foursome. ''I think
right after Nolan signed he had a sore elbow. Then he had that military
obligation and he didn't like New York. He also had those blister problems.''

Pickle brine. Nolan Ryan didn't know what it was but he helped make it famous
for a while. Because he suffered from blisters on his throwing hand, the pickle
brine was suggested as a means of toughening the skin. Boxers who cut easily
have been known to use it.

But the pickle brine made a mockery of Ryan's unfolding story.  Strong arm,
tender fingers. Great fastball, but no control. The experts cautioned the Mets
to remain patient, that Koufax was in his mid 20's when he finally learned how
to tame his considerable talent. But after four seasons and a 29-38 record, the
Mets were convinced Ryan would never succeed in New York.

He was traded along with three Met farmhands to the Angels in the winter of 1971
for Jim Fregosi in what always will be remembered as one of the biggest blunders
in the history of the Met franchise. ''I think Nolan picked up some good habits
on the Mets, though,'' McGraw said. ''He watched guys like Tom and Jerry.''

Ryan, though, credits Tom Morgan, the Angels' pitching coach, for teaching him
the refinements of pitching. He learned to control his fastball and he developed
a big breaking curve that rivaled any in the league. He won 19 games in his
first year with California and twice was a 20-game winner.

''One of the best secrets in the game is his curveball,'' said Pete Rose of the
Phillies. ''When that's working, you'll never hit the fastball. I've always
liked Nolan. He's a competitor. He's got a big heart. To me, he's a first-ballot
Hall of Fame member. He's the only guy who ever was a threat to pitch a
no-hitter every time he goes out there.''

As talented as they were, Seaver, Ryan, Koosman and Gentry all were traded by
the Mets at some point in their careers. Ryan and Seaver still keep in touch.
There is a professional respect between them.

Seaver has won 60 more games than Ryan, has a much better winning percentage and
is also noted as a strikeout pitcher who set a major league record by striking
out 200 or more batters for nine consecutive seasons. But in recent seasons his
fastball has lost some of its zip while Ryan retains almost all his speed. And
before he finally did it five years ago, Seaver often joked painfully about
trying to pitch a no-hitter while it was almost expected of Ryan.

Perhaps Seaver envies the fact that Ryan will never have to become a finesse
pitcher although Ryan senses the fastball is beginning to slow down at times.
Once he could throw 180 pitches a game and now his limit, he said, is about 120,
which is still above average.

''Lee Roy Jordan, who played linebacker for the Cowboys, and I are in business
together and we talk about getting older,'' Ryan said.  ''He'll tell me about
how he would be out there, knowing the play the offense was running, reading it,
but not being able to get there to stop it.

''In my situation, hitters now might foul off a pitch they would miss. And my
strikeout ratio is dropping. But on some days, it's not that way.''

What Ryan means is that on some days there still is no one in baseball who can
throw a ball any faster than he can. ''I said a long time ago that Nolan Ryan
would get the record,'' Seaver said. ''I expected it. He has a good
understanding of the mechanics of pitching and he's enormously strong.''

In typical Seaver style, it was a clinical appraisal. Ryan says that aside from
some friendly needling, the Mets' four young men of the late 1960's were not
rivals. Ryan was not a good enough pitcher then to compete against his
teammates.

''I never felt any comparisons,'' he said. ''I don't think of the Mets as being
a major part of my career. We were young and energetic in 1969 and it was like a
fantasy, an overpowering year for Tom and Jerry. But it was not a force in my
life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nolan Ryan table of career statistics

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
1,500 Vietnamese Troops Begin Leaving Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 124 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 2


About 1,500 Vietnamese troops accompanied by tanks and artillery today left
Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, for home.

The elaborately staged pullout was the start of a larger withdrawal from
Cambodia that the Vietnamese Ambassador, Ngo Dinh, says will involve 10,000
troops this month.

Hanoi helped set up the current Government here after invading Cambodia in
December 1978 and has an estimated 180,000 troops in the country.

----

BANGKOK, Thailand, May 2 (AP) -Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila of Thailand
told reporters here today that Vietnam's withdrawal of some of its troops in
Cambodia ''has no meaning.'' He added: ''We want a total withdrawal. These
troops might be sent right back. Who knows?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COMMITTEE OF 5 DRAFTED ARMS LETTER

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, May 2


The proposed pastoral letter on nuclear arms by the nation's Roman Catholic
bishops is the handiwork of a five-member ad hoc committee on war and peace that
has worked on the document for 22 months.

In the preparation process, the committee held hearings at which dozens of
religious, military and government officials testified, pored over hundreds of
pages of advice and heard the full conference of bishops debate the issues last
November. Although numerous aides gave assistance, the document was shaped
principally by the bishops themselves.

A diversity of views within the committee provided problems and some tensions.
On one side, Bishop Thomas J. Gumbleton of Detroit, president of the American
branch of Pax Christi, a group dedicated to nonviolence, reflected the most
critical view of the possession and use of nuclear arms.

On the other side, Bishop John O'Connor most vigorously defended the ''just
war'' tradition of justifiable self-defense. Two other bishops took a moderate
approach, The chairman, Joseph Cardinal Bernardin, tried to achieve a consensus,
stressing the need for unity.

Here are sketches of the committee members: JOSEPH CARDINAL BERNARDIN,
Archbishop of Chicago, chairman. The 55-year-old Cardinal is highly respected by
his fellow prelates.  Known as a shrewd church diplomat, he has carefully and
judiciously guided the committee along a middle course, arbitrating disputes and
sorting through complexities. He once served as general secretary and president
of the bishops' conference. Before moving to Chicago last year, he was
Archbishop of Cincinnati.

BISHOP THOMAS J. GUMBLETON, Auxiliary Bishop of Detroit. Bishop Gumbleton, 55,
has been the most liberal member of the committee. A familiar figure at peace
conferences, he has also been active in several social issues, including
poverty, civil rights and support for the oppressed. He was one of three United
States clergymen who visited the American hostages in Iran in the 1980 Christmas
season.  He holds a doctorate in canon law. Before being consecrated bishop, he
was vicar general of the Archdiocese of Detroit.

BISHOP JOHN O'CONNOR, Auxiliary Bishop to the Military Vicar in New York. Bishop
O'Connor, 63, pressed the committee to give weight to arguments in favor of
nuclear deterrence and the right of self-defense. In a long career as a Navy
chaplain, he rose to the rank of rear admiral and was chief of naval chaplains
from 1975 until his retirement in 1979. He earned a Ph.D. in psychology from the
Catholic University of America in Washington and has written two books, ''A
Chaplain Looks at Vietnam,'' and a volume on the tradition of just wars.

BISHOP GEORGE A. FULCHER, Bishop of Lafayette, Ind. Before being named as the
head of the Diocese of Lafayette earlier this year, Bishop Fulcher was an
auxiliary bishop in the Diocese of Columbus, Ohio. The 61-year-old Bishop is
generally known as a moderate with some liberal leanings. He earned a doctorate
in sacred theology in Rome, taught moral and pastoral theology to seminarians
and was once the editor of the diocesan newspaper in Columbus. He also served as
vicar general of that diocese. His interests include ecumenism and medical
ethics.

BISHOP DANIEL P. REILLY, Bishop of Norwich, Conn. Also regarded as a
middle-of-the-road member of the committee, Bishop Reilly's genial personality
makes him popular among his colleagues. His background includes studies in
business administration at Harvard and Boston College. Bishop Reilly, 54, was
vicar general of the Diocese of Providence, R.I., prior to his elevation to the
hierarchy in 1975.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bishop George Fulcher photo of Joseph Cardinal
Bernardin photo of Bishop Daniel Reilly photo of Bishop John O'Connor photo of
Bishop Thomas Gumbleton

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEMOCRACY BORN OF A CARIBBEAN CRISIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 174 words


To the Editor:

In the whirlwind of recriminations buffeting the Administration's Central
American policy, Americans have been treated to a veritable string of untruths
regarding the ''inevitability'' that Washington is heading for another Vietnam,
Cuba or Nicaragua.$ May I challenge this simplistic axiom by stating that in
April 1965, the U.S. likewise faced an ''inevitable'' defeat in a crisis
centered in the Caribbean. President Lyndon Johnson, responding to the situation
in league with our Latin American allies, restored order and paved the way for a
political evolution resulting in a new democracy.

Today, human-rights organizations such as Freedom House rate the Dominican
Republic - that lost cause of 18 years ago - as a sterling example of political
and economic progress. The Salvadorans should take heart.  JOHN J. METZLER
Glendale, N.Y., April 28, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


By Walter Goodman
THE AIR-LINE TO SEATTLE. Studies in Literary and Historical Writing About
America. By Kenneth S. Lynn. 227 pages. University of Chicago. $17.50.

KENNETH S. LYNN'S new collection of magazine essays and reviews takes its theme
from George Santayana's observation that the American intelligentsia is fatally
cut off from ''the variety, the unspeakable variety of possible life.'' The
book's title comes from a verse written by Santayana that mocked the ''grey
Puritans and Quakers'' who secluded themselves within the walls of Harvard and
other bastions of gentility:
''Yet the smoke of trade and battle Cannot quite be banished hence, And the
air-line to Seattle Whizzes just behind the fence.'' Whereas Santayana, writing
before World War I, was criticizing ''the genteel tradition'' in American
letters, Mr. Lynn attributes what he sees as the continuing divorcement of
intellectuals from American realities to their leftwing predilections. Mr. Lynn,
who teaches history at Johns Hopkins University, casts a wide net. He hauls in
Walter Lippmann, Christopher Lasch and Joseph P. Lash, Malcolm Cowley and Justin
Kaplan, Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., William Styron and Ronald Steel, Edmund
Wilson, Garry Wills and C. Vann Woodward, among others.

He finds examples of the intellectual malaise wherever he looks and takes arms
against it: In Frederick Lewis Allen's ''Only Yesterday,'' he discerns ''a
left-of-center willingness to believe the worst about conservative
Republicans.'' He argues that the readiness of the literati to read
''Huckleberry Finn'' as an indictment of America reflects ''the anti-Americanism
that has been a part of campus life ever since the mid-1960's.'' He calls Garry
Wills's thesis that a vision of communality rather than liberty inspired Thomas
Jefferson ''shameless pandering to leftist prejudices.'' He criticizes Justin
Kaplan for treating Walt Whitman's support of the war with Mexico ''in the
accents of a Viet Nam War critic condemning contemporary American 'imperialism.'
''

Ronald Steel's biography of Walter Lippmann, Mr. Lynn charges, merely
illuminates the author's ''own badly delimited and highly partisan view of
history.'' He tells us that Edmund Wilson's ''literary sensibility was ruled by
political nausea,'' and he is especially biting about Malcolm Cowley: ''No other
interpretation of American literature has more engaged the national mind, or
more thoroughly stultified it, than the legend of the lost generation that
Cowley wove from the warp of the Communist line and the woof of his own
romanticism.''

If such views sound as though they belong in Commentary magazine, that may be
because that is where most of them first appeared. Mr.  Lynn shares the
neo-conservative opinion that the literary life in America has for decades been
dominated by knee-jerk liberals or worse. He has a point, but his readers may at
moments wonder, are the left-wingers never right?

Some of these pieces work almost despite Mr. Lynn's obsession. His defense of
''Huckleberry Finn'' against tendentious interpretations of Huck as the
all-anti-American boy is full of common sense about the career of Mark Twain.
And his account of the unhappy life of Maxwell Perkins is fascinating for its
insights into how the fabled editor's personal troubles spilled over into his
professional relationships.

The most ambitious article in this collection is ''The Rebels of Greenwich
Village,'' a long, relatively unpolitical essay about the people who arrived in
the Village around World War I and made a considerable mark on American culture
during the ensuing decade.  Here, too, Mr. Lynn is a counter-puncher; he sets up
the assertion of the historian Henry F. May, that the young rebels came largely
from villages and small towns in the Middle West and hated middle-class culture,
in order to knock it down. Mr. Lynn's own research reveals that the rebels were
not so young and that they came mainly from well-to-do families in the East and
big cities elsewhere. What brought many of them to the Village, he believes, was
not love of the big city but a craving for ''friendship and a neighborhood
atmosphere.''

More typically, however, he works his ideological beat. He uses the tale of
Ralph Waldo Emerson's courting of a rich wife as a way of slamming ''American
intellectuals who like to believe that they are morally superior beings who have
risen above their countrymen's worship of money.'' His elaborate and
psychologically questionable essay on Ernest Hemingway suffers from a refusal to
grant even a bit of credence or credit to those who find a connection between
Hemingway's World War I wound and works such as ''The Sun Also Rises.'' Mr.
Lynn's polemical spirit and his fondness for invective become wearying in large
chunks. ''The self-promoting professor from South Carolina'' is one of his
kinder descriptions of Matthew J.  Bruccoli, a biographer of F. Scott
Fitzergald.

In the course of his skewering of Garry Wills, Mr. Lynn suggests that if Mr.
Wills were ''a less combative critic,'' he might have been a better scholar.
Well, if Mr. Lynn were less combative, if he could bring himself to grant a
portion of judgment or reason or good will or honesty to his ideological
adversaries, he would invite more confidence from even the favorably disposed
reader.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
THE FOCUS TURNS TO FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


On Tuesday, the House Intelligence Committee will consider an amendment to bar
any American-backed covert intelligence operations in Nicaragua. At the same
time, another committee will take testimony on President Reagan's plan to deploy
the MX missile, which has already come in for severe criticism. Later in the
week, the House will again debate a resolution calling for a freeze on nuclear
weapons.

As the schedule indicates, foreign policy issues are suddenly dominating the
Congressional agenda.  Capitol Hill critics of the Administration say they are
responding to rising confusion and alarm in the country about the direction of
Mr. Reagan's foreign policy. ''This Administration has a monolithic, 1950's,
John Foster Dulles view of the world in the 1980's,'' said Representative Thomas
J. Downey, a Long Island Democrat. ''They're out of sync with the American
people, and the American people are hammering that home to us.''

The White House is reacting to developments in Congress with irritation and
alarm. ''The feeling is that Congress is going too far,'' one Administration
official said privately. ''Every detail of foreign policy is now being fully
scrutinized, down to the minutiae.  We're dealing with legislative riders and
committee reports that are often conflicting, which makes it very difficult for
the execution of foreign policy.''

'One of the Oldest Conflicts'

There is a wide consensus on Capitol Hill that Congress can only intrude so far
into the conduct of foreign policy. As Representative Jim Wright of Texas, the
majority leader, put it, ''We can't have 535 Secretaries of State.'' But as
Senator John Tower, Republican of Texas, has noted, the conflict between the
White House and Congress over control of foreign policy is ''one of the oldest
conflicts in the American system of government.''

After World War I, Congress flexed its power by rejecting the Treaty of
Versailles and then restricting the ability of the Roosevelt Administration to
aid its European allies. World War II and its aftermath pushed the pendulum back
toward executive control of foreign affairs. But that all changed again with
Vietnam.

''The rhetoric says that the President has the authority to set foreign affairs,
but no one up here believes that,'' said an aide to the Senate leadership. ''
Vietnam killed that. From here on in, they'll take out after the President on
the foreign level as they do on the domestic level.''

The Vietnam experience not only buried the notion of Presidential infallibility
on foreign affairs, it made Congress particularly wary of situations like El
Salvador. To many, the lesson is that small initial commitments can lead to much
deeper ones.

New Generation of Leaders

Perhaps even more important, the Vietnam era produced a whole new generation of
leaders who view foreign policy in a fundamentally different way. And these
leaders are now moving into positions of influence on Capitol Hill.

''The tenor of Congress has changed,'' said House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.
''The new guys who have come here in the last eight or nine years feel they
should play a very important part. Is that right or wrong? I think the old
system was better myself.''

Mr. Downey added, ''The children of Vietnam are the adults of El Salvador.''
Senator Tower agrees that Congress has won the battle for control of foreign
policy, at least for now, but he regrets that victory.  Writing recently in the
magazine Foreign Affairs, the former political science professor argued that
''the balance between Congress and the President has swung dangerously to the
legislative side.''

To many analysts on Capitol Hill, the Reagan Administration has aggravated
Congressional concerns by the way it has conducted its foreign policy. A
Republican official in the Senate with long experience in this area said, ''The
Administration has to dominate foreign policy, and if there is a vacuum, the
House and Senate will move in.''

International Factors Cited

Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, said he was surprised at
how often foreign policy issues had come up during a recent trip home. ''The
rhetoric of the President and the people around him is unsettling to people,''
said Mr. Dodd, a leading critic of Administration policy.

Another motive for the growing Congressional involvement in foreign matters is
the increasing reliance of the American economy on international factors. Any
legislator with an automobile plant in his district worries about trade policy
with Japan, and representatives of wheat-growing states constantly monitor
Soviet relations and the international grain markets.

Politics is seldom far below the surface on Capitol Hill, and some
Administration critics acknowledge that they view foreign policy as a major
potential liability for Mr. Reagan. They would love, for instance, to see a good
many Republicans have to defend a vote against a nuclear freeze resolution.

Yet many Democrats also admit that they take a big risk when they criticize the
President too severely or restrict his flexibility in foreign affairs.

''I think it would be disastrous,'' said Mr. Wright, ''for us to be
obstructionist to the President.''

'They Will Be Held Accountable'

A Republican political strategist also noted the Democrats' vulnerability: ''If
they are perceived to be running a foreign policy that fails, they will be held
accountable for it.''

Moreover, Congress has relatively few mechanisms for expressing its foreign
policy views. Occasionally it can pass a law limiting executive action, such as
the War Powers Act of 1973. But usually it is limited to placing restrictions on
the use of foreign aid funds.  Sometimes the lawmakers can also kick up a fuss
by delaying an Administration appointment or adopting a statement of principles,
such as the freeze resolution.

Accordingly, Congressional impact on foreign policy is generally indirect. The
lawmakers can ask questions, raise doubts, expose problems and voice criticisms.
But most of them are unwilling or unable to try to run foreign policy from
Capitol Hill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 4, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 DEAD AS TORNADOES STRIKE IN 11 COUNTIES IN UPSTATE NEW YORK

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


Tornadoes roared across 11 counties in western and central New York Monday
evening, killing three people, injuring dozens more and damaging or destroying
hundreds of homes, state officials said.

The destructive winds and rain, ''sounding like 10 jet fighters going over,''
according to Joseph Johnson, a Chautauqua County resident, moved eastward across
the state, pulling trees from the ground, blowing apart houses and barns and
tossing cars in the air.

In rural Boonville, north of Utica, the village police station, which was not
occupied at the time, was torn from its foundation by a tornado that smashed it
down two blocks away. The funnel then skipped over the Sunset Nursing Home
across the street, breaking a few windows as it went by, to continue a
three-mile-long path of destruction.

The Oneida County Executive, John D. Plumley, declared Boonville a disaster area
yesterday morning. The chief administrative officers of several other counties
made similar declarations. Dave Kelly, deputy director of the state's Office of
Disaster Preparedness in Albany, said last evening that the total damage
remained unknown.

''We've been getting reports all day,'' he said, ''but much of the area is quite
rural, and we won't know the full extent for some time.''

In Boonville, which according to most reports was the worst hit of 17
communities, county emergency workers declared the water safe and the roads
clear and said they would continue their work today.

David Sage, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Buffalo, said
that there were ''several confirmed tornadoes,'' but that the total would not be
known ''until we look at the destruction - circular damage pattern, windows
blown out - and reports of the sound, like a freight train going overhead.''

He said tornadoes, and ''especially of this force,'' did not occur very often in
New York State. The tornadoes - violently whirling, funnel-shaped clouds
extending downward from a heavy, towering cloud mass, and often touching ground
in a series -came as a cold front passed through. ''The front had a warm humid
area ahead of it, producing an unstable air mass,'' he said.

It is from such unstable masses, accompanied by high humidity and the collision
of warm, moist air at low altitude with cooler, drier air above, that tornadoes
are spawned.

2 General Paths

Mr. Kelly, of the Disaster Preparedness Office, said the tornadoes followed two
general paths, one along the southern edge of the state's Western Tier and the
other farther north. ''There were 14 separate tornadoes,'' he said, some of
which touched down repeatedly and hit several communities.

The first tornado touched down at the Chautauqua Institution, a 108-year-old
cultural and educational institution on the western shores of Chautauqua Lake,
northwest of Jamestown.

''It hit us at 5:10, just as people were on their way home.'' said Phil Zimmer,
the institution's director of communications. ''We lost about 60 trees, 25 of
them on the golf course, and most of them 75 years and older. It then smashed
through the yacht club building and destroyed 15 to 20 boats, from canoes on up.

''Some of our people were driving home,'' Mr. Zimmer said. ''In one car they
stopped, scampered down a small embankment, saw part of a house blown away and
put their faces in the ground. When they got up there was debris all over, most
of the pieces big enough to have killed them.''

The tornado missed two historic buildings at the institution by half a mile: the
90-year-old Amphitheater and the 100-year-old Athenaeum Hotel.

Joseph Johnson, a Navy veteran and the institution's treasurer, said he saw the
tornado's funnel as it skirted the southern end of the institution. He said it
sounded like jet fighters had when he was in Vietnam.

The twister then tore into Chautauqua Shores, a nearby housing development,
where it killed 58-year-old June Young, who had just returned home with her
husband, according to the County Sheriff, John Bentley. ''The tornado destroyed
the house and garage,'' he said. ''They were still in the car.''

Victims' Husbands Hospitalized

Mayville, a rural community near Chautauqua, was hit next, killing Margaret
Latta, 68.  ''We don't know whether she was in her house or a mobile home on the
property,'' Sheriff Bentley said. He said the husbands of both the victims were
hospitalized.

The Sheriff estimated the damage in the area at several million dollars,
''including three quarters of a million dollars alone to a sewage treatment
plant.''

Mr. Kelly, in Albany, said 40 homes had been struck in the Chautauqua area, and
half of them destroyed. There was extensive property damage in Jamestown, and a
state of emergency was declared throughout Chautauqua County. Witnesses in each
community affected said it was over in 5 or 10 minutes as the weather front
moved rapidly eastward.

Mr. Kelly said the third death was reported in Cayuga County, near the town of
Meridian. The state police said the victim was 49-yearold Charles Patchett of
Cato, who died when the winds toppled his mobile home down an embankment.

At about 10:30 P.M., several hundred miles northeast of Chautauqua, the front
struck Boonville.  None of the village's 2,300 residents was reported killed or
seriously injured. The Ethan Allen Furniture Company, a major employer there,
lost its roof and reported $1 million in damage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of aftermath of tornados that hit upstate New
york Map of New York State (Page D24)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 4, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE PANEL BARS AID FOR THE C.I.A. AGAINST NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


The House Select Committee on Intelligence, in a setback for the Reagan
Administration, voted today to cut off funds for the Central Intelligence Agency
to conduct covert military actions in Nicaragua.

Instead, by a party-line vote of 9 to 5, the committee authorized $80 million
for overt aid to ''any friendly country in Central America,'' to help interrupt
the flow of weapons through such nations from Cuba or Nicaragua to El Salvador
or any other Central American nation.

The committee action, which came in a closed session, may prove more symbolic
than real. It is attached to an authorization bill for the fiscal year 1983,
which may expire before Congressional action is completed because of an expected
Presidential veto. The fiscal year ends Sept. 30.

The committee would then have to vote again on the ban, in the authorization
bill for fiscal year 1984, but today's action indicated that a renewal of the
ban would be likely.

Six Days After Reagan Speech

The measure provides that ''none of the funds appropriated for fiscal year 1983
or 1984 for the Central Intelligence Agency or any other department, agency or
entity of the United States involved in intelligence activities may be obligated
or expended for the purpose or which would have the effect of supporting,
directly or indirectly, military or paramilitary operations in Nicaragua by any
nation, group, organization, movement or individual.''

The committee's action came six days after President Reagan addressed a joint
session of Congress on Central America, in a speech intended to strengthen
support for Administration policies in Central America.

During a diplomatic reception at the White House tonight, Mr.  Reagan criticized
the House committee's action as ''irresponsible''.  ''What we're doing is
perfectly proper,'' he told reporters.  ''We'll keep right on fighting. If they
want to be irresponsible, that's their business.''

There was no chance for followup questions. However, Anson Franklin, a White
House spokesman, commented afterwards that Mr.  Reagan's reference to
''fighting'' had to do with the legislative battle the Administration would
undertake to upset the committee decision. He said further that the President's
reference to ''what we're doing'' did not concern covert activities, but the
general program of military-economic aid in Central America.

Representative Edward P. Boland, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the
committee, said after the vote: ''What this committee has done is in the
interests of our own Government.  What we were doing in that area was
counterproductive.''

Mr. Boland said he would seek a closed session of the House of Representatives,
already requested by Republicans on the intelligence panel, to discuss the
measure and to provide classified information used by the committee in reaching
its decision.

The committee previously rejected, 9 to 5, a Republican effort to continue the
covert aid, which the Administration contended was needed to interrupt the flow
of weapons into El Salvador.

Last fall it was disclosed that the Administration, through the C.I.A., had been
supporting a force of 2,000 Nicaraguan rebels. This action was undertaken with
the knowledge of the House and Senate Intelligence committees.

The disclosures elicited widespread Congressional concern and fear that the
United States was becoming involved in another Vietnam. Last December, Congress
adopted a measure that prohibited the United States from providing covert aid to
military groups ''for the purpose of'' overthrowing the Sandinist Government.

Congressional concern continued to mount, however, and Mr. Boland declared last
month that the Administration had been in ''apparent violation'' of the
Congressional prohibition, setting the stage for today's action.

The authorization for overt aid will now be considered by the Foreign Affairs
Committee, before it reaches the House floor. On Friday, the Senate Intelligence
committee is scheduled to discuss a similar measure.

As originally drafted, the measure would have banned operations ''in or
against'' Nicaragua, but the phrase ''or against'' was deleted. The purpose of
the deletion, committee members said, was to permit such operations in the event
that the Sandinists invaded another nation.

Also, the draft measure provided that the prohibition ''shall take effect 45
days after the date of enactment of this session.'' But, by amendment, the
effective date was classified.

Representative Wyche Fowler Jr., a Georgia Democrat, said the reason for the
classification was that ''the committee wanted to do everything possible to
prevent prior notification that might make an orderly disengagement
impossible.''

The political complexion of the committee's Democrats, all of whom are
moderates, heightened the impact of the resolution. Committee members said they
believed that the Administration would heed the committee.

In a final modification, the committee inserted the phrase ''or any other
country'' in the provision that read, ''The President is authorized to furnish
assistance, on such terms and conditions as he may determine, to the Government
of any friendly country in Central America in order to provide such country with
the ability to prevent use of its territory, or the use of international
territory, for the transfer of military equipment from or through Cuba or
Nicaragua or any other country to any individual, group, organization or
movement which the President determines seeks to overthrow the Government of
such friendly country or the Government of any other country in Central
America.''

The committee members stressed that they shared the Administration's objectives
in Central America, but disagreed with Administration policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 4, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM RAID: NUMBERS IN DOUBT

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 441 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 3


The number of Cambodian civilians killed early last month when Vietnamese troops
shelled their camp, reportedly herded some of them into bunkers and then threw
grenades at them has been placed by Cambodian refugees at between 20 and 40.

On April 8, five days after more than 1,000 Vietnamese troops launched an attack
against the camp at O Smach, Son Sann, the former Cambodian Prime Minister,
charged that Vietnamese troops had killed at least 200 civilians by herding them
into trenches, throwing hand grenades at them and later finishing them off with
bayonets.

Statements by refugees who fled into Thailand early last month made it clear
that the attacks on civilians had occurred, but the figures differed.

Last week, dozens of Cambodians agreed in interviews that grenade attacks had
killed and wounded some civilians, and that Vietnamese soldiers had instructed
civilians to enter bunkers before blowing them up. Opinions differed on whether
shells or grenades were responsible for more deaths.

Hundreds Taken Captive

The interviews were conducted last Thursday near the Thai village of Tatum, a
few miles east of O Smach. The new Tatum camp - to which more than 20,000 O
Smach refugees were moved from a refugee camp farther inside Thailand - has been
isolated by the Thai Army, but the army permitted the refugees to be
interviewed.

O Smach is still occupied by Vietnamese troops, according to Thai intelligence
officers and Cambodian insurgents among the refugees.  No one, except O Smach's
present occupiers, has had a chance to count the bodies.

There is a further problem in estimating the number of dead.  Witnesses said
several hundred Cambodians at O Smach, including women and children, were
captured and taken away by the invaders.

O Smach, also called Sihanoukville, was the military headquarters of 1,000 or
more troops loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former chief of state
and now the head of the insurgent coalition.  The coalition is recognized by the
United Nations.

Earlier visitors to Tatum had reported that some of O Smach's attackers were
Cambodian soldiers of the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh, and that
these Cambodians had also herded civilians into bunkers and attacked them.

Wearing Vietnamese Uniforms

Many witnesses said last Thursday that the invaders, who wore Vietnamese
uniforms, had occasionally spoken Khmer, the Cambodian language, but had
sometimes spoken it badly. Many soldiers spoke Vietnamese, the refugees said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 4, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Mitterrand Condemns Occupation of Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 87 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 3


President Francois Mitterrand of France today condemned Vietnam's occupation of
Cambodia, but denounced the Chinese-backed Pol Pot rebels who are part of a
coalition fighting to regain power in Phnom Penh.

At a state banquet on the first day of his visit to China, Mr.  Mitterrand
described the Pol Pot rebels, Cambodia's former rulers, as a ''bloody and, to
our eyes, inexcusable regime.''

He told Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang that France would back efforts to restore
independence, peace and neutrality to Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 4, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Possible Herbicide Ills Are Reported by U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


Vietnam veterans have made more than 369,000 visits to Veterans Administration
hospitals for illnesses that could have been caused by Agent Orange, the
Veterans Administration said today in its first report on the chemical's
possible effect on American soldiers in Southeast Asia.

About 9,400 veterans were ill enough to require hospitalization, the agency's
medical director, Donald Custis, testified before a Congressional panel.

The figures provided by Mr. Custis to the Investigations Subcommittee of the
House Veterans Affairs Committee covered treatment from February 1982 to
February 1983.

Until last year, veterans were ineligible for treatment at Veterans
Administration hospitals for ailments they attribute to Agent Orange. A law
passed in 1981 made Vietnam veterans eligible for care that could arise from
exposure to herbicides. They are not required to prove the ailment is service
connected.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 4, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENCE ACADEMY LOOKING FOR FUNDS

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


In the 120 years since its founding, the National Academy of Sciences has
evolved into an unusual institution on the Washington scene.

It is essentially a private organization, a collection of eminent scientists and
engineers who choose their own members and hold scientific meetings, much like
any other professional society. Yet the academy also enjoys a certain
quasi-official status.

It operates under a Congressional charter that requires it to respond to
requests for advice from Federal agencies or Congress on the best way to handle
everything from nuclear waste to free-roaming burros on Government land. Thus,
it has become the most prominent source of scientific advice for the Federal
Government, an ''ally of the Government'' as as a Federal judge here once put
it, and the vast bulk of its budget comes from Federal contracts.

The problem with this kind of financing, according to academy officials, is that
it leaves the organization too subservient to Federal purse strings. As a
result, the academy is beginning a major fundraising campaign in the private
sector to gain greater independence from its Federal patrons.

'To Follow Our Own Lights'

Staff members say that some committees have tended to pull their punches lest
they alienate the Federal agencies that provided financing. Further, almost all
staff members agree that the academy has difficulty initiating studies that the
Federal Government refuses to finance.

''On many issues, the Government, for one reason or another, chooses not to seek
academy advice,'' Frank Press, the academy's president, told the organization's
annual meeting last week. ''In order to follow our own lights, we must have
access to funds other than those derived from our Government grants and
contracts, which represent the overwhelming portion of our budget.''

The academy, whose total budget is expected to be $70 million to $75 million
this year, down from $78.5 million last year, has thus far got some $3.8 million
from foundations to finance self-initiated public policy studies over a
three-year period. It is to receive $600,000 more a year from major corporations
to do independent study. Some of this money has already been used to complete
one study warning that national security concerns might interfere with open
scientific research and another study urging immediate high-level action to
retain world leadership in advanced technologies.

Boost in Endowment Sought

Over the next decade, the academy hopes to gain even more independence by
increasing its endowment to $100 million from $30 million.  That money will be
sought primarily from foundations and individuals.

The academy's marble headquarters on Constitution Avenue, with spectacular views
of the Lincoln Memorial and Washington Monument, is the main base for the
hundreds of expert committees that produce studies and advise the Government and
the nation. In the past 15 months, academy panels have done these things:

- Urged Americans to change their eating habits to reduce the risk of cancer.

- Rejected charges that standardized ability tests are unfair to blacks.

- Warned that the Government's main study of the effects that Agent Orange had
upon ground troops in Vietnam rested on ''a shaky scientific base.''

- Expressed doubt that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration could
reach its goal of 30 space shuttle flights a year by 1990.

- Concluded that sounds recorded when President Kennedy was shot in Dallas
showed no evidence of a second gunman.

- Began a study to help the Secret Service deal with potential assassins.

- Agreed to advise Congress on the effects of the 55-mile-per-hour speed limit.

- Sent each of the nation's 16,000 school districts a report on the declining
state of science and mathematics education.  The academy has some 1,450 members,
elected in recognition of outstanding research. There are also two subsidiary
organizations, the National Academy of Engineering, which has 1,142 members and
has gradually been increasing its influence in academy affairs, and the
Institute of Medicine, with 453 members. All three organizations share in
running the National Research Council, which performs the advisory work.

None of these organizations should be confused with the National Science
Foundation, a Government agency that provides grants to support basic scientific
research.

Staff Down 20 Percent

The impact of the advice given by the academy is difficult to assess because it
is simply one factor among many considered by the actual decision-makers in
Government. But the size of the academy's advisory apparatus suggests that the
Government finds it useful.

In the current fiscal year, the academy expects to marshal some 7,500 experts
from universities, industry and other sources for volunteer, part-time service
on about 700 advisory committees. These committees are backed up by a full-time
staff of 886 professional and support personnel, down about 20 percent over the
past two years because of internal streamlining and budget stringencies.

Although Dr. Press is a registered Democrat who served as the White House
science adviser in the Carter Administration, he has not turned the academy into
a base for partisan attacks on the Reagan Administration. Like all academy
presidents, who see their prime mission as protecting the health of American
science, he has criticized specific budget cuts by the Federal Government. But
he has also lavished praise on the White House for its generally strong support
of scientific research, and he has cooperated closely with the White House
science office in setting scientific priorities.

''Frank Press has done his best to be responsive to the needs of the present
Administration and of the scientific community,'' said George A. Keyworth 2d,
President Reagan's science adviser. ''He has been very helpful to me.''

However, the spirit of collaboration does not extend to all fields. Some of the
academy's unfettered money is being used to support studies of arms control. Dr.
Keyworth, considered a ''hawk'' on military matters, complained the other day
that ''many of the arms control aficionados in the Academy have not responded to
changing times and changing Soviet military capabilities.''

''They are not a constructive aid to the Administration's arms control
efforts,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dr. Frank Press

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 4, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Comecon Disputes Reported

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 449 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 3


A long-planned summit meeting of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance,
scheduled for this month, has been postponed indefinitely because of disputes
within the group, East European sources said today.

The meeting of Communist Party chiefs would have been the first such gathering
of national leaders since 1971. It was to work out a trading strategy for the
rest of the century for the 10-nation Communist economic alliance, which is
usually referred to as Comecon.

The member nations are the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East
Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Rumania and Vietnam.

The postponement resulted largely from a dispute between Rumania and the Soviet
Union over the agenda, the sources said. A formal decision to put off the
meeting was taken when senior Communist Party secretaries from the Comecon
states failed to resolve this and other differences at a two-day meeting in
Moscow last week, the sources added.

They said a new date for the proposed gathering had not been set and the meeting
was unlikely to take place before next year.  The Comecon plans were wrecked
primarily by Rumanian demands for substantial economic concessions and Moscow's
adamant refusal to consider even discussing them, the East European sources
said.  Bucharest had called for sharp increases in Soviet oil exports to allied
states and under more favorable payment conditions. At present Rumania receives
only small quantities of Soviet oil and has to pay for it in hard Western
currencies.

The Soviet Union is believed by Western diplomats to fear demands for more oil
and gas supplies from its allies at a time when it needs to sell as much as
possible in the West to bolster its hard-currency reserves.

Rumania is reported to have also demanded the creation of a Comecon ''food
program'' that would allow it to import agricultural produce from other Comecon
states at reduced prices to ease internal food shortages.

The failure to hold the May meeting as planned is likely to be seen within the
Soviet sphere as a political setback, Western diplomats said. Communist
officials have made pointed references to the annual meeting on economic
strategy by leaders of the non-Communist industrial nations and have suggested
that the Communist allies should be able to do as much.

''At a time when the West is getting ready for the Williamsburg summit, it looks
pretty bad that the Comecon states cannot even agree to meet,'' one Western
diplomat said. The Virginia meeting is scheduled to be held over the Memorial
Day weekend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DOW SAYS U.S. KNEW DIOXIN PERIL OF AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By DAVID BURNHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1565 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


The Dow Chemical Company maintains that at least two years before the United
States halted the use of Agent Orange in Vietnam in 1971, both the Defense
Department and the company were aware of evidence indicating that dioxin, a
contaminant in the herbicide, might cause birth defects in the children of women
exposed to the defoliant.

Dow says in court papers that by 1969 the company and the Government were aware
of a National Cancer Institute study showing that dioxin caused birth defects in
mice.

Dow's statement, in a motion in Federal court against a suit by Vietnam
veterans, appeared to conflict in part with the company's recent assertions that
there was no indication that dioxin caused ''any adverse health effects.'' The
statement also seemed to raise the possibility that use of the herbicide might
have affected pregnant Vietnamese women, but it did not address the question of
the effect on mostly male American troops in Vietnam.

The company's motion in Federal District Court in Uniondale, L.I., asked Judge
George C. Pratt Jr. to dismiss the suit brought against Dow and several other
chemical companies by more than 20,000 Vietnam veterans, their widows and their
children.

Dow Seeks to Avoid Liability

The suit alleges that the millions of pounds of Agent Orange dumped on Vietnam
from 1961 to 1971 caused some of the cancers, deformities in children and other
serious health effects experienced by Vietnam veterans since the end of the war.

The unusual contention by the chemical company that it had early knowledge of
the dangers of dioxin is part of what is known as a Government contractor
defense. If Dow can prove that it manufactured the herbicide according to
Defense Department specifications and that both parties were aware of the
hazards, then the company could not be held liable for any damages that may have
been caused by the herbicide.

The lawyers for the veterans in the suit said, ''The thrust of the Government
contractor immunity defense is that the decision belonged not to the defendants,
but to the Government.''

Today Judge Pratt heard arguments on the Dow motion, filed two weeks ago, and
reserved decision.  Dow's motion also contended that in 1967 Secretary of
Defense Robert S. McNamara referred to the Joint Chiefs Staff a consultant's
report that said the fear of Vietnam peasants about the toxicity of Agent Orange
''was founded partly on actual experiences, not solely on Vietcong propaganda.''
The recommendations of the consultant's report were ignored by the Government,
Dow said.

Concerns Traced to 1963

Dow added that four years earlier, in 1963, President Johnson's Science Advisory
Committee was worried enough about the long-term health effects of herbicides to
provide the impetus for the National Cancer Institute study, which established
that dioxin caused birth defects in mice.

The company said the Government continued to spray the dioxincontaminated
herbicide in Vietnam despite evidence of the potential danger because the
defoliation program was regarded as a military necessity. The Government
justified the program as a method of denying the Vietcong food and of clearing
areas around American bases.

Dow said that by 1969 it knew about the Government-sponsored animal test
indicating that the dioxin in Agent Orange might damage the unborn children of
exposed women. On the other hand, the company also said it had ''no knowledge of
any health hazards'' associated with the use of the herbicides Dow sold to the
Government.

In making these apparently conflicting statements, company lawyers said the
Agent Orange that Dow sold had less than one part per million of dioxin, a level
that the company considers not dangerous.  There have been allegations that the
Agent Orange manufactured by some of the other chemical companies had from 10 to
50 parts per million.

Dioxin Problems in U.S.

Though Dow's legal defense concerns the use of Agent Orange in Vietnam, the
widespread use of chemicals contaminated with dioxin has by no means been
limited to Southeast Asia. Varying amounts of dioxin have been discovered in
waste dumps in the Love Canal area in Niagara, N.Y., in the soil of Times Beach,
Mo., and in the Great Lakes. It is also believed that thousands of waste dumps
in his country are contaminated with dioxin, which many scientists call the
single most toxic material manufactured by man.

The discovery of the poison in the United States has prompted the Government to
take unusual action, including agreeing to pay millions of dollars to families
required to evacuate their homes and recommending that people limit the
consumption of Great Lakes fish.

The Dow motion in Federal court said ''undisputed evidence'' showed that by the
mid-1960's the Government had ''substantial knowledge of potential occupational
health hazards to workers engaged in the production of herbicides containing
2,4,5-T and also was well aware of the evidence suggesting possible adverse
health effects, including teratogenicity, associated with the use of finished
products.'' Teratogenicity means malformation of a fetus, and 2,4,5-T is one of
components of Agent Orange that was sometimes contaminated with dixoin during
manufacture.

In a footnote, Dow's chief lawyer, Leonard L. Rivkin of Garden City, L.I., said
that ''prior to 1969'' it was ''noteworthy that the record is devoid of Dow's
knowledge or, for that matter, any chemical companies' knowledge'' of the
Government-financed study showing that dioxin caused birth defects in mice.

The attorneys for the Vietnam veterans, Yannacone and Associates of Patchogue,
ridiculed the Dow defense strategy. In arguing against dismissal of the
veterans' claims, the attorneys cited a then-secret meeting of chemicial
companies in 1965 in which Dow scientists warned about the serious health
hazards of dioxin.

''Since the mid-1960's, Dow had information that Agent Orange supplied to the
Government contained large levels of dioxin, far in excess of anything Dow
considered safe or necessary,'' the lawyers for the veterans said. ''Dow also
knew that its own product would be mixed with that of the others and used in
this manner on the battlefield.''

''What did Dow do with this information?'' the motion asked. ''It concealed it
from the Government and asked others, its co-defendants, to do the same.''

Other defendants in the Federal court suit besides Dow include the Monsanto
Company, Diamond Shamrock Corporation, Hercules Inc. and Thompson-Hayward
Chemical Company.

The 1967 report referred by Secretary McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
cited by the Dow lawyers was prepared by the Rand Corporation for the Advanced
Research Projects Agency. The authors, Russell Betts and Frank Denton, argued
that the program might be counterproductive to American interests because it
could upset Vietnamese peasants, whose support was essential if the war was to
be won.

In a sketchy footnote on the toxicity of the herbicides, the authors said it was
possible that in some small areas the spray dumped in overlapping patterns from
planes might provide ''a lethal dose for a 6-kilogram child if the chemicals
were used in an undiluted form.''

According to the Dow motion, the recommendation of the Rand study was ignored
and the defoliation program was continued until April 1971.

The lawyers for the veterans said that depositions of high-level Government
officials, including Secretary McNamara, showed that the officials were
''uniformly unaware of the toxicity of Agent Orange.''

The motion detailing Dow's early knowledge about the hazards of dioxin raises
questions about recent assertions by company executives concerning the poison.
On April 20, for instance, Robert Lundeen, Dow's chairman of the board, appeared
on the CBS News program ''Morning News'' to discuss Dow's participation in the
1965 industry meeting about Agent Orange.

''We stand on 30 years of producing and using the material, and either in our
plants or in the people used, there is no indication that there were any adverse
health effects,'' Mr. Lundeen said.

More recently, Dow has begun sending around teams of scientists to discuss
herbicides and dioxin on local radio talk programs. Two weeks ago, for instance,
according to a tape recording of a program in Cincinnati, a Dow scientist said
the evidence so far showed that people could be exposed to small amounts of
dioxin over long periods ''without significant or any detectable harm to
people.''

Senior Dow officials sought to defend the accuracy of the company's public
statements, insisting that they were not inconsistent with either the
information in the court motion requesting the dismissal or current knowledge.
Dr. Ralph Cook, for instance, said the finding of a Swedish study that some
forest and agriculture workers exposed to dioxin seemed to have an unexpected
incidence of one kind of cancer might have been flawed by sampling problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
DEMOCRATIC DEATH WISH

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


As it proved in 1972 with George McGovern, the Democratic Party would rather be
left than President.  In the last week, Democratic Party leaders have given the
1984 Republican nominee the greatest political boon in their power to bestow:
strident, partisan, isolationist opposition to a Presidential call for the
defense of our closest neighbors.

Mr. Reagan had turned away from jingoistic rhetoric to use Wilsonian cadences:
''Who among us would wish to bear responsibility for failing to meet our shared
obligation?''

Democrats promptly volunteered. The party leadership chose Senator Christopher
Dodd of Connecticut to revile the President's plea to aid a beleaguered ally,
calling it an ''association with criminals'' designed to let slip ''the dogs of
war.''

By seeking to deny the President power to arm our allies to combat Communist
takeovers, Senator Dodd followed in the tradition of J.  William Fulbright, John
Tunney, Dick Clark and Frank Church, whose dovish stands made them national
liberal heroes and local losers.

To drive home the official, partisan nature of the Democratic response, the
House Select Intelligence Committee subsequently voted to bar aid to the
anti-Communist fighters in Nicaragua on straight party lines. The committee
chairman is a Democrat, Edward P. Boland of Massachusetts, who for 20 years was
Tip O'Neill's roommate and is his closest House ally. Before the vote, the less
dovish Jim Wright of Texas, who hopes to succeed Tip as Speaker of the House,
let it be known he was unhappy with the shrill Dodd speech and the proposed
outright rejection of the President. But evidently the Speaker got to him: the
get-along, go-along Wright caved in.

As a result of this strategy, the Democratic Party seems assured of carrying
Massachusetts again in 1984, as it did for McGovern. For Republicans, the happy
prospect looms of not only maintaining occupancy of the White House but
retaining the Senate and even making a run at a majority in the House.

This is an issue of which landslides are made. Liberal and dovish politicians
should have learned by now that they scoff at ''silent majorities'' at their
peril. A President unencumbered by scandal needs only a great theme to overcome
voter antipathy toward incumbents. The time-honored defense of this continent -
used by Monroe and Roosevelt and Kennedy - is such a theme.

Up to now, the Republican record has been that Mr. Reagan induced a necessary
but painful recession in order to wring out a dangerous inflation, which is
attackable; and that he added to defense without raising taxes, which is
defensible but not exciting. Like Truman, the Republican candidate needs a
''do-nothing Republican 80th Congress'' against which to inveigh; it appears
that the Republican will have ''the defeatist Democratic House.''

If the little band of men from Massachusetts deny the President the power to act
- and Fidel Castro's Nicaraguan ally, supplied from Moscow and Libya, then takes
over another Central American state - we can expect a wave of refugees to
dramatize the President's case. Mr.  Reagan's evocation of memories of
Afghanistan and Cuba was telling: ''Must we wait while Central Americans are
driven from their homes ...?'' As night follows day, defeat would be followed by
the new ''boat people.''

Most of these Spanish-speaking refugees would be outspokenly anti-Communist.
Democratic pols who slavishly follow today's no-more-Vietnam polls do not look
ahead to the way a massive refugee influx would affect the most significant new
voting minority: the Hispanics.

Mexican-Americans in Texas and California, Cuban-Americans in Florida, and
Puerto Ricans in New York all have distinct interests and differences, but in
general they tend to be more liberal than whites and less than blacks; right
now, Republican National Committee polls show that the recession is driving
Hispanics into Democratic arms. An emotional issue such as the betrayal of
Central America would stop or reverse that trend in the four states crucial to
electoral victory.

We can expect the President to exploit the Democratic death wish.  In speeches
and press conferences to come, he will appeal to the center of public opinion in
the United States that time and again has turned away from the timid and
guilt-ridden arguments that some of us like to call the counsels of despair. In
time he will meld his Caribbean initiative, his covert action against the
Sandinists and new pressures against Mr. Castro into a coherent Reagan Doctrine.

Republicans can hope that forgetful Democrats slam their party against that
rock. Therefore, ye men of Massachusetts and environs, hold fast -your
obstruction may pave the way for a resurgence of the responsibles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
THURSDAY, MAY 5, 1983

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 926 words


International
Nicaraguan recipients of covert aid from the Central Intelligence Agency were
''freedom fighters'' opposing a Government that had betrayed its revolutionary
principles, President Reagan said. He also said, in an interview at the White
House, that it would be ''all right with me'' if Congress wanted to require that
assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels be ''overt instead of covert.'' However,
there would have to be no further restrictions imposed on the rebels'
activities, Mr. Reagan said. (Page A1, Col. 6.)
Israel's Cabinet will soon meet to decide whether to accept the Lebanese-Israeli
draft agreement worked out by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Prime
Minister Menachem Begin said. A senior Cabinet official said the meeting would
probably take place in time to allow Mr. Shultz to meet his unofficial target of
concluding the accord by the end of this week. (A1:3.)
Iran's Communist party was dissolved by the Government, which accused it of
spying for the Soviet Union, and soon after, 18 Soviet diplomats were ordered to
leave the country. A Foreign Ministry announcement did not explicitly link the
ouster of the diplomats with the action against the party. (A1:2.)
An amnesty law was appproved by San Salvador's Constitutent Assembly. It takes
effect immediately and could lead to freedom for hundreds of political
prisoners. It also offers amnesty to guerrrillas who turn themselves in within
60 days. Human rights activists said the law did not go far enough. (A10:3.)
Sotheby, Parke Bernet's takeover by two American financiers was blocked
temporarily by the British Government. The trade minister referred the $100
million bid to the Monopolies and Merger Commission, which will study the
proposal for six months before approving it or disapproving it. (C23:4.)
National
William D. Ruckelshaus pledged to enforce environmental laws ''as written by
Congress'' at a hearing of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee
after asking its members to recommend his confirmation as Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency. He said there had been an ''abuse of process''
at the agency. (A1:1.)
The nuclear freeze resolution was substantially modified by the House, though it
still calls for President Reagan to negotiate a ''mutual and verifiable freeze
and reductions in nuclear weapons'' with the Soviet Union. But the vote of 278
to 149 came after the House adopted an amendment that would revoke the freeze if
it was not followed by negotiated arms reductions ''within a reasonable,
specified period of time.'' (A1:5.)
The quality of public schools is threatening the military, economic and social
well-being of the United States, a group of 41 governors and people prominent in
education, industry, science and labor said.  Its call for a ''deep and lasting
change'' in the American educational system was made in ''an unusual sense of
urgency,'' the group said. (A1:1.)
Florida can refuse diplomas to high school seniors who fail the state's
functional literacy test, a Federal judge ruled. His ruling went against black
students who asserted the examination was discriminatory. As a result of the
ruling, the 3,000 Florida high school seniors who failed the basic skills test
this year will get a certificate of completion instead of a diploma. (A16:1.)
The toxicity of the herbicide Agent Orange used in Vietnam was known to both the
United States Government and one of its manufacturers, the Dow Chemical Company,
Dow said in a motion filed in Federal court in Uniondale, L.I. Dow's contention
about its early knowledge of the dangers of dioxin, a contaminant of Agent
Orange, was part of what is known as the government contractor defense. If the
company can prove that it manufactured the herbicide according to Defense
Department specifications and that both parties were aware of the hazards, then
the company could not be held liable for any damages that may have been caused
by the herbicide. The Dow motion asked for dismissal of a liability suit filed
by Vietnam veterans. (A18:1.)
The pastoral letter against nuclear war that was overwhelmingly ratified by
Roman Catholic bishops at their meeting in Chicago Tuesday will be introduced
soon in their home dioceses for study and discussion. The bishops believe that
the 150-page letter will cause much debate. (B17:1.)
Metropolitan
Closing some troubled high schools and providing all-day kindergarten classes
throughout the city was proposed by New York City Schools Chancellor Anthony J.
Alvarado, at his first public meeting with the Board of Education since taking
office four days ago. (B1:6.)
The sale of 25 vandalized parks in Islip, L.I., has been proposed by the town's
officials. The parks are trouble spots and hangouts for young people, according
to the Supervisor of Islip, Michael A.  LoGrande, who said ''most of the
neighbors want them closed.'' Sale of the parks must approved by the State
Legislature. (B1:1.)
Thirty-five cases of rubella have been reported at an office of the
Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company at 55 Water Street in lower Manhattan. The
Commissioner of Health, Dr. David J. Sencer, said the city had begun a
vaccination program for 5,000 bank employees.  (B3:4.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 367 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 1983 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'ALL BY MYSELF,' ABOUT EARTHA KITT

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Column 2; Weekend Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 548 words


EARTHA KITT'S sheer force of personality is enough to make ''All By Myself'' an
attention-getting documentary, even if it reflects Miss Kitt's abrasiveness as
memorably as her prodigious energy. Christian Blackwood, who produced and
directed this profile, clearly intends it admiringly. But he has captured Miss
Kitt's stagy, disingenuous side just as surely as he's conveyed her strength.
The woman seen here is most memorable for her willfully eccentric singing style,
her inch-long eyelashes and her very short fuse.

Mr. Blackwood, whose documentary opened yesterday at the Film Forum, attempts to
provide some contrast to the mannered, public side of Miss Kitt's personality.
So in addition to filming her at her most flamboyant - dressed to the nines at a
celebration of the Reagan inauguration, where she turns on the charm for such
colleagues as Joan Fontaine and Virginia Graham - he seeks out the ostensibly
quiet moments as well. These include the singer harvesting vegetables in her
Southern California garden (she is later shown distributing the produce among
young girls who are her dance pupils), talking confidentially about love and
making a visit to her mother's grave.

These scenes, which reveal Miss Kitt in a stark and cosmetic-free light, are the
film's attempt to get to the essence of its subject. That they feel less than
wholly spontaneous is a significant disappointment, since the show-biz
ebullience in the rest of the film requires some ballast. In these moments of
forced candor, Miss Kitt shifts her expression suddenly, angrily and
dramatically, seeming to have the camera in mind even when she pointedly ignores
it. In a small Southern town, while visiting her mother's grave, she delivers a
tearful monologue while walking heedlessly away from the camera. Seeming to
ignore the film makers, she nevertheless keeps talking and remains well within
microphone range.

When asked about her romantic history, she throws her head back in full-bodied
laughter, then snarls ''Stupid!'' a minute later. These sharp contrasts are a
lot more valuable in her singing performances, which combine her metallic
vibrato with the powerfully offbeat delivery that has earned her a devoted
following. The film is at its best when it simply accepts Miss Kitt as a force
of nature, affectations and all, and captures her thousand-watt stage manner.
Sometimes - as when she startles a little girl at the inaugural party by asking,
''You wouldn't know who I am, would you? Tell the truth! I'm Cat Woman!'' - she
can be quite riveting. At others - as when Mayor Koch is glimpsed seated at a
dais behind her, looking drowsy during her one of her songs -she's not.

Miss Kitt's well-publicized contretemps with Lady Bird Johnson, in which she
attempted to introduce the subject of the war in Vietnam into an afternoon of
White House propriety, is discussed here only briefly. In the context of the
film, it's only one of the many acts of bravado that make her a suitably fiery
subject for Mr. Blackwood's profiling methods.

Suitably Fiery
ALL BY MYSELF, directed, produced and photographed by Christian Blackwood;
edited by Susan Ardo Berger; associate producer, David Schmerler. At the Film
Forum 1, 57 Watts Street. Running time: 85 minutes. This film has no rating.
WITH: Eartha Kitt

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Worm and the Apple;
Fair, and Foul, on the Street

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 525 words


Mayor Koch signed a peddling law yesterday that should, in time, make life on
the sidewalks of New York a little more agreeable.  That's no small achievement,
and it's one worthy of the first award in a series we intend to make in this
brand-new corner of comment.

It will be our aim, under the rubric ''The Worm and the Apple,'' to call
attention to persistent grievances about city life, large and small. We welcome
suggestions from readers in identifying such grievances. Whenever apt, we'll
award Apples to people whose efforts to do something constructive deserve
favorable recognition - and Worms to those who could do something but won't.

A Municipal Vietnam

Our first Apple, hence, to Edward I. Koch, for his responsive and reasonable
action to regulate street vendors.  On this topic, it's not easy to be either
responsive or reasonable. ''Peddling,'' says one city official, ''is the Vietnam
of municipal issues.'' He knows that for many people, peddlers are parasites.
They block sidewalks, pay no taxes, rip off the unwary and pollute the showcase
atmosphere of shopping streets like Fifth Avenue and Madison Avenue.

Yet to others, peddlers are Horatio Alger. Food vendors provide quick, cheap
lunch - especially necessary as luncheonettes are crowded out of midtown.
Merchandise vendors satisfy small shopping impulses. And both kinds satisfy the
work ethic. By pushing a pushcart around all day

(''the way my grandfather did''), someone with grit, no matter how poor or
unskilled, can make a buck and work his way up.  It's an argument that dates
back at least to 1767, when New York City forbade peddling (fine: 5). Soon
thereafter, according to one historian, the city recognized that peddlers
''served a real need,'' reversed itself and permitted ''chapmen to operate under
a very strict licensing system.''

Considering how sharply the issue divides the public, it's little wonder that
city officials can provide no decisive solution. The peddler problem can't be
solved. The test for city government is how well the problem can be managed.
Recently, the Koch administration has been managing it very well indeed.

A 1979 law toughened enforcement against people hawking handmade earrings or
machine-made schlock. The law signed yesterday concerns food peddlers. It will
bar them from specified avenues (and cross streets in the theater district)
during congested periods. Gradually, it will also restrict the total number of
food peddlers.

Even tougher laws can't help much unless enforced - and that's hard, what with
nine different city agencies involved, sometimes in conflict. Beyond pushing for
the new laws, Mr. Koch has appointed an aide, Stanley Schlein, to work full time
coordinating everything concerning peddlers.

The result so far is hardly perfect. Taxpaying merchants still wince when they
see modern-day chapmen hustling crocodile shirts off blankets on Fifth Avenue.
But the Fifth Avenue Association acknowledges sporadic improvement; the
sidewalks are a little safer and a little clearer; under the new law, they are
likely to become more so. A shiny Apple to the Mayor.

Apples by Jerelle Kraus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S WITHDRAWAL IS THE KEY TO THE CAMBODIAN SOLUTION

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 512 words


To the Editor:

Gareth Porter's Op-Ed article ''Disserving Cambodia'' (April 21) is itself a
disservice to that country and its people. It distorts the central issues of the
situation by diverting attention from the Vietnamese occupation and turning it
into an artificial controversy over U.S. foreign policy.

The Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea has been condemned by an overwhelming
majority of United Nations members. Over 100 have called for the withdrawal of
all foreign forces from Kampuchea to let the people exercise their right of
self-determination. That position is based on the U.N. Charter and guided by
concern for the well-being and indeed the existence of Kampuchea as a national
entity.

It is ludicrous for Mr. Porter to suggest that such a position by any country,
especially a ''superpower'' like the United States, ''blindly follows'' the
policy of others. If Vietnam today finds itself isolated in the community of
nations, it is due to its own actions, not those of any other nation or nations.
Vietnam has chosen to align itself with the Soviet Union to achieve its own
ambitious designs; any hope of weaning it away is illusory.

Mr. Porter uses the specter of the return of Pol Pot to justify the Vietnamese
occupation. This assumes Vietnam has the interests of the Kampucheans at heart.
Its record in support of the Pol Pot Government up to the end of 1977 (with the
evident approval of many sympathizers in this country), should preclude such
facile assumption, and recent attacks on Kampuchean refugees further belie it.

The assertion by Mr. Porter that Thailand desires to see the continuation of the
conflict in Kampuchea is false. That armed conflict has had serious
repercussions on Thailand, even though Thailand is not and does not wish to
become a party to it.

Shelling from across the border by Vietnamese forces and their incursions into
Thailand have resulted in loss of life and the uprooting of over 80,000 Thai
villagers. The flow of hundreds of thousands of Kampuchean refugees into
Thailand has added to the burden on its limited resources. That is why Thailand
and other members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (Asean) have
striven for a peaceful and comprehensive political settlement of the conflict.

The International Conference on Kampuchea, convened at the U.N. in July 1981,
called for a cease-fire by all parties, complete withdrawal of foreign forces
and free elections under U.N.  supervision. All states would be obligated to
respect the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and nonaligned
status of Kampuchea, and not to use its territory to threaten its neighbors,
including Vietnam.

This is indeed a reasonable framework for ensuring peace and stability in the
region and in particular for the long-suffering people of Kampuchea. Asean and
the international community have been urging Vietnam and its allies to respond
to this peaceful initiative and forgo recourse to arms.
M.L. BIRABHONGSE KASEMSRI, Ambassador of Thailand to the United Nations, New
York, April 22, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
VOTING DOWN IDEAS

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 833 words


Where, if not on the college campus, should ideas be openly and freely heard and
debated? Who, more than students and faculty, should uphold that ideal of the
campus as an open forum for all views?

Free expression is doubly diminished, therefore, by the actions of students and
faculty at Barnard and Smith colleges in opposing for political reasons the
honors the two schools had offered to Jeane Kirkpatrick, the Reagan
Administration's chief delegate to the United Nations.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick also was booed and heckled off the stage when she recently
tried to speak at the University of California in Berkeley.  In view of student
and faculty opposition, she has refused the Barnard and Smith honors with the
laconic, scathing observation that ''a university or college is in the most
basic sense defined by its faculty and students.''

At Barnard, more than 1,000 students had signed a petition protesting a medal to
be awarded Mrs. Kirkpatrick, a Barnard alumna.  The faculty voted its
disapproval of the award, 48 to l8.

At Smith, where student political opposition already had led her to cancel a
scheduled commencement address, an honorary doctorate was offered her by school
trustees. About half the faculty then signed a petition of disapproval.

There's no doubt why students and faculty at both schools acted as they did.
Theirs is political opposition to an idea - to Mrs.  Kirkpatrick's controversial
views on Central American affairs, apparently a large factor in the Reagan
Administration's policy toward that region.

No one would argue that Mrs. Kirkpatrick is not distinguished as an academician
and as a writer in her field. No one would argue that she is not a woman of high
ability and achievement, first in education, now in government. No one would
argue that she's too controversial; colleges have awarded countless honors to
persons holding views at least as hotly debated as hers.

Nor can it be argued that academic honors are so precious that they should go
only to the purest and the noblest. Colleges and universities routinely hand
them out to large donors, to influential politicians, to important trustees and
to commencement speakers, in lieu of a fee.

(At the University of Kentucky there's even an old joke about a proposal to
award a doctorate to one of that state's great thoroughbred race horses. ''It
would be,'' the university president is supposed to have said, ''the first time
we ever gave a degree to a whole horse.'')

No, the opposition to honors for Mrs. Kirkpatrick is political.  The opposition
believes that her ideas are unsuitable or inferior or immoral or something, and
therefore should not be heard, or their author honored, at Smith or Barnard. But
what then becomes of the ideal of an open forum for ideas? And should there be a
change in the political atmosphere, what idea and what person might be
considered politically unacceptable next time?

Not too many years ago, the State Legislature approved a ban on Communist
speakers at the University of North Carolina. I and other graduates, together
with faculty, administrators, students and many who had no connection with the
university, spoke, wrote and fought against that so-called ''speaker ban'' until
it was lifted. I don't see much difference between the attitude of the Smith and
Barnard opposition and that of the Legislature that voted the restriction; they
both wanted certain ideas to be banned from the campus.

Political debate, including opposition to government policy, is the essence of
democracy; but so is free expression. Students and faculty at Smith and Barnard
don't have to listen to Mrs. Kirkpatrick if they don't want to; but they don't
have to stifle the speech or the recognition of someone with a differing view in
order to express their own. They can vote; they can make sure their legislators
know of their opposition to aid to the Salvadoran Army and police, or to the
C.I.A.-sponsored forces in Nicaragua; they can take part in rallies, teach-ins,
political activism, political campaigns.

That they acted as they did, however, suggests one ''Vietnam parallel'' of which
even the Reagan Administration should be wary - the likelihood of an outraged,
embittered, sometimes intolerant opposition to its military approach to Central
America.

As in the years of the Vietnam peace movement, development of such an opposition
will only be fostered by an Administration that circumvents Congress and
shortcuts constitutional procedures; that overstates its case with doubtful
''facts'' and exaggerated claims about its clients and their ''progress'' toward
democracy; that invokes a so-called ''moral obligation'' and the ''national
honor'' in the cause of repressive and sometimes murderous forces who cannot be
disguised as ''good guys'' or ''freedom fighters.''

Nothing is more divisive than such tactics, hence more selfdefeating. In a
democracy, Presidents can't for long fight a war - even by proxy -when the
public and Congress won't support it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'CAINE MUTINY' BACK AT CIRCLE IN SQUARE

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words


IF you are hungering to see a revival of ''The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial,''
then hop to the one that has arrived, by way of Stamford's Hartman Theater, at
the Circle in the Square. Graced with crackling, intelligently conceived
performances by John Rubinstein, Michael Moriarty and most of a large supporting
cast, Arthur Sherman's staging gets every ounce of juice there is to be had from
Herman Wouk's 1954 Broadway hit - and then some.

If you're not hungering to see this play - well, that's understandable, too.
It's a matter of personal taste. ''The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial,'' like most
courtroom melodramas, proceeds on a dogged, straight path that can become
wearing. Though Mr. Wouk's handling of the genre is extremely professional and
sometimes even witty, he can't escape the static conventions that make a stage
trial, for all the planted surprises, look like an open-and-shut affair. You
know going into the theater that Act I will bring a parade of witnesses who must
painstakingly lay out the exposition.  You know, too, that Act II will bring the
real conflict - the cracking of the key witness under the relentless badgering
of the most saintly lawyer.

That witness in ''Caine Mutiny,'' as you may recall from Mr.  Wouk's original
novel or the Humphrey Bogart film, is Captain Queeg, the World War II commander
who may or may not have gone berserk when his destroyer entered the center of a
typhoon. If Captain Queeg did, in fact, go nuts, then Lieutenant Maryk, his
executive officer and the trial's defendant, was justified in usurping the
ship's command.  But if Captain Queeg cannot be proven to have gone insane, then
Lieutenant Maryk is guilty, as charged, of plotting a mutiny.

The famous Act II scene in which the defense lawyer, Lieut. Barney Greenwald,
must try to unmask Queeg as a lunatic is superbly orchestrated by this
production's stars. Mr. Rubinstein's lawyer - a bright, sensitive, restless man
with little stomach for the cruel task before him - goes after Mr. Moriarty's
Queeg with burning intellectual arrogance, not brute force. What could be a pro
forma wrestling match becomes, with Mr. Rubinstein's shrewdly paced prodding, a
tense psychological chess game that really keeps you guessing each move.

Mr. Moriarty, though looking a bit young to play a veteran officer, responds in
kind. He crumbles under his tormentor's waspish pricks by showing us tiny,
bloody fissures rather than gaping wounds. A smooth Southern good ole boy until
this point, this Queeg unwinds so delicately that we don't even register that
exact moment when he becomes a puddle on the courtroom floor. It's a performance
of admirable subtlety from an actor who's tended to go overboard in recent
years.

Nothing else in the play is so gripping as this climax, but that's no fault of
the cast. All the Act I witnesses are first-rate: Jay O.  Sanders as the
disingenuous Maryck; J. Kenneth Campbell as Mr.  Wouk's real villain, an
aspiring novelist who condescends to his uniform; Jace Alexander as a comically
frightened young signalman; Jonathan Hogan and Brad Sullivan as lesser Caine
officers; and Leon B. Stevens and Geoffrey Horne as military psychiatrists who
don't exactly further Freud's cause on the stand. Stephen Joyce exudes crisp,
no-nonsense authority as the presiding judge, who taps his ring on his desk to
build up tension. Only William Atherton, for the prosecution, falls short: Too
unctuous in Act I, he seems to mimic Mr. Moriarty in Act II.

The real problems are in the script. There are just too many witnesses -do we
really need two doctors, for instance? - and the result is a good half-hour of
overlength. The attempts to give some of the characters a life beyond their
roles in the trial are perfunctory: we never believe, as we're told, that the
opposing lawyers were cronies at Georgetown Law School. Mr. Wouk also has a
tendency to diffuse suspense by announcing exactly what he's going to do long
before he does it. He signals in advance that Queeg will be undone once he
starts to play with the metal marbles he keeps in his pocket; the opening scene
tips off the supposedly shocking change-of-heart speech that Greenwald delivers
in the play's coda.

Though fervently given by Mr. Rubinstein, that speech is perhaps the biggest
stumbling block of all. Suddenly the lawyer who's unmasked Queeg as a martinet
in court takes to defending his victim.  Greenwald's argument - that only
fascist American commanding officers can whip fascism overseas - seems
questionable, if not simplistically jingoistic, in 1983. Whether one uses post-
Vietnam historical hindsight to question this logic or not, however, the fact
remains that a black-and-white melodrama is an infelicitous forum for opening
such a serious, complex debate.

But perhaps no one like myself -whose eyes glaze over at the sight of jurors
taking notes on legal pads -can render an unclouded, impartial judgment on ''The
Caine Mutiny Court-Martial.'' What I do recognize is that Mr. Rubinstein, Mr.
Moriarty and company are just about the strongest possible advocates for Mr.
Wouk's case.

Was He Insane?
THE CAINE MUTINY COURT-MARITAL, by Herman Wouk; directed by Arthur Sherman;
scenery, John Falabella; costumes, David Murin; lighting, Richard Nelson. A
Hartman Theater Production presented by Circle In The Square Theater and The
Kennedy Center. At 50th Street west of Broadway.
Lieut. Barney Greenwald ...............John Rubinstein
Lieut. Stephen Maryk ...................Jay O. Sanders
Stenographer ............................Tom Paliferro
Orderly ..............................Richard Arbolino
Lieut. Comdr. John Challee ...........William Atherton
Captain Blakely .........................Stephen Joyce
Lieut. Comdr. Philip Francis Queeg
Michael Moriarty
Lieut. Thomas Keefer .............J. Kenneth Campbell
Signalman 3d Cl. Junius Urban ..........Jace Alexander
Lieut. Willis Seward Keith .............Jonathan Hogan
Capt. Randolph Southard .................Brad Sullivan
Dr. Forrest Lundeen ...................Leon B. Stevens
Dr. Bird ...............................Geoffrey Horne
Six Members of the Court Clinton Allmon, Warren Ball, Chad Burton, Sam Coppola,
Daniel Davin and Oliver Dixon Officers of the Caine at the Fairmont Hotel
Clinton Allmon, Chad Burton and Sam Coppola

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Michael Moriarty

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE UNIT WOULD CURB I.M.F. LOANS TO PRETORIA

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 5


A House banking subcommittee acted today to bar the United States from
supporting loans made by the International Monetary Fund to South Africa because
of that country's racial policies.

The move came in a voice vote by the House Banking Committee's Subcommittee on
International Trade, Investment and Monetary Policy as the panel was considering
an Administration request for $8.4 billion as the United States share of an
international agreement to increase I.M.F. resources.

The request for the money was approved along with the antiapartheid amendment
and sent to the House Banking Committee, which will take up the legislation on
Monday. Expectations were that the vote would be close, with some staff members
predicting that the amendment would carry by a small margin.

The amendment, proposed by Representative Jerry M. Patterson, Democrat of
California, is similar to legislation already on the books mandating votes by
the United States against certain types of loans made by the I.M.F.'s sister
institution, the World Bank.

Opposed by Reagan

It was strongly opposed by the Reagan Administration and the subcommittee's
chairman, Stephen L. Neal, Democrat of North Carolina, who said he would move to
strike the provision on Monday. His efforts to do so today in the subcommittee
failed on a recorded 9-to-8 vote.

Mr. Neal, Marc Leland, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International
Affairs, and Richard D. Erb, the United States representative on the I.M.F.
board, all made similar points - that repugnant as apartheid is, such an
amendment sets a dangerous precedent in politicizing I.M.F. loan decisions.

''If we start singling out nations for one outrage after the other, where do we
stop?'' Mr. Neal asked. ''What about Islamic countries that discriminate against
women? What about all the countries that violate human rights? The I.M.F. does
one job, an economic job, well. You can't load it down with all the world's
social, political and moral responsibilities and expect it to work.''

The I.M.F. and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as the
World Bank is formally known, became the twin pillars of the monetary system
after the 1944 Bretton Woods conference. The 146-nation I.M.F. makes loans to
countries that have trouble paying international bills. The 144-nation World
Bank makes longer-term project development loans to the poorest countries.

Curbs Attempted in 70's

Efforts by the United States to control lending of the two institutions go back
to the late 1970's. When the House was considering a World Bank capital increase
in 1978 and 1979, it conditioned the American contribution on a policy that
would bar loans to Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea, as Cambodia is called in that
country. But the United States was found not to have the legal right to set
terms of the bank's policies.

The result was legislation that mandates votes by the American representative
against certain types of loans, for example, those to countries that engage in a
consistent pattern of gross violation of human rights or that provide refuge to
aircraft hijackers. The law also says that the United States must oppose loans
to expand production for export of palm oil, sugar or citrus crops when it may
injure American producers.

The amendment passed today represents the first Congressional effort to
influence I.M.F. policies. It says that ''the President shall instruct the U.S.
executive director of the fund to actively opose any credit drawings on the fund
or any of its facilities by any country which practices apartheid.''

The issue has developed as a result of a $1.1 billion loan to South Africa that
the I.M.F. agreed to last November. A number of countries opposed that loan
because of the apartheid issue. However, as Treasury officials noted today, most
countries of black Africa abstained instead of voting against it because they
did not want to set a precedent that would politicize I.M.F. lending, which
might backfire against them.

Meanwhile, the House Banking Committee chairman, Fernand St Germain, Democrat of
Rhode Island, announced that he was introducing a package of regulatory reforms
to add to the legislation on Monday.  These are more rigorous than those voted
by the Senate Banking Committee when it cleared the I.M.F. bill April 28. The
apartheid issue has not been raised in the Senate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DIGGING STOPS AND THE HEALING STARTS IN CAMBODIA;
The Talk of Phnom Penh

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Even though this country has seen a long war, a famine and then an invasion by
Vietnam, this capital seems surprisingly cheerful. There are cars on the
streets, food in the markets and more smiles than a visitor might expect.

Small shops have been opening, and some of the proprietors seem sufficiently
confident of the future that they are putting up new brick walls, windows, gates
and awnings. Sometimes the awnings are temporary - quick bowers for wedding
parties, of which Cambodia seems to have an inordinate number.

Private transportation has returned, and pedicabs and small flatbeds pulled by
motorcycles cruise the avenues, clustering at night in front of the railroad
station to meet the incoming train from Battambang, 160 miles to the northwest.

The service at the refurbished Monorom Hotel is not bad, and there is still a
swimming pool at the elegant old Le Royale Hotel - now called the Samaki, which
means ''solidarity'' with Vietnam.

On Sundays people dress up, the women in wide-brimmed bonnets, and wander down
to the esplanade in front of the former Royal Palace. The brown Mekong and Tonle
Sap Rivers meet there, and a visitor can spend hours imagining that nothing much
ever happened in Cambodia.

It feels the same on the city's boulevards - their ornamental trees blooming
yellow or red or lavender -when thousands of children finish school and stream
home in blue and white uniforms.

There are signs of terrible troubles, to be sure. Between the big green hotel
where the resident Soviet citizens are housed and the smaller silver hotel where
the East Germans live, the aging Sokhalay Hotel is still boarded up and empty,
as are hundreds of other buildings. Piles of rubble seem immune to removal,
barbed-wire mysteriously blocks some streets, and the housing for most people is
squalid.

Many tenements, though, have water and electricity, and living conditions
generally seem no worse here, and are often better, than in the slums of Jakarta
or some other, freer cities.

The Pol Pot Government used to execute its Cabinet ministers. The new Government
does not do such things, but officials still occasionally drop totally from
public eye.

There is a museum, for example, that includes among its exhibits a photograph of
Cambodia's new leaders in 1979, soon after they took over. The odd thing about
the scene is that the face of a tall man next to President Heng Samrin has been
scratched out.

The face almost certainly belonged to Pen Sovann, the former Defense Minister
and Communist Party leader, who disappeared in December 1981 and who was said
months later to be living in Hanoi and suffering from an overdose of drugs.

''No pictures,'' a plainclothes guard said when a Western reporter tried to
photograph the photograph. ''This is an exhibit of the Interior Ministry.''

Foreigners here tell Pen Sovann jokes. Cambodian officials go deaf and mute at
the mention of his name.

The capital's liveliest new rivalry pits the reborn open markets in the western
part of the city, whose contraband fabrics, soaps and sunglasses come from
Thailand, against the markets in the east, whose goods come mainly from southern
Vietnam.

For one riel - 3 cents at the standard black-market rate of exchange -a visitor
can buy a single aspirin on either side of town, or two cups of soup, or three
cups of boiled rice, or four teaspoonsful of peppercorns or five small roasted
fish.

A T-shirt for an infant costs 50 riels, a pair of adult's jeans 200, but for 200
a visitor can get a Union Jack or an Italian flag patched on the back pocket.

''It's completely different from what it was a year ago,'' said Lawrence
Ostlund, who runs Unicef's regional supply center. ''There was practically
nothing to buy then. There were hardly any shops.  There were one or two
restaurants.''

The Government has been lenient about the commerce with Thailand, and the
checked scarves Cambodians wear are usually Thai.  Books are scarce and
censored, but a few stalls offer old textbooks, new notebooks, French guides to
Angkor and English dictionaries.

All such enterprises, for now, are privately operated. ''We don't have any
intention of stopping them,'' the Mayor said. ''We are doing our utmost to
encourage them.''

Step by step, however, the city's privately owned transportation, motorcycles
and even bicycles will be collectivized. So might other businesses. The Mayor
said some people were calling for more socialism. ''But,'' he said, ''we have
not yet decided.''

People talk a lot about digging.  A young man said his family buried its
valuables before being forced out of Phnom Penh in 1975. When he returned four
years later, his family dead, he went to dig up his treasure, but it was gone.

Whole libraries were buried. A man at the Foreign Ministry said a collection of
books on Cambodian archeology had been buried in 1975 by Unesco. The Government,
he said, badly needed those books now but did not know where to dig.

The Government's first priority lately has been to dig tank traps along the
western frontier.  A young French visitor named Francois Grunewald has been
researching a history of Cambodian architecture. He said not long ago that he
had been astonished at all the digging the previous regime had done.

''Dams, reservoirs, canals - it's unbelievable,'' said Mr.  Grunewald.  The
landscape has been altered more than Mr. Grunewald thought possible under such
primitive conditions. In another 20 or 50 years, he said, Mr. Pol Pot might, in
theory, have created a huge new irrigated agriculture.

These ambitions, however, had their flaws. Sticking to the techniques of the
matter, Mr. Grunewald said starvation, disease and murder had greatly sapped Mr.
Pol Pot's all-important human labor.

''In 20 years,'' he said, ''there might have been nobody left to dig.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Phnom Penh

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIA IS SAID TO SPY ON ALLIES

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 365 words

DATELINE: CANBERRA, Australia, May 6


The High Court ordered The National Times today to stop publishing classified
documents that assert that Australia spied on Asian allies and was cut off from
United States information on China's invasion of Vietnam in 1979.

The articles in the weekly newspaper include charges that Australian
intelligence agents monitored telephone calls in allied countries and conducted
secret raids for politically damaging information at home.

The injunction was sought by Prime Minister Robert Hawke's Government but came
too late to bar the first installment on the operations of the Australian
Security Intelligence Organization. Mr.  Hawke, while conceding that some of the
charges were true, said publication threatened national security.

The order also required the newspaper's editor to hand over to the High Court
any classified documents he had. Mr. Hawke said action was being taken to find
the source of the information.

The articles, based on classified and confidential documents, detail relations
between the Australian Security Intelligence Organization and the security
services of Western countries including the United States, Britain and Canada.

They are said to show that the Liberal Government of Prime Minister Malcolm
Fraser, now out of power, was highly critical of the Australian security service
and its relations with friendly countries, particularly the United States.

The documents assert that there was a breakdown between Canberra and Washington
over the Chinese invasion of Vietnam in 1979 and that American security
organizations cut off vital information to the Australian service.

The National Times also charged that Australian spies set up advanced monitoring
devices in Papua New Guinea and Indonesia, both allies, enabling them to listen
in on telephone calls.

Mr. Hawke said he expected protests from both countries on the reports.  ''While
not in any way conceding that all the allegations in the article are accurate,
some of them are,'' Mr. Hawke said at a news conference.

''The fact is that the allegations made to this stage already go to the gravest
issues of Australia's international relationships and domestic security
considerations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


Each year the College Scholarship Fund of the United Federation of Teachers
gives 300 scholarships to outstanding public-school seniors in great financial
need.

The application includes an essay under the heading ''Explanations and Statement
of Applicant.'' The space is often filled with a carefully chosen selection of
familiar platitudes about the future, potential, expanding horizons and
development as a human being.

This year, however, the scholarship committee received a stark, matter-of-fact
little essay that began like this: ''I was released from jail in Oct. 1978 and
was on a boat in Nov.  of the same year for my second attempt to escape from
Vietnam. I had a chance to reflect upon my life during those next two days. I
thought about where I had come from and where I hoped to be going, but given the
experiences of the previous four years, I was not certain that my future would
be any longer than the boat ride.''

It was not exactly what the committee had been accustomed to receiving from a
high-school senior.  Neil Luu wrote the essay, somewhat against his better
judgment. He is 19 years old, of Chinese ancestry, a senior at Newtown High
School in Elmhurst, Queens, and a four-year resident of the United States.

He and three of his four brothers were imprisoned in Vietnam after trying to
escape from the country by boat. His father was in jail for 13 months. One of
his two best friends died when the boat in which she was fleeing capsized. His
family came here with nothing. None could speak English.

Outside of his family, perhaps in all the world, he is closest to a man named
Peter Sheridan, a lawyer who lives in Greenwich, Conn., and was a battalion
commander in Saigon in 1970 and 1971.

When they first met, through another Vietnamese refugee who had been Mr.
Sheridan's interpreter in Vietnam, the boy and the man went for a camping trip
at Lake George in upstate New York.

Neil packed a dictionary, and every time Mr. Sheridan used a word, he would look
it up and write it down in both Chinese and English.  This was the beginning of
a beautiful friendship. When Neil began work on his essay, he asked Mr.
Sheridan's advice.

''I suggested to him that what he really knew best were the changes in his
life,'' Mr. Sheridan said. ''He was very reluctant to write about those
things.''

''It was too personal or something,'' Neil said. ''I was just maybe shy. Peter
explained the difference between America and my own country. In China we do not
talk about ourselves so much.''

The essay continued: ''My father started in Vietnam of the virtually nothing,
and was able on his own to achieve a significant position in the world of
education and later business. He had been the principle of Fukien High School in
Saigon, the president of the major steel manufacturing factory and the executive
of the import-export company in Saigon. He was able to provide my family with
financial independence. When the Government of Vietnam fell in April of 1975, we
lost our financial stability but in spite of greater injustice to come, we never
lost the integrity of the family.''

Neil was most hesitant about thrusting his personal life into the application
because he was afraid it would reflect badly on his family. He is the fourth of
five boys. All except the second oldest, who has a family of his own, live in a
three-room apartment in Elmhurst with their parents.

In Saigon, the family had a housekeeper and a maid. Here Neil works three nights
a week as a delivery boy for a Chinese restaurant in Manhattan. His oldest
brother worked in a factory before enrolling as an electrical-engineering major
at City College. The second goes to night school, the third to Newtown with
Neil. Their father, who is 61, has not worked since he and his wife joined their
sons in New York City in 1980.

''Nobody will hire him for an easy job because of his age and his English,''
Neil said. ''He can read English but not speak. He wants to go to work, washing
dishes in a restaurant, doing anything, but being his sons, we don't want him
to. He writes letters to people he knew in Taiwan, Hong Kong, to get back in
business.''

The essay continued: ''I had vague thoughts about freedom, about education and
about life. My concepts at age 15 were not well formed and in fact still being
shaped today. I could not have imagined the technological superiority, the
social differences, or the living condition of life in this country.''

Neil has been a student since he arrived in the United States. He looks like any
high-school senior -jeans, T-shirt, sneakers, backpack.

About 20 percent of the students at Newtown are Asian, and the school has an
extensive bilingual program. Neil was enrolled in the program for a year before
Peter Sheridan pushed him to take regular classes. He was doing well, and Mr.
Sheridan thought he could do better if he leaped into the mainstream.

This year, Neil is taking three math courses - calculus, computer science and
advanced algebra - as well as physics, creative writing and music. His math and
science grades have always been excellent, the others fair. He wants to be an
electrical engineer.

Neil won one of the U.F.T. scholarships, $1,000 annually over four years. With
the rest of the financial aid package offered him by the college, he will be
able to attend Colgate, in upstate Hamilton, in the fall. Peter Sheridan urged
him to go to college away from home.

''He is so single-minded, so serious,'' Mr. Sheridan said. ''Maybe too
serious.'' His ambition, Neil says, is to make enough money to restore his
parents' former standard of living. The last line of his essay reads, ''I'm
dedicated to pursuance of academic excellence as my only method of being able to
repay my parents and society for the chance which I had been given.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC: 'WILD GARDENS OF THE LOUP GAROU'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 35, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 330 words


''Wild Gardens of the Loup Garou,'' composer Carman Moore's music drama based on
25 poems by Ishmael Reed and Colleen McElroy, takes its central image from
voodoo folklore. The Loup Garou, explains the program note, is a spirit of
restlessness that takes the forms of dogs and birds; it both drives people crazy
and makes them able to love.

This cyclic suite of songs and recitations, currently playing at the Judson
Memorial Church, has its four performers periodically disappear into its
gorgeous set - a luminescent enchanted garden created by colored light
projections on revolving curtains - to wrestle with their demons. As their
voices murmur from within this iridescent wilderness, theatrical sparks fly.

But the central motif doesn't knit together an evening of poetry - most of it
sung - that lacks a specific theme. Mr. Moore's music, arranged for jazz quintet
and voices, is as diverse as the subjects of the poems. At its weakest, this
blend of jazz and hipsterish poetry recalls 50's Beat poetry set to music.

Mr. Moore, however, is a talented and versatile songwriter, and his more formal
settings emotionally enhance the poetry. His pop-blues rendering of Mr. Reed's
''Bitter Chocklate,'' the musings of a Vietnam veteran, has the strength and
bite of Gil Scott-Heron. Miss McElroy's girlhood recollection, ''Webs and
Rocks,'' is aptly set in a 50's rock-and-roll idiom. For Miss McElroy's sensuous
''And When My Love Calls,'' the music looks back to Ravel by way of Sondheim.

As directed by Marilyn Worrell, ''Wild Gardens of the Loup Garou'' only fitfully
sustains the ritualistic fervor of its enchantedgarden interludes. The
singer-actors are shuffled about in aimless tableaux where they do too much
mugging. Yet, despite its faults, ''Wild Gardens of the Loup Garou'' contains
flashes of real theatrical magic. It deserves a tighter production.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IS THE PASTORAL LETTER ON NUCLEAR WARFARE ONLY A BEGINNING?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1948 words


AFTER nearly two years of study and debate, America's Roman Catholic bishops
last week put the finishing touches on a pastoral letter on nuclear weapons. The
document has blazed new trails in the church's teachings on social justice. The
process of forging it has spotlighted the United States church hierarchy as
perhaps no other issue in its history.

Meeting in Chicago, the bishops amended the third draft by toughening its
condemnation of nuclear war and calling more boldly for a nuclear freeze. As in
earlier versions, they insisted that using arms as a deterrent is morally valid
only if disarmament talks are pursued.

The final vote favoring the letter, 238 to 9, delighted most prelates and
signaled a powerful meeting of their minds. They spoke glowingly of coming to
grips with one of the most perilous dangers of modernity, undaunted by critics
in the Reagan Administration and among conservative Catholics. American bishops
had been known for their largely unstinting support of United States military
policy.  But growing opposition to the arms race by recent Popes, combined with
the bishops' increasing tendency to speak out on social issues, gave impetus to
a new and forceful criticism of nuclear strategy.

Returning to their dioceses, many have vowed to place peace and disarmament at
the heart of the church's social ministry. These themes will now echo throughout
homilies, classrooms and conferences, for the letter has provided an instrument
for analyzing not only the moral standards that underlie it, but a range of
prudential solutions with which Catholics may agree or disagree. How the bishops
will use that instrument, and how the very process of honing it affected their
views on nuclear disarmament and on the church, were questions posed to several
clergymen by Kenneth A. Briggs, religion editor of The New York Times. Excerpts
of the responses follow.

QUINN

This is a difficult matter, in the sense that it has many scientific and
political complexities dealing with the nation's freedom and integrity. But it
is something about which people are informed and for which they are eager to
find a moral focus. I have found mine. I now firmly believe that any use of
nuclear weapons is morally wrong. I recognize some ambiguities in terms of
possessing nuclear arms, because there is the element of deterrence. But it is
morally wrong to let that continue.

I have already brought these issues to the attention of those in my
jurisdiction. Two years ago I issued my own pastoral letter on the subject. I
anticipated great hostility; I was wrong. I've had 1,500 letters from all kinds
of people on all levels, and only 20 were negative. The same response has come
through my personal contacts.  After all this time, people still spontaneously
bring up the subject. It seems only natural, then, for the new pastoral to be
introduced into our adult education program and our children's school
curriculum.

LYKE

This experience has reaffirmed my old convictions. During the 1960's and early
70's I demonstrated for civil rights. In 1970, I demonstrated for peace -
reading the names of people killed in Vietnam. I received hate mail far more
vitriolic than any I'd received before. It occurred to me then how deep a false
sense of patriotism -the notion that America is so sacred you can't criticize it
- runs in our country. The peace movement only touched it. Now I realize that a
large percentage of people favor a nuclear freeze. It seems, then, that the
people and the bishops have come a long way. We are all more willing to place
national policies under a higher law and the Gospel.

Bishops have brought the issues of justice to the people. We must bring them the
issue of disarmament, in part because of its effect on the world's poor. Not
only are resources being diverted, but some of our finest minds are being used
to destroy rather than build a peaceful world.

As a Franciscan, I look to St. Francis who was committed to peace.  And I do so
knowing that the 'just war' theory arose from the church's understanding of
humanity's sinful state. St.Augustine (who formulated the theory) was trying to
make it difficult to fight by posing very tough standards for fighting. It's not
that we have two traditions, one of nonviolence and the other of the just war.
It's rather a question of making the peaceful nonviolent approach of Jesus the
basic principle.

HEAD

We've just come through a process somewhat constraining and difficult,
particularly since we were not used to working as a body of bishops, but
necessary.

In its initial stages, I was deeply impressed with the needs of the poor as
against the huge amounts of money spent on the arms race.  That was my first
concern, without much regard for other priorities or needs. Gradually, I began
circling in on the effects of nuclear war and the facts of this terrible
destructive power. Then I began separating out aspects of the issue, circulating
drafts of the letter and getting reactions, including those of conservative
Catholics and of peace groups. The responses sharpened the debate and made it
possible to clarify my concern over the cataclysmic power of nuclear weapons.

I'm satified with the thrust of this final document, though I would like to have
seen clearer statements on the matter of deterrence. I don't think it should be
a permanent policy, but we shouldn't underplay its value in keeping us out of
nuclear war.

Of course, we haven't ended anything with this letter; we've only reached a
certain point in the journey. I'd like to see us press for some organization or
group at the United Nations to zero in on nuclear arms. I'd like to see us
continue our open discussions, exchanging views especially with bishops
conferences in Europe. We may find that the letter is not acceptable to our
brother bishops, but it will have given us an agenda.

LESSARD

I've become convinced that this way of working -discussing matters openly -
provides the proper soil for the moral freedom we preach about. Of course, it
has repercussions in the church. It is more challenging, since you can't rely on
the edict approach. Moreover, the issue is a public policy matter; you can't
approach it as you would certain matters of personal morality. Here there are
assorted options on a series of practical questions.

Writing the letter, we developed a sense of ownership long before we finished. I
became conscious of the realism and reasonableness of that part of our tradition
that is able to avoid extremes, and of how easily we are taken in by rhetoric,
such as the myth-making about Russia - it's always us and them, angels and
devils.

We have an enormous military presence in my diocese. A lot of our people are in
the military or used to be. I've been surprised over the last two years by their
response. They're principled people and they want to have guidance. I sent the
second draft of the letter to our local Army general. He had no trouble with it.
So I'm not as worried as I was before that there might be difficulties.

DINGMAN

When I gave a talk at the University of Iowa at Ames some time ago I used a big
blackboard. On one end I wrote militarism, on the other pacifism and down the
middle the Catholic 'just war' theory. Well, we're now moving on the continuum
from the just war theory over to pacifism, and I think that reflects the general
direction of the bishops. I know I've become a nuclear pacifist.

The document reflects this movement. It must now be approached from three
perspectives. It must be Scripturally stated and prophetically stated - we have
to be prophets and be critical of our times. Then it must be pastorally
fulfilled, keeping in mind the conscience of each individual and working within
those guidelines. I don't want this document gathering dust; I don't think it
will.  We've broken our silence and our people won't let us forget it. I cannot
keep silent as the Italian bishops did with Mussolini and the German bishops
with Hitler.

We're in a beautiful position now. There is far greater freedom in the church.
Witness this bishops conference, which spoke out in its own voice. And our
timing is perfect for convincing people, not through excommunication or a hard
line, but by addressing specific questions. We don't always have that. Sometimes
we're a little ahead and often we're late, as during the Vietnam war.

We're setting up a full-time peace ministry in our diocese. I think we'll see
another document coming in three to five years. We said this country can keep
deterrence only if it works vigorously for arms control. If that isn't achieved,
I believe we'll take a far stronger stand.

GERETY

For us there has been a developing sea change, part of the process initiated by
the Vatican Council opening the church to the world.  We're abandoning our
fortress mentality and opening our minds to the positions the church should have
taken a long time ago.

The letter, then, is a summing up of where we are -really a dramatic time. I've
seen the gradual adaptation of bishops to the nuclear realities, to the primary
problem of survival in this world.  The process (of writing the document)
brought that home to us.

Our first move in the archdiocese will be to discuss the letter with advisory
boards - priests, sisters and the archdiocesan pastoral council. We're also
going to have to talk about this with our education people. We've had courses on
issues of justice for a long time, trying to help people understand our basic
stand on the dignity of the humanb?eing. This letter will become part of that.
But because there have been divisive voices all along, we must face up to the
fact that we're in for heated discussions.

HICKEY

As the archbishop who serves in and around the nation's capital, the bishops'
letter on war and peace poses a unique personal and pastoral challenge.
Washington is the place where our nuclear policies are made and a principal
target in any nuclear exchange.

Now that the pastoral letter has been adopted, we must build on it through a
program of prayer, study, reflection and discussion. But peacemaking obviously
means more. It means an ongoing commitment to sharing our teaching. Pastorally,
we must respond with courage, neither evading nor overemphasizing the public
policy implications of this teaching. We must respond with competence, with an
understanding of what the church teaches and what the facts are. We must respond
with pastoral skill, recognizing the urgency and complexity of the issues,
understanding that for a significant number of people these are personal as well
as public concerns.

We want to be a peacemaking church. But a peacemaking church is also a community
that raises fundamental moral questions about policies. We should be building a
constituency of conscience. We should be helping to shape public opinion in a
way that supports genuine efforts to curb the arms race and obtain peace. This
is why our letter is a tremendous achievement. The issues cannot be left to
technicians or to a few leaders. This document places the moral and ethical
dimensions of nuclear arms in the center of the national debate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Conference

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
PSEUDO SALESTALK

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words


''It's nice to have your own money to spend, isn't it?'' Sounds like an
innocuous observation; in reality, those words are a sneaky salesman's way of
asking a young person: ''Tell me, now, if there's somebody else you have to
consult before buying.''

''How'd you hear about us?'' According to Steve Salerno, in an article in
Highwire, the national student magazine published in Lowell, Mass., the hidden
meaning of that piece of sales language is: ''Were you recommended? If so, I can
probably get away with charging you more.''

''Have you been looking for (the product) for very long?'' That means: ''Do you
have other price information I'm going to have to contend with, or are you a
novice?'' The author also tells young people to keep an ear open for sales
euphemisms. For example, no smooth salesman says, ''Let's sign the contract'';
rather, the archly offhand words are Let's approve the agreement, or authorize
the paperwork, or O.K. the forms.

While I had Highwire on the wire, I inquired about the latest teen-age talk. Are
teen-agers still calling parents rents? No such luck, says editor Ed Miller;
toad refers to a parent now, and ''my old man'' is ''my old toad.''

What is a current expression of approval? ''Bold rave, radical and dual are
in,'' reports Miller. Dual? ''Apparently it has something to do with the
desirability of a dual exhaust system on one's car,'' he says, ''and dual in the
sense of 'double' conveys the idea of 'twice as good.' '' ''All of these
expressions can be used with the intensifying prefix mega,'' the editor adds,
''thus megadual, which is defined as 'totally awesome.' ''

The verb to rap, meaning ''to chat,'' has developed into rapping trash, probably
a play on ''wrapping trash.'' (In Washington, a garbage-collection company
advertises itself: ''We don't talk trash, we haul trash.'') Pseudo means
''suspect,'' or ''fake,'' as in ''Are those really Calvin Kleins? They look
pseudo to me.''

The teen-age use of drug lingo, which I think has peaked, or spiked, may have
come to its logical conclusion with the simple English word drugs - not snow,
aitch, hash or even pot - used to exclaim approval. ''For instance, your friend
says, 'Let's go over to my house and listen to the new Dire Straits LP,' to
which you reply, 'Drugs!' ''

What words are generally eschewed by young people? Highwire's publisher, Vidar
J. Jorgensen, says that in choosing a name for the publication, they tested Teen
News, Youth Journal and Student.  ''Students hated all the names we liked,'' he
observes. ''We wound up with a word for a balancing act between generations.''
When he announced proudly that his quarterly was now going monthly, and I
responded, ''Drugs! Megadual!'' there was a silence; publishers are always the
last to get the word.

I Cash Words

''When was the last time you heard someone say, 'Let's go to a nightclub
tonight'?'' writes Dan Woog of Westport, Conn. ''Are there, in fact, any
nightclubs around anymore, or have they all been replaced by discos and clubs?
What about bistros?'' He wonders whether the terms used to describe
entertainment spots change faster than the spots themselves.

Which triggers a thought: What happens to old words like nightclub? Is there a
graveyard for the words of yesteryear? (The last time I heard yesteryear was in
a Lone Ranger promo. The last time I heard promo was ... .)

For a piece on outdated words, Lex Irregs are urged to send candidates to me at
The New York Times, 1000 Connecticut Avenue N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036.

Henry the Impetuous

Once in a while, you can tell when a word is selected with care. In the
Eisenhower era, when Sherman Adams wanted to describe his exchange of gifts with
an industrialist - admitting error but not wrongdoing - he chose the Yankee
fiduciary's word imprudent.

In the same way, when Henry Kissinger returned from Vietnam negotiations in
1972, he needed a phrase that said peace was soon to come: Nigh was too
old-fashioned; around the corner, too Hooverian; soon would accentuate the time
rather than the peace. Hence, ''Peace is at hand.''

Recently, Dr. Kissinger was attending a conference in Morocco. A friend asked
him if the agreement he drew up while Secretary of State -that the Israelis
would withdraw from strategic passes in Sinai in return for an American pledge
not to deal with the P.L.O. - precluded any meeting between a private American
citizen and a Palestinian Arab. Henry Kissinger said he was willing to talk to
the man, and the two met in a hotel lobby for 30 or 40 minutes.

Later, it was revealed that the Palestinian was a top negotiator for Yasir
Arafat, and King Hussein leaped on that meeting as evidence that the Americans
were secretly undermining his dealings with the P.L.O. In a political column
written by the Mr. Hyde in me, I chastised the former Secretary for his
back-channel machinations; when we next spoke, and he lugubriously remonstrated
with me, I put it plainly: ''Henry, you were being either dopey or devious.
Which was it?''

If faced with the stark choice between those two words, Henry would probably
have reversed earlier form and preferred ''dopey,'' since his position is that
he was unaware of the Palestinian's official position. However, experienced
statesmen do not accept word choices that damn them either way. Henry thought it
over, and put forward a word with which he felt more comfortable: ''I was
incautious.''

Snugging at the Fed

Will the Federal Reserve Board reduce the availability of reserves in the
banking system, thereby restraining the growth of the money supply, and thus
either valiantly stop a resurgence of inflation or foolishly abort a recovery?
(Abort now goes with recovery the way awash used to go with oil.)

New York Times financial reporter Michael Quint quoted an unnamed Government
securities dealer as replying: ''There are those who think the Fed has snugged a
notch, those who think they have snugged two notches, and those who think they
have not snugged at all.''

This was zipped down to me by business/financial editor John M.  Lee with an
electronic note: ''Fed policy is arcane enough without dealers clouding it
further. Maybe semanticists can shed light.''

Most of us know the adjective snug from its early nautical sense, ''trim, tight,
neat, protected from bad weather,'' and quickly recall Benjamin Franklin's
letter of 1772 to the shapely Miss Georgiana Shipley that included the doggerel:
''Here Skugg lies snug as a bug in a rug.''

The same nautical associations adhere like barnacles to the hoarier verb to
snug. By battening down the hatches, furling the sails, stowing the movables and
lowering the topmast, sailors snugged their ship, making it trim and
stormworthy.

The securities dealer made a nice figurative extension of the act of preparing
for inflationary storms: By tightening money, the Fed snugs the economy.

Another waterlogged word popped up in a quotation recently: ''I think the
company has been able to get its dobber back in good shape, and I think I have
as well,'' said a hotel executive about recovery from a tragic skyway collapse.
Writes Steve Boone of Point Pleasant Beach, N.J.: ''What is a dobber? Is it a
Missouri barnyardism?''

A dobber, sometimes called a bobber, is a cork or plastic float that a fisherman
ties to his line to keep the bait at the desired depth and to let him know when
a fish is nibbling. When your line gets fouled or some fish steals your bait,
you look forward to the day when you get your dobber in good shape.

Safire's Investment Advice: When the Fed snugs, sell; when the dobber ducks
underwater, buy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR DODD, GAIN IN A COUNTERPOINT

BYLINE: By ROBERT E. TOMASSON

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1511 words


SENATOR Christopher J. Dodd flushed noticeably last week when asked whether he
had any ambitions to run for Vice President, now that national attention has
focused on him following his televised rebuttal to President Reagan's recent
address on Central America.

''No, no, I just don't see it. I don't think it's possible,'' the 38-year-old
Senator said, indicating that political realities and perhaps personal ambitions
were missing for any run for the office in 1984. The possibility of Mr. Dodd's
running for the No. 2 job in the country has been mentioned of late by various
political observers.

''It's flattering'' he said, to be asked about the possibility, but suggested
that two years in the United States Senate and 10 minutes on the three national
networks do not a Vice-Presidential candidate make.

A week ago Wednesday, Senator Dodd was asked by the Democratic leadership to
give the party's response to the President's speech, in which Mr. Reagan warned
that national security depended on increased military aid to Central America. In
his strongly worded rebuttal, Mr. Dodd called ''ever-increasing military
assistance'' to the area ''a formula for failure.'' His speech drew Mr. Dodd,
already a wellrespected member of the Senate, even more into the national
limelight.

Two days after the speech Senator Dodd's office had received more than 300
telegrams, and more than 2,000 letters arrived in the following week - the most
response he has received on a single issue since he has been in the Senate.
''The majority'' of the letters and telegrams approved of his position, said a
press aide.

The attention continued through last week, as he was criticized and complimented
by syndicated newspaper columnists and appeared on television programs reporting
on Central America and on the vote last Tuesday by the House Select Committee on
Intelligence to cut off funds for the Central Intelligence Agency to conduct
covert military action in Nicaragua.

Connecticut's junior Senator, meanwhile, has also been turning his attention to
local concerns, meeting over the last six weeks with Democratic politicians
around the state over breakfast on Mondays and Fridays. The Senator said he
wanted to schedule the local meetings before the 1984 Presidential race got into
full swing.

The issues raised most often, Senator Dodd, of East Haddam, said after one
breakfast in Norwalk, regarded tandem trucks, tolls and repairs on Connecticut
highways - about which he did not have too many encouraging words.

He held out little hope that Connecticut would ultimately prevail in excluding
the double trailers from state highways, though truckers recently received
permission from the Federal Government to drive the tandem trucks anywhere in
the country.

''Most states have dealt with the tandem trucks and there just is not much
sentiment in the Congress'' to sustain the attempts of a few states to exclude
them, he said. Connecticut's ban has yet to be challenged in the courts.

When discussions moved into foreign affairs at the dozen meetings, questions
usually centered on Central America, especially El Salvador. That is an area
where Senator Dodd steps forward as an expert ready to do battle with the
President Reagan - a role the Democratic leadership in Congress enhanced
considerable by selecting him to respond to the President's speech.

''I did not ask to make the reply,'' Senator Dodd said in discussing some of the
implications of his new stature as critic to the President's Central American
policies.

The text of his reply to the President's remarks was submitted to the Democratic
policy committees in both the House and Senate and only one alteration was made
- the addition of a disclaimer that he was speaking for all Democrats.

In his televised rejoinder, Senator Dodd noted that, ''while there's no
unanimity in Congress - on either side of the aisle - on Central America,
tonight I'm speaking for the many Americans who are concerned about our
ever-deepening involvement in the military conflict in that part of the world.''

In calling for negotiated settlements between warring factions in El Salvador
and Nicaragua and the need for the United States to emphasize social rather than
military solutions, Mr. Dodd, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, said that he was concerned about the misconceptions of some regarding
his position.

The growing concern of the United States in Central America should not be
compared to the sentiments that grew in the 1960's over Vietnam, ''where the
national perception came to be that we had no business in there,'' Senator Dodd
said after his speech.

Central America is very much a valid object of American concern, an area where
our self-interests must be protected, he said.  ''And some people seem to think
I'm for the rebels, which is just not the case,'' he added. ''I'm for ending the
war the most effective way possible, which is not the President's way.''

In his speech, Mr. Dodd said the United States must pay more attention to ''the
cry for bread, schools, work and opportunity'' from Central Americans and ''make
violent revolution preventable by making peaceful revolution possible.''

Last week, the Republican counterattacks on the reply were harsh.  Mr. Dodd's
remarks were called ''demagogic'' and ''irresponsible'' by Jeane J. Kirkpatrick,
chief United States delegate to the United Nations. And some Democrats, most
notable Representative James C.  Wright Jr. of Texas, the House majority leader,
let it be known that they preferred the President's program over that of Mr.
Dodd.

The criticism from Mr. Wright, who described Mr. Dodd's speech as ''hyperbole''
and ''florid rhetoric,'' seemed to strike the Connecticut Democrat with the most
concern.

''I'm disappointed not because he disagreed substantively, but because his
comments were personal in nature,'' Mr. Dodd said. ''They seemed to transcend
substance, and, frankly, that's surprising because that's not the way he is.''

The two had served together in the House for six years before Mr.  Dodd moved to
the Senate.  Connecticut's Republican Senator, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., said
through an aide that he was ''disappointed'' in the President's speech,
commenting that ''military policy does make a foreign policy'' and that ''more
attention should be given to social problems and the social roots of conflicts''
as stressed by Senator Dodd.

There seemed to be few neutral reactions to Mr. Dodd's characterization of the
President's policy as ''a formula for failure.''

''The most congested stretch of ignorance and sentimentality ever delivered this
side of a junior high school forum,'' wrote William F. Buckley Jr., the
conservative columnist.

Senator Dodd was ''a brilliant pick'' to counter the President, wrote another
syndicated columnist, Sandy Grady. ''He talked from the heart.''

The prospect of becoming a political figure identified mainly with one issue -
and an emotional one at that - is a possibility that Senator Dodd said he had no
real choice over, considering his experience in Central America. He served in
the Peace Corps in the Dominican Republic from 1966 through 1968.

With a background in the language, culture and history of Central America, Mr.
Dodd said that the area became a natural choice for him to pursue in Congress
''before it was on the front page every day.'' If national attention in Central
America ebbs, he said, ''it will remain my primary area of concern.''

With a staff of 38 in Washington and their home states, as well as extensive
resources including the committees to which they belong, Senators can direct
considerable efforts to acquiring expertise on chosen subjects.

The Senators he respects and seeks to emulate are those who have devoted
themselves to becoming experts in two or three fields, rather than committing
themselves and their staffs to scores of issues, Mr.  Dodd said.

For the Connecticut Democrat, those issues are Central America and housing.  At
the top of his list of bipartisan experts in the Senate are Sam Nunn, Democrat
of Georgia, on defense matters; Robert J. Dole, Republican of Kansas, and Bill
Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, on taxes; Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts, on the Middle East; Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, on
defense hardware, and Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, on strategic
weapons.

''You don't always vote with them on those matters,'' said Senator Dodd. ''But
when they speak, you know they've done their homework.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Christopher Dodd

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COUNTY STUDENTS VISIT CAPITAL

BYLINE: By JOHN H. REISS

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 4, Column 4; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words


WASHINGTON DAVIDA HOROWITZ had a busy day in Washington on Tuesday. At 9:30 A.M.
she had an appointment at the White House. Two hours later she met with her
Congressman on the floor of the House of Representatives to talk about plans for
construction of a museum on the Mall to commemorate the Holocaust. After an
impromptu photo session outside the Capitol, she made a brief stop at the
Supreme Court, hurried across town to meet with a lobbyist, visited the Vietnam
Memorial, and then, just to prove that she's not all work and no fun, Davida
took in a show at the Ford Theater.

Wednesday was similarly hectic, culminating in a five-hour-plus bus ride back to
Westchester at night. By Thursday morning the excitement was over, and Davida
had to return to the more perfunctory task of being an eighth grader.

Davida's three-day adventure in Washington was part of a class trip taken yearly
by eighth graders at the Solomon Schechter School of Westchester in White
Plains. Their foray to Washington included the requisite visits to the city's
monuments, the tour of the Capitol and a stopover at Arlington National
Cemetery. But the excursion was also punctuated by a substantive on-the-record
conference with Representative Richard L. Ottinger, Democrat of Mamaroneck, a
skull session with a representative of the Religious Action Center, a Jewish
lobbying group, and relentless mugging for photographers.

By the students' accounts, the White House scene Tuesday was ''a bummer.'' In
fact, the White House ranked right up there with the heat and Washington's
ubiquitous steps as the least popular aspects of the trip. Having traveled all
the way from Westchester County, the least one would expect is a V.I.P. tour of
the White House, which they didn't get. They were given the preferred tour, but
as Rachel Kadish put it, after standing outside the White House with her
classmates for half an hour, ''All that furniture and four rooms just weren't
worth the wait.''

On to the Capitol. There, sitting on the Democratic side on the House floor, the
students listened to a frenetic explanation from Mr. Ottinger on how a bill
becomes law -''...very difficult process...sent to committee...try to use our
influence...committee marks it up...goes to the floor for a vote...'' -and then
peppered the Representative with prepared questions. The issues included United
States aid to El Salvador, draft registraiton, prayer in school and whether the
United States should negotiate with the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Later, on the Capitol steps, less weighty matters were discussed.  The
Congressman - who typically sees about 20 student groups a year, three-quarters
of them in the spring - was reported to have said that '' 'E.T.' should have won
the Academy Award, but so should have 'Gandhi.' ''

The meeting with Representative Ottinger provoked a spirited debate on his
sincerity in dealing with 14-year-old nonvoters. Suzanne Nossel said Mr.
Ottinger ''talked a lot, but didn't say much,'' and felt that he was ''looking
down on us when he was talking about the P.L.O.''

Ricky Troy agreed that Mr. Ottinger was aware that he was talking to Jewish
children: ''He talked to us as an ethnic group.'' David Bardin came to Mr.
Ottinger's defense. ''I don't think he talked down to us,'' he said. ''With
Central America, a lot of people don't want to state their opinions, even to
reporters, so you can't expect him to do it for us.''

And Aliza Rosen, answering a charge that Mr. Ottinger was too vague, said she
thought he was ''very direct'' and ''didn't beat around the bush like most
politicians.''

Josh Benjamin didn't beat around the bush when, on a tour of the Capitol, the
guide said the House would be debating the nuclearfreeze issue.

''Agriculture,'' Josh corrected.  ''No, it's the nuclear freeze, today,'' the
guide said.  ''Agriculture,'' Josh repeated, shaking his head.  Agriculture it
was, the humbled guide learned, as she led the group into the House visitor's
gallery.  Later, everyone became fascinated, then appalled, at the prospect of
becoming a Congressional page. The exchange between the guide and students went
something like this:

Guide: ''The pages only go to school for three hours a day.'' Students:
''Ahhhhhhhhhh.'' Guide: ''But their day starts at 6 A.M.'' Students:
''Uhhhhhhhhhh.'' Interest in the Capitol tour waned quickly as well. One girl,
shifting her weight from foot to foot, remarked to no one in particular, ''This
is boring.'' Moments later, when the guide asked, ''Are there any questions?''
the girl closed her eyes, tightened her lips, and pleaded in quiet desperation,
''No, no. Please, no.''

The guide at the Supreme Court didn't get off so easily. While delivering a
rhythmic, obviously rehearsed litany of facts about the Court, many having to do
with its physical structure, the guide mentioned that lawyers for the Supreme
Court are often disbarred.

''For what reason,'' asked Rona Robinson, the students' Social Studies and
English teacher. The guide's face went blank and, bargaining for time, he leaned
forward and asked Mrs. Robinson to repeat the question.

''For what reason?'' she asked again.  ''Many, many reasons,'' he replied.
''Like what?'' she persisted.  ''Oh, many, many, many reasons,'' he said.
Moments later, as the children filed out of the courtroom, one boy commented, in
a sing-song manner, ''Somebody didn't know what he was talking about.''

Outside the court, Mrs. Robinson warned her students, ''Don't try that answer on
a test.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Ottinger

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION WEEK

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words


Cut, Shaped and Refocused

To ease the financial burden on the public-television system, the cost of
bringing Lanford Wilson's 1980 Broadway hit ''Fifth of July'' to public
television was shared by Showtime Entertainment, the subscription cable channel.
Consequently, this television production was telecast on Showtime last fall and
will be shown on the cable channel again next fall. Now, as part of the
''American Playhouse '' series, ''Fifth of July'' will be broadcast Tuesday at 9
P.M. on Channel 13. The cast is led by two actors who are re-creating their
Broadway roles, Richard Thomas and Swoosie Kurtz. Miss Kurtz won a Tony for her
Broadway performance.

''Fifth of July'' is about a paraplegic Vietnam veteran, his homosexual lover,
the veteran's unwed sister and her daughter. When the play opened on Broadway in
the fall of 1980, Frank Rich, The New York Times drama critic, said it was ''a
densely packed yet buoyant outpouring of empathy, poetry and humor, all shaped
in a remarkable vision.''

Marshall W. Mason, the theatrical director and a founder of the Circle
Repertory, where ''Fifth of July'' was first produced, staged the earlier Off
Broadway and Broadway productions as well as this television version. Kirk
Browning, the veteran television director, was the co-director for this
production. Mr. Mason said that to make the play in the television mode, ''the
entire rhythm of the piece had to be reconceived. We cut, shaped and refocused
the text. We cut the text to provide more time for visuals. It's sort of like a
little movie. And going outdoors was a big difference.'' The play was filmed
last summer in Essex and Hartford, Conn.

Back to Basic Honesty
Although he is perhaps most notable because of his association with ''American
Bandstand'' and rock-and-roll, Dick Clark was once a country-music disk jockey
called ''Cactus Dick.'' Currently, among other things, he is an owner of United
Stations Network, a countrymusic network that functions via satellite. Thus, it
is consistent that through dick clark productions, inc., he should be the
executive producer of the 18th annual Academy of Country Music Awards that will
be broadcast Monday on NBC from 9 to 11 P.M., live from Knott's Berry Farm in
Buena Vista, Calif. The performer roster includes Jerry Reed, John Schneider,
Tammy Wynette, Alabama, David Frizzell, Merle Haggard, Lee Greenwood, Willie
Nelson and Sylvia.

Mr. Clark said that country is ''middle of the road music - the only facet of
the music field that has not substantially changed, country music has maintained
its same substantial share of the market.'' He believes that country fans are
''ex-rock-and-rollers who want a more melodious sound when they reach their
30's.''

Bill Boyd, executive director of the Academy of Country Music, is more bullish.
''In the past 15 years,'' he said recently, ''country music has been the fastest
growing form of American music. The number of radio stations playing country
music tripled in the past 10 years.'' Those were not new stations, he explained,
but outlets that dropped one music form for country. Songwriting is the key to
country's success, he claims. ''The freshest group of young songwriters are
writing country. It's back to patriotism, back to basic honesty,'' he said.
''This is a business that believes in honesty, that believes in a handshake.''
If someone in this business gives you his word, he added, ''you can take it to
the bank.''

Filming Twain
American television, especially commercial television, has not taken a
sufficient interest in American literary classics, the producer/composer William
Perry said last week. For example, he said, ''The Spanish are doing Hemingway.
We overlook our own literature while we bring in 'Brideshead Revisited.' ''
Doing his part to offset these omissions, Mr. Perry has produced four Mark Twain
classics for television, and they will be seen on Channel 13 this month.
''Innocents Abroad'' will lead off and will have its premiere Monday from 9 to
11 P.M. On each of May's remaining Mondays, one of three previously broadcast
Twain works - ''Life on the Mississippi,'' ''The Mysterious Stranger'' and ''The
Private History of a Campaign that Failed'' - will be presented.

''Innocents Abroad'' is the story of Twain's first visit, in 1867, to Europe,
Egypt and what is now Israel. In addition to producing it, Mr. Perry composed
the film's original score and conducted members of Rome's two major symphonies
in performances of it. The film cost about $2.2 million, Mr. Perry said, and
financial support came from France, Italy, Germany and Austria, as well as from
American corporations and foundations. It was filmed in France, Greece, Italy
and Egypt and has been dubbed into several European languages - a first, Mr.
Perry believes, for a public-television drama - for viewing on the continent.

Personal Experiences
As a writer, the multi-talented actor Charles Grodin said the other day, he is
not a ''research writer.'' He writes when he ''has a certain amount of things to
say'' based on his ''actual personal experience.'' It can be assumed, therefore,
that Mr. Grodin has put some of this experience into ''Love, Sex ...and
Marriage?'' an hourlong romantic comedy that he wrote and also stars in. He said
he wrote it ''originally intending to hit the turning points in several
different relationships -what happens between the meeting and the breaking up.
However, after a couple of years' of ruminations and many rewrites, it turns out
that ''Love, Sex ...and Marriage?'' is only about one couple played by Mr.
Grodin and Marlo Thomas. ABC will broadcast the comedy from 10 to 11 on
Wednesday evening.

The reason he produces, directs and writes, Mr. Grodin said, is that often,
''good actors can't get a job.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
WILLY LOMAN IN PEKING

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Arthur Miller's ''Death of a Salesman,'' directed by the author and starring
Stephen Ying, who translated the play into Chinese, opened in Peking last week.

The tragic hero, Willy Loman, lugs his suitcases filled with false values
onstage to dramatize to a new audience that success in life is better measured
by the love of a family than the liking of customers.

A question arises: Why, a dozen years after the first talks between Zhou Enlai
and Henry Kissinger, have Chinese-American relations progressed so little?

The tendency of Americans is to blame ourselves for the blunders of others. We
lash our own backs for being indiscreet about playing the China card against the
Russians, or for otherwise offending Chinese sensibilities.

But it was Peking that overplayed its hand that resulted in its loss of leverage
in world affairs.  The essence of Zhou Enlai's diplomacy was to induce the
nonthreatening American barbarians into standing up to the threatening Soviet
barbarians by beginning to cooperate in trade and strategy against Moscow.
Already ideologically estranged from the Soviet Union, the Middle Kingdom
skillfully exploited America's desire to worry the Russians by establishing a
new Chinese-American relationship. Thus, Zhou received U.S. help and recognition
while demonstrating to Moscow that China could not be intimidated.

But consider the situation today: the new Chinese leaders have lost their
international leverage.  In relations with the U.S., after snatching
normalization from Mr.  Carter at no cost, Peking acted with ill grace toward
the further Reagan concessions. To Deng Xiaoping, the Taiwan issue suddenly
became more important than the common interest in containing Soviet hegemony.
The startling offer by Mr. Reagan in August of 1982 to ultimately cut off all
arms sales to Taiwan was met with ''not enough'' from Peking. Later, visiting
Secretary Shultz was pelted with press insults on his departure.

When a young female tennis player, Hu Na, defected, Peking loudly demanded that
the U.S. change its fundamental law on refugees; the Reagan men were then forced
to react by granting the young woman asylum; in a fit of Peking, China cut off
future official cultural exchanges. Not very subtle, and wholly ineffective. The
message from Peking was a threat to play their Russian card: If you don't give
us everything we want, we'll start dealing with the Russians.

That was blundering. The Soviet leaders might be willing to accommodate Chinese
desires by rearranging the disposition of some border troops, but on the matter
that affects Chinese-Russian affairs most directly - Vietnam's takeover of
China's ally, Cambodia - the Russians will surely stick with their client,
Vietnam. That clearly tells the third world, which China would like to lead,
that the Chinese cannot get a superpower to lay off one of its neighbors.

This inept bipolar byplay has brought Peking the worst of both worlds. The
Russians are not worried that the Chinese will embrace the Americans, and so
they go ahead and support Vietnam. At the same time, the Americans are not
worried that the Chinese will rapproche with the Russians, and so we threaten to
withdraw from the Asian Development Bank if Peking tries to kick out Taiwan.

Evidently the Chinese leaders are becoming aware of their loss of diplomatic
leverage. The Peking Daily is now being published in English, and a flock of
press agents has been added to the previously stone-faced Peking ministries. A
deft new ambassador has been dispatched to Washington, intelligence cooperation
has picked up, a Jeep deal has been signed, and Henry Kissinger was summoned to
Peking last month, presumably to establish a front, back or side channel.

Such cosmetics cannot cover up the diplomatic decline when what is really needed
is a demonstration of internal stability. The world knows that Deng's recent
railing at the U.S. for continuing even a reduced support for Taiwan is evidence
of his own internal weakness - Mao and Zhou were never forced to play to the
crowds at home on the Taiwan issue.

To recoup, and to regain the position in the world suitable for the government
of a billion people, Peking should seek to reassure the Taiwanese, not frighten
them by demanding arms cutoffs. China should offer genuine market opportunities
to American business, instead of trying to expand the protectionist bureaucracy
that stifles investment. It should return to delicacy and subtlety, instead of
pursuing the politics of petulance by crassly playing the Russian card.

This is not to suggest that China should take a ride on a smile and a shoeshine.
As Willy Loman learned too late, the relationships that count are built on
steady accretions of trust and not on the shifting sands of material gain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words


PRESENT HISTORY. By Theodore Draper. 467 pages. Random House.  $17.95.

THE title of Theodore Draper's collection of a decade's worth of magazine
articles signals his mission to bring the techniques of the scholar to the study
of contemporary issues. He gives to current memoirs, documents, speeches and
off-the-cuff statements the kind of close reading usually reserved for the
residue of other periods. The subjects so served in ''Present History'' include
nuclear deterrence, Arab-Israeli relations and the Western alliance.

That Mr. Draper, who has written an estimable history of the American Communist
Party, is a skilled historian is certain, yet his temperament is anything but
dispassionate. Behind the talents of the scholar-journalist lurks the spirit of
an editorial writer.

His polemical talents are put to particularly effective account in his extended
treatments of nuclear policy, which first appeared in The New York Review of
Books. He subjects Jonathan Schell's ''Fate of the Earth'' to a withering
analysis, comparing it to Charles Reich's ''Greening of America,'' - ''that
classic of puerility'' - as an example of ''political fantasy and millennial
daydreaming.'' He leaves Mr. Schell's celebrated book in the condition of
Hiroshima after the bomb.

What particularly irritates Mr. Draper, whose strength lies in close weighing of
real possibilities, is the cast of mind ''that operates only between extremes.''
He adds: ''If anything like deterrence offers any protection at all against
nuclear war, it must be denied and denounced. Nothing must be permitted to hold
out any hope that does not pass the tests of eternal peace and everlasting
love.''

Sensibly scornful of any approach to an arms agreement that depends on pressure
from the Russian people on their masters, Mr. Draper argues that the hope of
avoiding nuclear catastrophe (failing complete abolition of nuclear weapons)
lies in mutual deterrence at as low a level as possible. Thus, he is appalled at
the leaked plans of the Reagan Administration for fighting a protracted nuclear
war.  He notes that although Caspar Weinberger concedes that a nuclear war is
not winnable, as Secretary of Defense he is planning ''to prevail.'' What the
Secretary does not see, according to Mr. Draper, is that ''arming for deterrence
is not the same as arming for fighting or prevailing in a protracted nuclear
war'' - an ominous oversight.

He sums up his charge powerfully: ''The search for nuclear superiority, the
preparation for a protracted nuclear war and the goal of prevailing in such a
war, all fit together in behalf of a master plan that goes far beyond
deterrence; it is the vision of an apocalyptic nuclear war to decide once and
for all the issue of world power. Only such an outcome could possibly justify
the millions of casualties and the frightful physical destruction that would
ensue from such a war. It is an aim that makes no sense in any conceivable
cost-benefit calculus, and yet it is the hidden agenda of those on both sides
who are plotting to win a nuclear war.''

Mr. Draper keeps on the move between camps. In the 1970's, for example, he wrote
three articles on the Arab-Israeli wars for Commentary magazine, in which he
argued that the blame for the 1973 war rested squarely with Arab absolutists.
His account of the shaping of United Nations Resolution 242, that
much-interpreted document on conditions for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict that everyone cites but that few have studied, is especially
illuminating. But even here, Mr. Draper, who believes that Israel gave up far
more than Egypt in the Camp David accords, warns against the ''immemorial
claims'' of Israelis as well as Arabs: ''It is too late for Israelis to say that
the West Bank does not belong to the Arabs; they are there, and they cannot be
removed or disregarded without incalculable suffering. The trouble with history
is that it is nonnegotiable, and diplomacy is negotiation or it is nothing.''

His distaste for all-or-nothing mentalities emerges, too, in his pitiless
dissection of Norman Podhoretz's ''Why We Were in Vietnam.'' Mr. Draper writes
that the war as viewed by the editor of Commentary ''does not exist in a real
world, tainted with struggles for power and geopolitical forces.'' Mr. Draper
goes on: ''His war exists in an ideal realm of anti-Communism, no matter where,
by what means, at what price or against whom.'' Mr. Draper is similarly critical
of what he discerns as softness toward authoritarian regimes displayed by
representatives of the the present Administration, like that ''formidably
single-minded partisan,'' Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States chief delegate
to the United Nations.

For Mr. Draper, the crucial division over today's great issues is between
absolutists and realists. In addition to championing dangerous policies, the
absolutists, whether in the peace camp or the Pentagon, violate his scholar's
standards by adjusting the facts to suit their predilections. This is his
quarrel, too, with Henry Kissinger, whose book, ''White House Years,'' Mr.
Draper finds to be a rewriting of history, especially in its ''suppression of
all evidence of his responsibility for the illusions of detente.'' In Mr.
Draper's view, Mr. Kissinger wildly underestimated the Kremlin's ambitions and
misread the character of its international strategy.

If the criticisms of Mr. Kissinger and some other passages become repetitious,
that is because Mr. Draper, perhaps applying his own rules of historical
accuracy, has declined to revise his articles. A few trims would have made this
long book more readable without raising invidious suspicions. But that's a small
matter. Mr. Draper confirms in these essays his valuable position as one of the
clearereyed observers of the issues that torment us.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Theodore Draper

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: CHANNEL 13'S 'FIFTH'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 792 words


AFTER watching a performance of Lanford Wilson's ''Fifth of July'' on Broadway,
a theatergoer was heard to remark, with evident satisfaction, ''Finally, a play
play - maybe real plays are coming back.'' It was a pinpointing of Mr. Wilson's
strength. Eschewing abstractions, avant-garde experimentation or gimmicky sets,
he uses the fairly traditional forms of domestic drama - complete with
beginnings, middles and ends - to create his own very distinctive world of
special sensibilities. It is an art he has developed with uncommon skill.

Tonight at 9 o'clock, ''Fifth of July'' comes to public television via a
somewhat unusual route. It has been packaged as a co-production of WNET/ Channel
13 and Showtime Entertainment, which is a pay-cable operation. The play has
already been presented on Showtime, in a version that is some 20 minutes longer
than the one that can be seen this evening. The cuts for public television have
included much of Mr. Wilson's more colorful language, although several choice
examples remain and are likely to startle viewers not accustomed to the
permissiveness of cable fare.

For television, Marshall W. Mason, director of the original stage production,
has been joined by Kirk Browning, the veteran television director, in an effort
to transpose the play smoothly to a different medium. The single setting of a
large old house in Lebanon, Mo., is now seen as a real on-location house,
surrounded by a rolling lawn (it was actually filmed in Connecticut). Most of
the cast has been recruited from the Circle Repertory Theater, founded in 1969
by Mr.  Mason and Mr. Wilson along with Tanya Berezin, an actress, and Rob
Thirkield, a director. Repeating their Broadway performances are Richard Thomas,
who replaced Christopher Reeve, and Swoosie Kurtz, who won Tony, Drama Desk and
Outer Critics Circle awards for this particular role.

As all theatergoers should know by now, ''Fifth of July,'' taking place during
the Independence Day holiday of 1977, is part of a trilogy. The other two plays,
''Talley's Folly'' and ''A Tale Told,'' unfold on July 4 of 1944. At the
seemingly quiet and stable center of ''Fifth of July'' are Ken Talley (Mr.
Thomas), a Vietnam veteran who lost both legs in battle, and Jed Jenkins (Jeff
Daniels), Ken's lover, who would be content to spend the rest of his life
cultivating a formal English garden. Their relationship is quickly made apparent
when Jed enters and kisses Ken warmly, but homosexuality is not a burning issue
in the play. It is simply there.

The house is being visited for the weekend by an oddball collection of relatives
and old college friends, survivors from the activist 1960's. Ken's sister, June
(Joyce Rheeling Christopher), is given to frequent fretting, especially when
dealing with her 13-year-old daughter, Shirley (Cynthia Nixon), who suffers from
an overheated imagination. June's onetime college boyfriend, John Landis
(Jonathan Hogan), is married to the bizarre but shrewd Gwen (Miss Kurtz), much
of whose hilariously outlandish behavior is undoubtedly connected with snorting
cocaine and popping Quaaludes. Representing the past is Aunt Sally (Helen
Stenborg), who fell in love with the outsider, Matt Friedman, in ''Talley's
Folly.''

Mr. Wilson sets this set of characters spinning, moving them carefully in and
out of one another's emotional range. Gradually, insights are provided into all
of their lives. In the end, it is Ken who has to face some of the more difficult
truths. The conclusion remains powerful and moving, but, unfortunately, the
overall impact of the play has been dissipated in this television adaptation.

Perhaps this shorter version has trimmed too much from the original, leaving
certain carefully calculated scenes suddenly lopsided. The stage production was
a model of ensemble acting, timed with almost dazzling precision. Television,
employing the inevitable closeups, loses the feeling of the ensemble. The result
is a curious imbalance. The character of Ken recedes from the picture while Aunt
Sally and young Shirley become more prominent. Seen at close range in periodic
spurts, Gwen becomes more monstrous than funny. Everything that meshed
splendidly on the stage is suddenly out of kilter.

It is largely a matter of pacing and editing. The performances are still superb.
Mr. Thomas is especially impressive, bringing to Ken just the right degrees of
gentleness and toughness. He brings to the role and extraordinarily sensitive
balance, something that is sadly missing in the production as a whole.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Thomas

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEEP STRAINS IN COMECON

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 9


When the Soviet Union built a headquarters for Comecon, the trading bloc that
links Moscow and its Communist allies, officials selected a prime site by the
Moscow River and erected one of the capital's tallest buildings, a 31-story
steel-andglass structure that looks out on an unlimited horizon.

More than a decade later, the view is about the most heartening thing left for
the organization, whose bleak economic prospects and internal strains have
developed to the point where it has had to repeatedly postpone a long-planned
summit meeting.

The meeting, which would be the first since 1971, has been in preparation since
at least early 1981, when it was mentioned by the then Soviet leader, Leonid I.
Brezhnev, at the Soviet party's 26th Congress. But four high-level meetings in
Moscow this year, including one that ended last week, have been unable to agree
on an agenda.  Since such gatherings in the Communist world are held only to
ratify agreements already made, this is tantamount to acknowledging that the
disputes remain too wide for accommodation.

Pressure for Integration

Comecon officials are secretive about the discord, but enough has emerged from
the organization's cryptic communiques and articles in the Soviet press to
indicate that the nub of the problem lies in the Kremlin's pressure for
increased economic integration of the member states. Along with this is a range
of continuing troubles, including resentment among the Eastern European states
at the rising cost of Soviet energy and raw material supplies, notably oil.

The situation appears to have worsened since the Soviet leadership passed last
November to Yuri V. Andropov. Much of Mr. Andropov's career has been spent
dealing with Eastern Europe, and he has broken new ground by advocating that the
Soviet Union look elsewhere in the bloc, notably to Hungary, for guidelines to
domestic economic reform.

But he has also stepped up pressures for increased rationalization of the
economies of the Comecon states, increasing apprehension among allies who fear a
further undermining of their already fragile sovereignty.

In addition to the Soviet Union, Comecon - a shortened form for the Council for
Mutual Economic Assistance - includes six Eastern European countries, Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland and Rumania, and two other
Communist states, Cuba and Vietnam.

The Soviet authorities have long wanted changes in the disjointed manner in
which the organization operates, and difficulties with the West have provided a
convenient rationale. The most important change would be closer coordination of
the planning process in each of the member states. The Russians have urged the
adoption of a common master plan that would cover the period up to the end of
the century, in place of the current practice of aligning five-year plans.

Theme Is 'Specialization'

The Russians are looking for major economies of scale. The catchword in Soviet
articles is ''specialization,'' the idea being that the member states end the
duplication in industrial production and concentrate on the areas of their
greatest expertise.

Under such arrangements, East Germany, well ahead of other members in robotics
and microelectronics, would increase its investments, yielding other activities,
perhaps auto manufacturing, to the Soviet Union or other Comecon members.

In addition, Moscow is pushing the idea of ''joint companies,'' with expertise
and investment from one country being welded to that of another in a single
plant or series of plants. It has also urged more direct contacts between
enterprises in different countries producing similar goods, or components for
the same end product.

The prescriptions sound like a Communist attempt to emulate some of the
successes of the European Economic Community, or Common Market, where the
reduction of tariffs and other barriers has led to a more rational system, much
of it led by the multinational corporations that Soviet propaganda likes to
depict as a capitalist scourge.

It is an irony of Comecon that it has failed to achieve anything like the degree
of economic integration that has developed in Western Europe, despite the
Kremlin's military and political authority.

Although Comecon existed in primitive form as early as 1949, it has never
managed to develop into anything much more than a forum for the management of a
series of bilateral trading agreements between the member states. The absence of
coherent, bloc-wide economic arrangements is exemplified by the failure to make
the ruble into a fully convertible currency within the bloc, despite the fact
that the bulk of interstate transactions are denominated in the Soviet currency.


Transportation Complaints

This has led to complaints by Moscow's partners that they cannot use ruble
surpluses to buy products elsewhere in the bloc. Other obstacles to the bloc's
growth include a wider railway gauge in the Soviet Union than that in most other
countries of Eastern Europe, the absence of modern highways, and the failure to
agree on standardized container sizes for freight shipments.

American figures on the two blocs tell their own story. The Common Market, with
a population of 265 million, had a gross national product of nearly $2,800
billion in 1980, while the Comecon nations, with a population of more than 375
million, had a G.N.P. of $2,020 billion.

This difference translates into a huge gap in living standards. The European
nations had 311 automobiles for every 1,000 people, compared with 71 for the
Comecon countries. Until the mid-1970's, most Comecon countries reported
impressive growth rates, but the gradual exhaustion of opportunities for what
Marxist economists call ''extensive economic growth,'' meaning output gains
resulting from increases in labor, land and capital, forced a painful
deceleration as the decade progressed.

Like the Soviet Union, most of the East European states sought a cure in
large-scale imports of Western technology, but this proved of limited value as
anticipated growth failed to materialize and big debts to Western banks turned
sour. Worse still, Western technology often proved difficult to integrate into
less advanced economies.

Trade Friction

Problems within the bloc that arose from the worsening economic climate were
compounded by growing friction over terms of trade. The Russians argue that
trading arrangements have involved big subsidies by the Kremlin to allied
states, largely as a result of policies that underpriced Soviet deliveries of
energy and raw materials and overpriced the machinery and agricultural products
that the European states sold in return.

In addition, Moscow consistently allowed the European states to carry imbalances
in the bilateral trade, in effect extending interest-free credit. Western
calculations have put the cost of these Soviet transfers at $18 billion for the
European members of Comecon in 1980 alone, with another $5 billion for Cuba,
Vietnam and other dependent nations. Although such figures are not available to
ordinary Russians, it has long been believed by ordinary people here that other
members of the bloc, particularly Poland, have been living off Soviet largesse.

Eastern Europeans see matters differently. While conceding that the terms of
trade have been tipped in their favor, they see this as a fair charge to the
Russians for imposing a closed political and economic system after World War II.
Moreover, in recent years they have seen the balance shifting back toward Moscow
as a result of a rapid increases in the price of Soviet energy supplies.

Cheap Soviet oil, in particular, has been a mainstay of Comecon.  But in 1975,
after the first leap in oil prices set by the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries, Moscow shifted to a new formula that has had the effect of
moving the Comecon price progressively closer to OPEC levels.

From an effective subsidy of 50 percent on the OPEC price in 1981, the Kremlin
has shifted to a 10 percent subsidy this year.  With oil accounting for 30
percent of Soviet exports to Comecon partners, the rising price has become one
of the major issues in negotiations over a summit meeting. According to Eastern
Europeans who have discussed the matter here, some agreement on energy pricing
is essential before a summit meeting can be held.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map depicting Eastern Europe's financial growth

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECRET PENTAGON INTELLIGENCE UNIT IS DISCLOSED

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 911 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 10


The Defense Department has set up a special unit for intelligence gathering and
covert operations to supplement the Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense
Intelligence Agency, according to several officials and others familiar with the
new unit and its activities.

The sources said that the new Pentagon unit, which they identified as the Army
Intelligence Support Activity, was intended to operate around the world, and
that two current missions were in El Salvador and in support of the
anti-Sandinist guerrillas in Nicaragua.

The existence of the new unit was confirmed by a high-ranking Defense Department
official, who declined to provide any details. A department spokesman, James
Freeman, declined to answer questions about the matter.

A former intelligence official and Government sources said the unit had been
established in 1980, during the planning of the raid to free the American
hostages in Iran. According to the Government sources, the Pentagon had been
dissatisfied with the intelligence data it was getting from the C.I.A.

Clandestine Existence for a Year

The sources said that the unit, for nearly a year, conducted clandestine
operations without a ''Presidential finding,'' a legal authorization required by
Congress, and that the Pentagon had not advised the Senate and House
Intelligence committees of the unit's existence, as required by law.

One source said that during this period the C.I.A. and the Defense Intelligence
Agency, which is the Pentagon's regular intelligence unit, had been unaware of
the secret unit's activities except possibly ''in very vague terms.''

The unit was said by the sources to be operating now in compliance with the law.
They said it included clerical and support personnel along with servicemen and
civilians in the field.

According to a Government official, the unit began operating in El Salvador
about the time of the elections to the Constituent Assembly in March 1982. He
said the primary function of the group in El Salvador was intelligence
gathering.

Military Included in the Unit

The official said the group in El Salvador included servicemen, but he declined
to say whether their presence meant that the stated ceiling on United States
military personnel in El Salvador was being exceeded as a result. Under an
agreement with Congressional leaders, the Reagan Administration has said that
the number of military advisers in El Salvador will not exceed 55.

In connection with the Nicaraguan mission, several sources said, the Pentagon
unit is gathering intelligence to support anti-Sandinist forces and does not
have anyone stationed inside Nicaragua.

Elsewhere around the world, the sources said, the unit has provided military
equipment to foreign forces and deployed servicemen using false identities to
collect intelligence.

The sources declined to identify the unit's headquarters, although they
indicated that some of its operations were run out of Fort Bragg, N.C.,
apparently as an extension of the Army's Special Forces there.

Committees 'Stumbled on' Unit

The Congressional intelligence committees ''stumbled on'' the unit's existence,
as one source put it, after an article in The Boston Globe in July 1981 said the
United States had provided intelligence support to James G. (Bo) Gritz, a former
Green Beret officer, on private forays into Laos in search of Americans rumored
to be still alive and held captive since the Vietnam War.

Although the intelligence committees were said to have conducted an
investigation subsequently, several committee members who were asked about the
unit said last week that they still doubted whether the committees had been
fully informed of its operations.

One House member, who declined to be identified, said that, during a trip to
Central America, he had asked C.I.A. operations chiefs in Honduras, El Salvador
and Nicaragua whether they were aware of the activities of the special Pentagon
unit and that each had said no.  The legislator said he did not know whether the
C.I.A. officers were telling him the truth or were in fact not aware of what the
unit was doing.

Reported Role in Dozier Affair

The sources said the special Pentagon unit played an unspecified role in the
rescue in January 1982 of Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier, who had been kidnapped by
the Red Brigades in Italy.

A prime mover in the development of the secret unit, according to the sources,
was Gen. Richard G. Stilwell. Now retired, General Stilwell is the Deputy Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy and, in that capacity, plays a leading role in
intelligence, counterintelligence and security policies.

The sources said General Stilwell had proposed setting up an entire new
intelligence-gathering agency within the Defense Department. Using the code name
''Monarch Eagle,'' the agency would have provided intelligence for the secret
unit's field operations.

The sources said the C.I.A. had opposed this enlarged intelligencegathering
operation on the ground that problems would arise if more than one American
intelligence service was active in a particular country. The House and Senate
Intelligence committees agreed, according to the sources, and the new agency was
not set up.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICAN POLICY HEADED FOR A DEAD END

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


To the Editor:

By characterizing the Salvadoran guerrillas and the Nicaraguan Sandinists as all
evil and their adversaries as all good, and then by attaching U.S. vital
interests to the forces of good, President Reagan has laid the groundwork for
another Vietnam (news story April 28).f evil prevails, he said, ''the region's
freedom would be lost and our security damaged in ways that can hardly be
calculated''; it is necessary to prevent ''a Communist victory.'' Under such
circumstances, if advisers and aid do not work, how can he not send troops?

The issue is not aid and advisers; it is the recognition that they won't do any
good. A solution can only come through negotiation among the players. This
should have been started long ago, using the good offices of Mexico, Panama,
Colombia and Venezuela.

The issue is not poverty or freedom.  Central American countries have always had
much of one and little of the other. The issue is stability, and stability
depends, as it has for 20 years, upon a reallocation of power, upon the conduct
of an effective revolutionary process. The question for us is how to insulate
that process from the Russians and the Cubans.

The President is wrong when he says his Administration was once friendly to the
Sandinists. It was hostile from the beginning.  He is mistaken when he alludes
to President Truman's 1947 juxtaposition of individual liberty versus
oppression. Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala have always been characterized
by oppression - oppression which has been generally nourished by the U.S. Their
transition to democracy is a tortuous process, probably requiring revolution. If
we oppose that revolution, we will lose and will push the winners into the hands
of the Russians and the Cubans, where, the evidence is, they do not want to be
at all.

Mr. Reagan asks, must we accept ''the destabilization of an entire region from
Panama to Mexico,'' as though the region had once been stable - and stable
indeed under a benign democracy. If it had stability, it was the stability of
the tomb and the prison.

He and Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick suggest that an economic Marshall Plan will
do some good. It won't - by itself. There are none of the social, political
institutions in Central America which enabled the Marshall Plan to work as well
as it did in Europe. Such ignorance or denial of reality is dangerous in high
places. Economic aid will merely strengthen the status quo, as it did in
Vietnam. Very little will trickle down, and then as much will trickle to the
guerrillas as to the rural and urban poor.

Economic and military assistance only make sense if they are a subsidiary part
of a much larger political process, aimed at reallocating power and at
reconciliation. The objective is to make revolution peaceful and to preserve it
from the imperialistic ambitions of Cuba and the U.S.S.R.

President Reagan's approach will not accomplish that objective. The road down
which he is going is a dead-end. When he gets to the end, his choice will be war
or defeat. If he picks war, the result will be defeat anyway. This is not
''defeatism''; it is a recognition of reality.  GEORGE C. LODGE Boston, April
28, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'TRASHING' CANDIDATES

BYLINE: By George McGovern

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


An interesting paradox of American politics is that every Presidential contender
longs to become the front-runner, but this position once achieved becomes so
hazardous as to be perceived as a possible liability on the road to nomination
and election.

One reason the front-runner is so vulnerable is that he is subjected to scrutiny
and criticism by the news media and public in a manner that is sometimes beyond
reason. The press has a vested interest, as does perhaps the public, in a horse
race all the way to election day. Thus, it is tempting to cut down the
front-runner with speculative commentary - ''peaking too early,'' ''too far to
the right,'' ''too far to the left,'' ''single-issue fixation.''

If none of these charges can be leveled, the front-runner may be cut down
because of a single awkward statement or a single mishandled incident, or by
treating either as a catastrophe.

In 1968, Governor George Romney of Michigan, a Mormon of high moral principle,
was eliminated from the Republican Presidential competition after he told a
Detroit interviewer that earlier he had been ''brainwashed'' by briefing
officers at the United States Embassy in Saigon, who temporarily sold him on the
soundness of American policy in Vietnam. Considering that later that year
Richard M. Nixon was nominated and elected, and then continued the war for four
more years, the press might have better served the national interest by giving
more attention to Mr. Nixon's intentions on Vietnam and less to Mr. Romney's
confession.

In 1972, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination, Senator Edmund S.
Muskie of Maine, was savaged by much of the press after the celebrated ''crying
incident'' in Manchester, N.H. Coming into New Hampshire from a hard campaign
swing, he was reported to have shed some tears in the snow when he attempted to
defend his wife against an ungracious attack by The Manchester Union-Leader.

Why anyone considered that a sign of weakness I have never understood. Indeed,
daily neighborhood surveys showed that Senator Muskie actually went up three or
four percentage points with the New Hampshire electorate after the crying
episode. But across the nation, many political commentators saw this incident as
the reason why he should be dropped from further Presidential consideration.

I was the immediate beneficiary of this interpretation and went on to win the
Democratic nomination. But my time in the ''trashing machine'' was to come once
I became the front-runner and then the nominee.

The phrase ''1,000'' was my undoing. First, I was assailed for suggesting that
the personal income tax exemption (which is now $1,000) should be replaced with
a $1,000 tax credit as a minimumincome floor. This would
---------------------------------------------------------------------
George McGovern now heads Americans for Common Sense, a public-interest
organization. have also replaced the welfare bureaucracy and the complicated
maze of existing public-assistance programs. The concept, actually a
conservative one, was similar to the negative income tax long advocated by the
economist Milton Friedman - and, for a brief time, by the Nixon Administration
in the form of the Family Assistance Program. But as the front-running contender
for the Democratic nomination, I was treated to a barrage of ridicule and
charges of radicalism that I never recovered from in 1972. Once nominated, I
selected as my running mate Thomas F.  Eagelton of Missouri, an effective
Senator who was later revealed to have had a history of mental illness for which
he had been treated with electric shock therapy. I erred in saying that I stood
''a thousand percent'' behind Senator Eagleton, only to be forced by subsequent
information into changing my mind. There was no dishonesty in my handling of
this complicated dilemma. But the incident received more abuse in the press than
Mr. Nixon's prosecution of the Vietnam War, his refusal to meet me in public
debate and the Watergate coverup. The front-running difficulties of George
Romney, Edmund Muskie and myself should be consigned to history as the nation
looks forward to another Presidential election year. But perhaps a reminder of
earlier times will enable the public to be a little more reasonable in
evaluating present and future front-runners. Former Vice President Walter F.
Mondale is said to be the current Democratic front-runner. He will and should be
subjected to careful scrutiny.  But he deserves to be evaluated, not on the
basis of his superficial personal reactions or a single ''goof,'' but on his
full measure as a man and as a political leader with a long and distinguished
public career. I am not ready to endorse him or any other contender at this
point. It is too early for that. But my eventual decision about him and other
contenders will not be based on personal whims or on trashing by political
commentators searching for grist for tomorrow's columns.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REV. RENE LUEDEE

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


The Rev. Rene Luedee, a retired Army chaplain, died of cancer Sunday at the
Veterans Administration Medical Center in West Haven, Conn. He was 51 years old
and had lived in New Haven.

Father Luedee had been an Army chaplain for 19 years, serving in the United
States, West Germany and Vietnam before retiring with a medical discharge last
July. He held the Silver and Bronze Stars and the Legion of Merit, among other
citations.

He entered the Congregation of the Passionate in 1955 and was ordained in 1962.
Father Luedee is survived by his mother, Julia Luedee of New Haven; two
brothers, Philip Luedee of New Haven and James Luedee of Branford, Conn., and
three sisters, Catherine Volpe of Branford, Mary O'Neil of Guilford, Conn., and
Veronica Luedee of New Haven.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE ARMY: JOHN A. WICKMAN JR.

BYLINE: By B.DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


In the 101st Airborne Division, one of the Army's elite combat units, troopers
who can survive the physical rigors of a special field training course are
awarded an ''air assault badge.''

So it was all but inevitable that Gen. John A. Wickham Jr. would go after one of
those coveted symbols of excellence when he took command of the division in
1976. Injuries he suffered a decade earlier in a night attack in Vietnam
hamstrung him through the course, but he rode it out, day after day, until he
got the badge.

''That's the way he is,'' one of his brigade commanders recalled today. ''He
perceives his duty and he goes at it right steadily until it's done. He can be
an innovative leader, but he doesn't achieve through flamboyance.''

Tuesday night, the Senate confirmed his appointment to succeed Gen. Edward C.
Meyer June 30 as the Army's Chief of Staff.  The 54-year-old general, graduated
from the United States Military Academy in 1950, has not publicly said what he
has in mind for the Army. But Pentagon colleagues who have talked with him
privately say he plans no radical changes. He has told them he believes the
service has transcended the Vietnam era and needs only to be kept on course and
fine-tuned a bit.

That approach would be characteristic. The Army has no farreaching doctrines or
developments that bear his name. But the record speaks for itself: Of all the
men and women who now wear the Army green, only General John W. Vessey Jr., the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has gone further.

Former Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger says General Wickham is a good
choice for Chief of Staff because of his experience, first as a combat soldier
in Vietnam, later as the commander of a crack division, still later as a
commander of an Army force in South Korea and then as a top Pentagon officer and
adviser.

''He has a range of experience that goes well beyond the Army into the whole
field of military and international affairs,'' said Mr.Schlesinger, who chose
General Wickham to be his senior military assistant in the mid-1970's. ''He's no
scholar, but he's very well read. He's personable but not a backslapper. I would
say he's a Boy Scout, not in the invidious sense but in the best sense of duty
and honor and country.''

Except on the squash court. ''There,'' says Mr. Schlesinger, ''there he has a
crazy killer instinct. I know.''

An Ambition as a Schoolboy

John Adams Wickham Jr. was born June 25, 1928, at Dobbs Ferry, N.Y. He had his
heart set on West Point and a military career before he got out of grammar
school. His father had been an Army officer before turning to the law. A
schoolmate, Donald Flood Sr., of Goldens Bridge, N.Y., said that ''no one was
surprised when he was named Army chief because he knew right from the start what
he wanted to do.''

After West Point, General Wickham worked his way through the ranks to command of
a First Cavalry Division battalion in Vietnam, and was seriously wounded. He
holds the Defense Distinguished Service Medal, the Army Distinguished Service
Medal, and the Silver Star.

General Wickham has served six tours overseas, two each in West Germany, South
Korea and Vietnam. On his last tour in Vietnam, he was the deputy chief
negotiator on peace treaty issues with North Vietnamese and Vietcong military
leaders. In West Germany, he was a brigade commander and a division chief of
staff with the Third Infantry Division.

On his last tour in South Korea, he commanded the Eighth Army as well as the
United Nations Command and the 500,000-man combined force of United States and
South Korean troops. He also ran into one of his few setbacks. Apparently
thinking he would not be quoted by name, he commented on political developments
in South Korea. State Department officials had to explain that he was not
speaking for their Government.

General Wickham also served as senior military assistant to Defense Secretary
Donald Rumsfeld. He also had three tours on the Joint Staff, the last as
director. General Wickham is married to the former Ann Lindsley Prior and has
three children. A son, John A.  Wickham 2d, is an Army first lieutenant.

The general's family and friends say he is as steady and unflamboyant off-duty
as on, except for that occasional game of squash.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Wickham Jr.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 367 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 1983 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'BLUE THUNDER,' A HELICOPTER

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Weekend Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 438 words


JOHN BADHAM'S ''Blue Thunder,'' which opens today at Loews State and other
theaters, comes as close to being a big-screen video game as any movie this
year. The popularity of video games being what it is, the movie's future doesn't
appear to be in doubt.

The film does have a story of sorts, being about a conspiracy to deny Los
Angeles citizens their civil rights, but this is only important as a frame on
which to hang a succession of old-fashioned thrills, the kind that can be
experienced in today's new-fashioned pinball parlors.

The film's star is a futuristic helicopter, called the Blue Thunder, which is
capable of speeds unusual for a helicopter and equipped with surveillance
devices that can see and hear conversations inside buildings and on the ground.
The enemy is a group of fascistic military and government types, who plan to
trick the Los Angeles Police Department into using this plane for mind as well
as mob control.

Supporting the plane, which is spectacular, are Roy Scheider, who plays a
neurotic - and thus good - pilot of helicopters for the police department; the
late Warren Oates, as his trusted superior; Daniel Stern, as Mr. Scheider's
young sidekick, and Malcolm McDowell, who is suitably suave and ruthless as an
Air Force colonel who wants Mr. Scheider dead. Candy Clark makes some
unrewarding appearances as the young woman who loves Mr. Scheider but cannot
compete with his awful memories of Vietnam. In the form of flashbacks, these
memories attack their victim with symptoms that are much like those for malaria.

The action sequences are what the film is all about, and these are remarkably
well done, including a climactic, largely bloodless shootout among helicopters
and jet fighters over Los Angeles. However, one does itch to be able to fire a
few rounds for oneself, but that, I suppose, is what pinball parlors are for.
Vincent Canby

Spying From Above
BLUE THUNDER, directed by John Badham; written by Dan O'Bannon and Don Jakoby;
director of photography, John A. Alonzo; edited by Frank Morriss and Edward
Abroms; music by Arthur B. Rubinstein; produced by Gordon Carroll; released by
Columbia Pictures. At Loews State, Broadway and 45th Street; Orpheum, 86th
Street and Third Avenue; 34th Street Showplace, near Second Avenue. Running
time: 110 minutes. This film is rated R.

Murphy . . . . . Roy Scheider
Braddock . . . . . Warren Oates
Kate . . . . . Candy Clark
Lymangood . . . . . Daniel Stern
Icelan . . . . . Paul Roebling
Fletcher . . . . . David S. Sheiner
Montoya . . . . . Joe Santos
Chochrane . . . . . Malcolm McDowell
Sgt. Short . . . . . Ed Bernard
Mayor . . . . . Jason Bernard

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MORE SALVADOR AID, AND MORE STRINGS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


An emerging Congressional consensus on military aid to El Salvador, considered
unlikely last winter, may provide more funds than the Reagan Administration
could reasonably have expected. It would also tie more strings to the aid than
critics had hoped to achieve.

Although the curbs remain ill-defined, they have the potential for real bite. On
the other hand, there is nothing to prevent President Reagan from later asking
for more funds, and precedent suggests he will.

Thus, both sides have the best deal so far in the proposed legislation that they
felt they could get under the circumstances, leading Representative Henry Hyde,
a conservative Republican of Illinois to quip, ''If you can't get dinner, get a
sandwich.''

Risks Run by Both Parties

The political risks posed by the situation in El Salvador are apparent to most
lawmakers. Democrats run the risk of being blamed for an insurgent victory if
the Administration does not get what it says it needs to bolster the Salvadoran
Government. Republicans run the risk of increased United States involvement and
of being blamed for another Vietnam.

A bipartisan policy is thus considered to be in the interest of most lawmakers,
especially if it is cloaked in the ambiguities provided by the compromises
adopted in recent days by the relevant House and Senate committees.

The committees' amendments fell into a pattern in which conditions have been
imposed and it is up to the President to determine whether they are fulfilled.
Although a House committee bill provided a mechanism for Congress to reverse the
President's judgment, Congress has traditionally been loath to do so on such
issues.

Under the compromises, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved $76.3
million in military aid for El Salvador in the current fiscal year and the House
Foreign Affairs Committee voted $65 million. The 1982 aid level was $26 million.


President Asked for $136 Million

The increase from last year obscured the fact that President had requested $136
million for this fiscal year. But few in the Administration or on Capitol Hill
believed there was a realistic possibility that Congress would come close to
that amount, and many regarded the request as part of a negotiating strategy.

Thus, the House committee action, which would provide the lower amount, was
hailed as ''a positive move'' by Powell A. Moore, Assistant Secretary of State
for Congressional affairs.

Although the committees approved large increases, each exacted some form of
commitment to a curb on human rights violations and an ''unconditional
dialogue'' with the rebels.

The more stringent requirement came from the House committee, although the key
provision was ambiguous. It said Congress would shut off military aid unless
there was ''active preparation by the Government of El Salvador for and
engagement in a dialogue, in good faith and without preconditions, with all the
major parties to the conflict in El Salvador for the purpose of achieving an
equitable political solution to the conflict.''

Sponsors of the compromise said during the debate that this meant the Salvadoran
Government had to be ''actively engaged'' in a dialogue.

Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, asked for a
definition of a ''dialogue in good faith and without preconditions.''

''Dialogue is a euphemism for negotiations,'' replied Representative Stephen J.
Solarz, Democrat of New York. ''It means that negotiations will begin without
conditions.''

The phrase ''unconditional dialogue'' has become the watchword of both the
Senate and House committees, but is not contained in the House committee bill,
which instead speaks of ''dialogue without preconditions.''

Views of Two Sides in Salvador

Unconditional dialogue has been opposed by the Salvadoran Government on the
ground that it would lead to power-sharing before elections. The Government said
the insurgents would have to get involved in the electoral process, which they
have boycotted. The insurgents, on the other hand, want the dialogue first
because they regard the elections, without prior understandings, as a device to
exclude them.

The Reagan Administration has not opposed discussions between the two sides so
long as they were limited to establishing the ground rules for elections. But
the Administration has opposed any negotiations on a division of power on the
ground - or, as Secretary of State George P. Shultz has put it, the insurgents
should not be able to shoot their way into power.

Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois and chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, said the United States should put the insurgents to the
test. The committee sent a letter to Mr. Shultz asking the United States to
encourage such ''unconditional dialogue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Church Group Deplores Policy on Asian Refugees

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 12


Representatives of American church and humanitarian groups said today that
American officials had denied entry to thousands of Indochinese refugees by
being too strict in applying guidelines for resettlement in the United States.

The group made its charges in a letter to President Reagan, the Immigration and
Naturalization Service and the State Department after spending nine days
visiting refugee camps and officials in Thailand.

Spokesmen for the group made the letter public at a news conference here,
charging that some United States immigration officers in Thailand ignore
guidelines for deciding which people are legitimate refugees.

''Thousands of refugee applicants who have been in Thailand for over three years
continue to be rejected despite the fact that to most observers they have
established substantial basis for fear of persecution upon return to Cambodia
and Vietnam,'' the report said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. JUDGE CLEARS WAY FOR TRIAL ON AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: UNIONDALE, L.I., May 12


Vietnam veterans who say their medical problems have been caused by Agent Orange
won a round here today when a Federal district judge agreed that their suit
against several chemical companies that produced the herbicide should go to
trial.

Judge George C. Pratt Jr. said a trial was merited because there was enough
evidence that the Dow Chemical Company, along with four smaller chemical
manufacturers, might have withheld crucial information on the dangers of Agent
Orange. The defoliant was used to deprive the enemy of cover in the jungles of
Vietnam.

''We won an important victory today,'' said Victor John Yannacone Jr., an
attorney representing the 20,000 veterans, their widows and children in the
four-year-old suit. ''If the judge had dismissed us, we would have been
finished.''

Over the last 30 years the United States Supreme Court has consistently ruled
that soldiers do not have the right to sue the Government. If the suit against
the chemical companies had been dismissed, Mr. Yannacone said, it would have
ended legal claims involving Agent Orange.

Proving Knowledge of Danger

The judge had said that in order for the veterans to prove that they had a
legitimate claim against the chemical companies, they had to demonstrate that
the companies knew more about the dangers of Agent Orange than the Federal
Government knew.

The chemical companies argued that the Government was aware of the dangers of
the herbicide for at least 20 years. The companies say they were simply
manufacturing the product to Government specification.

But in an oral opinion that lasted more than an hour, the judge said several of
the chemical companies might have withheld crucial information from the
Government, making it impossible for the Government to draw up reasonable safety
specifications.

''The record demonstrated that the Government and the military had a
considerable amount of knowledge about dioxin and its health hazards going back
to the 1940's,'' Judge Pratt said.

Highly Toxic Substance

Dioxin, a byproduct in the manufacture of Agent Orange, has been called the most
toxic substance made by man.  In the mid-1960's human health hazards of dioxin
were discussed at a meeting attended by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara,
the judge said, and the Department of Defense had a study commissioned in 1967
that reported the health dangers of the herbicide.

Dow's experience with Agent Orange also went far back, he said. By 1948 Dow had
started production of the crucial ingredient for Agent Orange, Judge Pratt said,
adding that by the 1950's the company had a detailed list of the hazards of the
chemical.

Judge Pratt dismissed claims against four other companies originally named in
the suit, Hercules Inc., Thompson Company, Riverdale Company and Hoffman-Taff
Company. However, attorneys for the veterans said those companies were
peripheral to their case.

The trial for the remaining five companies is not expected to start for at least
a year because of the large number of depositions that must be taken. The
companies facing trial are Dow Chemical, Thompson Hayward Company, Uniroyal
Inc., Diamond Shamrock Corporation and the Monsanto Company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CUOMO ATTACKS REAGAN ON ARMS AND AID FOR POOR

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


Governor Cuomo characterized the Reagan Administration's philosophy yesterday as
''make munitions and punish criminals - especially welfare cheats.'' He said
this philosophy, coupled with ''acts aimed at undermining the Government of
Israel,'' would offer voters in the 1984 Presidential campaign the clearest
choice in 50 years.

Addressing the 77th annual meeting of the American Jewish Committee, at the New
York Hilton Hotel in Manhattan, Mr. Cuomo departed from his prepared text to
comment on remarks made on Monday by Interior Secretary James G. Watt.

''Did you hear what he said about a Christian nation?'' Mr. Cuomo asked. ''It's
incredible.''

Watt's Address in Virginia

Mr. Watt had urged graduates of the Rev. Jerry Falwell's Liberty Baptist College
in Lynchburg, Va., to ''bring a change to America and the world.'' The Secretary
said he had committed his life to Jesus and wanted to ''revolutionize the world
for Him.''

Mr. Cuomo said that the Reagan Administration would either have to disavow Mr.
Watt's remarks ''or accept them, because you can't have it both ways.''

A White House aide dismissed Mr. Cuomo's speech as ''blatantly political'' and
said that the Governor was seeking to transform his appearance, originally
billed as an address on the role of state governments, into ''a campaign forum
for a Vice Presidential bid.''

The aide, Michael R. Gale of the office of the assistant to the President for
public liaison, is representing the White House at the American Jewish
Committee's meeting. Mr. Gale

A Warning He Plans to Repeat

Fine-tuning several political themes in his luncheon address, Mr.  Cuomo
outlined his goals for a ''compassionate government'' in what he later told
reporters was the ''kind of thing'' his party's Presidential candidates should
be saying.

He predicted that those candidates would lose a personality contest with Mr.
Reagan next year and would be better advised to contrast their philosophies with
that of the President - a warning he said he would repeat at a strategy session
of the Democratic National Committee in Washington tomorrow.

The President's ''persona transcends the most obvious misperformance,'' Mr.
Cuomo said.  The Governor said that ''this room is filled with people whose
families made it over the past 50 years thanks to compassionate government.'' He
urged the delegates to rally behind similar government assistance for those
Americans who need help, rather than support an Administration that has ''taken
from poor people and given to ammunition.''

Mr. Cuomo said in his prepared remarks that most reductions in Federal aid to
New York State had ''vanished into President Reagan's massive military
buildup,'' which he said was in some ways ''so mindless, unreasonable, and
excessive that even the President's own party has turned against it in
Congress.''

''From the beginning of its tenure in 1981,'' the Governor said, ''the Reagan
Administration has gone to great lengths to discredit Israel. The eagerness with
which it exploited a less than minor incident at a Beirut checkpoint is
consistent with earlier actions on Awacs, the F-15's, F-16's. These acts are
aimed at undermining the Government of Israel - 'destabilization' if you will -
and seem to be aimed at domestic American public opinion as well.

''I think we Americans should be under no illusions about Israel's interests in
the region. Israel wants security. She is not an American cat's-paw. But the
reality of the Middle East is that Israel's fundamental and legitimate interests
coincide with America's.''

The Administration, Mr. Cuomo said, ''cajoles Israel and penalizes her for
refusal to be exposed to the threats to security posed by Soviet-trained,
Soviet-equipped, Soviet-led and, in some cases, Soviet-manned forces.''

Mr. Cuomo's criticism of the President echoed many themes he first sounded in
1980, when he headed former President Jimmy Carter's campaign in New York, and
repeated last year during his successful race for Governor.

Mr. Cuomo, who has said he will not run for national office next year, told the
Jewish Committee that the President's philosophy of government is based on a
form of Darwinism - ''survival of the fittest.''

Earlier at the meeting yesterday, Bishop Paul Moore Jr., head of the Episcopal
Diocese of New York, appealed for a renewed alliance between Jews and liberal
Protestants.

The Bishop decried what he called the breakdown of close ties between the two
groups as a result of differences over support for Israel and the general
decline of joint social-justice projects in the last decade.

He urged a return to the ''friendship, cooperation and understanding'' that the
two groups shared in the civil-rights and anti-Vietnam War movements.

The committee elected Howard I. Friedman, a Los Angeles lawyer, as its president
yesterday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Governor Cuomo (Page B7)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES;
The camera that followed Eartha Kitt.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words


''ALL BY MYSELF,'' a feature-length musical portrait of Eartha Kitt (at the Film
Forum through next Tuesday), is the work of the film maker Christian Blackwood.
''Two years ago, I called Eartha,'' he says, ''and I said, 'I'd just like to
follow you around and see what happens.' ''

Miss Kitt agreed, and the adventure began. When she traveled - once, she was
doing a benefit in South America; she is always doing a benefit somewhere - Mr.
Blackwood went along. And when she was at home, Mr. Blackwood was there too.
Underfoot, across the table, in the wings. ''We could have made a three-hour
film,'' he says. ''But I wanted to keep it simple. I didn't want Eartha singing
with the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. I would always have my camera with me, and she
had a wireless mike on all the time, and after a while she didn't know any more
if I was filming, and the moments came out very true.''

Sometimes Mr. Blackwood led, rather than followed. ''He called me one day,''
Miss Kitt says, ''and said: 'Throw your things in a bag.  We're flying to South
Carolina.' '' Going south, to the hometown where she had been ''used as a work
mule'' wasn't easy. ''All the feelings come back that you experienced as a
child,'' she says.  ''Watching your mother's coffin put in the ground. The film
helped me get some of that hurt out of my system.''

A teen-ager when she came to New York, on a dare, Miss Kitt auditioned for the
Katherine Dunham Dance Company. ''It was one of my ways of getting myself off
the streets,'' she says. She won a full scholarship to the Dunham school, and
her first Broadway show as a dancer was ''Blue Holiday'' with Ethel Waters and
Avon Long. She remembers that she was paid $45 a week. But in ''New Faces of
1952,'' she got to slither across a stage singing a song called ''Monotonous,''
and after that she was a star.

She ran into a bad patch at the White House in 1968, when she spoke out against
the Vietnam War and upset President and Mrs. Johnson. She says this resulted in
her suffering a kind of blacklisting, but she has no remorse about her actions.
''I wasn't invited to the White House as an entertainer. I was invited to give
my opinions about the problems of our young people. I still believe this is the
greatest country there is, but we have to stand up for what the country says
we're all about. Anyway, if you walk through life needing everybody to love you
you will never do anything.''

A longtime resident of California -she likes having her own fruit trees and
chickens - Miss Kitt plans to move back East because more of her work is in this
part of the country. She says: ''I had the same kind of problem Lena Horne had
in Hollywood. 'You're a mulatto, you don't look black enough, you don't look
white enough.' When we made 'Anna Lucasta,' 2,500 theaters in America wouldn't
take it because it looked like a white woman was making love to a black man.''
She sighs. ''Maybe in my daughter's time. You can't tell what she is.''
For Jennifer Beals,

Yale and Movies Mix

Like Miss Kitt's daughter, Jennifer Beals's time is now. Fresh out of her teens,
the child of a white mother and a black father, Miss Beals may be the proof that
things do get better. She is the star of ''Flashdance,'' a smash-hit sleeper
that is the No. 1 box-office movie, according to Variety. She takes the
hullabaloo calmly. She wants to go on acting - ''I want to learn to be really
good'' - but she wants to finish school too. ''Acting is insecure,'' she says,
''and education is with you all the time.'' She grins. ''My mom's a
schoolteacher.''

Miss Beals, who comes from Chicago, started working when she was 13. ''I walked
dogs, worked at Baskin Robbins, saved for college. I didn't think it was fair
that my mom should have to pay for every whim of mine.'' Modeling turned out to
be more lucrative than dog walking for Miss Beals, who is tall and slender and
very pretty, but even so she wasn't diverted from applying to Yale, where she is
a freshman.

''I thought I would never get in,'' she says. ''I thought they only took
geniuses. But I was lucky, because I'm a minority. I'm not black, and I'm not
white, so I could mark 'other' on my application, and I guess it's hard for them
to fill that quota.''

The physical training for ''Flashdance'' was rigorous but exciting, and Miss
Beals feels awful that her dance double, Marine Jahan, didn't get any screen
credit. ''Because movies are a fairy tale,'' she says, ''but the credits at the
end of a film are a tribute to reality. That's where you draw the line and say,
'Oh, all those people were working behind the actors.' It was terrible that they
didn't put her name there. She taught me a lot, and she's a great dancer.''

Although Miss Beals doesn't care for dormitory living - ''People are up really
late, you know, and like spraying your door with whipped cream'' -she did find
romance at Yale. ''I met him the first week,'' she says. ''He's so handsome and
so smart. Actually, he directs films and fancies himself to be like Steven
Spielberg. He's got that entertainment mentality. Instead of, you know, 'Let's
go make ''Sophie's Choice,'' ' he'd rather make 'E.T.' He wants to make films
we'd like to see.''

Miss Beals has a bit of a sensible streak herself. ''They wanted to show
'Flashdance' at school,'' she says, ''but I said absolutely not. If they want to
see it, let 'em pay.''
Nino Manfredi Objects

To Pants for Michelangelo

''Nudo di Donna,'' which opens today at the Gemini (reviewed on page C7), stars
Nino Manfredi, who has been in Italian movies for more than 30 years. He
directed and worked on the script too. ''I wanted to do a story about the
middle-age sex crisis of a man,'' he says. ''But not to do it vulgar. We had
once a Pope who asked to put pants on one of Michelangelo's statues, and that is
horrible. I don't object to the human body, but you have to be able to tell me
something with it, not to use it just for the sake of sensation.

''In 'Nudo di Donna,' the man I play has been married 16 years, and sex has
almost disappeared. This man did not have a successful career, either. He was in
the tire business, and his fate took him to Venice, where there are no cars and
no roads. His wife is intellectual, interested in erotic art. In Italy, the
church considers that heavy sin. So we go back to Michelangelo in pants.  This
man is in a bad moment with himself and with his wife. The story is about the
search for love.''

When he directs himself, Mr. Manfredi says his acting suffers.  ''Sometimes the
other actors stop me because rather than to say my lines, I'm saying their
lines.''

Mr. Manfredi once acted on Broadway - in ''Rugantino,'' described as a Roman
musical spectacle, in 1964 -and now he says that he would like to buy a place in
New York and spend a few months a year here.  Mostly for his children's sake. Of
his three children, one is an actress, another a director, and, Mr. Manfredi
says: ''This is a country that, if you have a talent and profession, it can
offer you more than other countries. In Italy, the film business is in terrible
shape. We have terrorism in Italy, we have corruption, we have the Mafia, and
nobody wants to talk about it.''

Has Mr. Manfredi ever been tempted by Hollywood. ''I have been asked many times
to go there,'' he says. ''First time, Dino De Laurentiis asked me to come with
him when he came to the States.  'You'll be there for a year. You'll learn the
language. We'll make a film.' 'What kind of film?' I asked him. And he explained
to me a thing which I hated immediately. Later, Billy Wilder asked me. And I had
other invitations for small parts to give an Italian flavor to some American
movies. There was a movie called 'Four Women.' When they asked me, 'Would you
like to play in this movie?' I say, 'Which woman are you asking me to play?' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 14, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thais Say Hanoi Sent New Forces to Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 13


Vietnam sent 2,000 more troops into southern Cambodia early this month, the day
after it announced a partial troop withdrawal from the country, Thailand's
security chief said today.

The security chief, Squadron Leader Prasong Soonsiri, who is the secretary
general of Thailand's National Security Council, said the new troops were based
in Kandal Province south of Phnom Penh and replaced soldiers Hanoi pulled out on
May 2.

Western journalists were invited to Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese authorities to
witness the pullout and saw about 1,500 soldiers leave the Cambodian capital and
cross the border to Vietnam.

Vietnam's Ambassador to Cambodia, Ngo Diem, said at the time that more than
10,000 Vietnamese troops would leave in the monthlong withdrawal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA PRESENTS A PLAY ABOUT ITS VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 14


A mother asks an old family friend to help get her soldier son transferred from
the battlefront. ''I only have one son,'' she pleads over the telephone. ''We
have done enough for the revolution.''

But she is unable to stop him from being sent off to war, where over half of his
company gets wiped out. China's enemy this time is Vietnam, and the place is
their short but bloody border war in early 1979.

A popular new play, ''Wreaths at the Foot of the Mountain,'' has become the
ideological highlight of Peking's current theater season.  It was so well
received when first performed in the Manchurian province of Liaoning that the
Liaoning People's Art Theater brought it to China's capital in March.

Party Supports the Play

The Communist Party has given the play its blessing by sending some of its
leading comrades to see it.A second drama troupe in Peking is simultaneously
performing the play, which is also being shown on television. A feature film
version is being shot less than a mile from China's tense frontier with Vietnam.

The play has been adopted from a short novel by Li Cunbao, 37 years old, a
writer serving in the army. The novel was acclaimed when it appeared earlier
this year in the literary magazine New China Digest. Mr. Li said the novel was
based on his interviews with soldiers when he spent four months on the Yunnan
front at the time of the border war.

The popularity of the play coincides with the latest round of border clashes,
leaving little doubt that Vietnam has been made an authorized artistic target.
An audience one recent night responded enthusiastically to allusions about
Hanoi's ingratitude for help that Peking rendered during Vietnam's war with the
United States.

The Broader Message

Yet the broader message of ''Wreaths at the Foot of the Mountain'' is that China
still needs martyrs. In an essay in Xinwen Zhaibao, Li Cunbao explained that he
was upset to see the army ''disrespected and insulted in public places'' and
that he wanted to extol its continuing sacrifices.

The hero of the play, Zhao Mengshen, is a self-indulgent young man assigned to
an infantry unit as a political instructor. He chafes at the Spartan barracks
life, wants to get transferred to a comfortable urban billet and displays
character flaws such as dancing to disco music.

His sympathetic mother is a prominent health official whose revolutionary
background has given her lots of good connections. She agrees to help get him
out of the infantry.

But the crusty old division commander rebuffs her. The political instructor,
Zhao, apologizes to his men for trying to shirk his duty and accompanies them
into Vietnam.

The company storms the Vietnamese fortifications, and the selfless company
commander is killed by shrapnel when he tosses back a hand grenade hurled by a
Vietnamese in hiding. Other casualties in the battle include a cheerful new
recruit known to his comrades only by the nickname ''Peking.''

Chastened by his baptism of fire, Zhao, the political instructor, resists his
mother's entreaties to quit the army. When the platoon leader, Jin, is denied a
posthumous medal because he violated army discipline by going off to steal sugar
cane for his beleaguered troops, Zhao hands the grieving widow his own medal.

The audience seemed moved by the sharp exchanges between Zhao's mother and the
blunt old general. ''It's only natural for me to show concern for my son,'' she
argues. ''My son was on the battlefield.  Where was your son during the war?''

''Let's go down to the cemetery,'' the general suggests sadly, and there he
shows her the unmarked grave of his son, who concealed his family connections by
using the nickname of ''Peking.''

The play ends tidily in the tradition of socialist realism. The political
instructor, Zhao, discovers that his company commander's mother was the wet
nurse who raised him from infancy. His own mother corrects her selfish maternal
attitude.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Australia to Study Effects of Agent Orange

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia, May 14


The Government today announced an inquiry into Vietnam veterans' claims that
exposure to chemical defoliants such as Agent Orange damaged their health.

Veterans Affairs Minister Arthur Gietzelt announced the action at the fourth
annual meeting of the 9,000-member Australian Vietnam Veterans Association.

The chemicals, the best-known of which is the herbicide Agent Orange, were used
in the Vietnam War to destroy brush that provided concealment for the enemy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
ARE VIDEO GAMES ABOUT TO ZAP THE ACTION MOVIE?

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1243 words


More and more these days one attends to the mayhem within an action movie with
impatience, as if watching other people play video games, which, when the
history of entertainment is written, may turn out to be the breakthrough of our
era. Old-fashioned movies can't easily compete with the wizardry that, for a
small price, allows anyone to be the hero of his own action epic.

One sits in the dark of the movie theater and squirms helplessly at each
successive encounter with the enemy, dodging missiles in ''Star Wars'' and dried
bones in ''Conan the Barbarian,'' reaching for weapons that aren't there,
cheering a direct hit on the opposing forces and feeling exhausted at the end,
if not necessarily satisfied. This has always been true of certain kinds of
movies, but now that more and more movies look and sound like video games, and
now that more and more video games look and sound like movies, it seems possible
that the new art form might well swallow up the old.

If the principal point of an action movie has always been to afford the viewer
the vicarious pleasure of being in the thick of it, then the experience that
allows the viewer to enter the action and to control it, as a video game does,
must be more satisfying than an experience that excludes the viewer, all other
things being equal.  It's true, unfortunately, that all other things often are
equal these days, since most action films aren't especially strong on characters
or plot.

Consider John Badham's new action-adventure melodrama, ''Blue Thunder,'' set in
contemporary Los Angeles. It's full of futuristic hardware, elaborately executed
visual and sound effects and, when the action gets going, it's fairly
relentless. Yet, because the screenplay is so small it could have been written
on the head of a pin, the movie isn't especially fulfilling. The best way to
describe ''Blue Thunder'' is as Hollywood's most ambitious video game substitute
of the season to date.

Though star billing goes to Roy Scheider as Frank Murphy, a highly neurotic
helicopter pilot with the Los Angeles police, and featured billing goes to
Malcolm McDowell, who plays Cochrane, a nasty, rightwing, United States Air
Force colonel, all of the people in ''Blue Thunder'' are far less interesting -
and far, far less complex - than the title machine. This is the Blue Thunder,
which may not be quite ''the ultimate weapon'' the ads say it is, although it's
certainly impressive.

The Blue Thunder is the latest thing in helicopters, capable of speeds
comparable to those of conventional aircraft and equipped with all sorts of
advanced weaponry as well as with surveillance equipment, which enables the
pilot to monitor conversations on the ground and to take pictures through walls.
On the eve of 1984, Big Brother has arrived in Los Angeles.

As a story for the film, the screenwriters have come up with the sort of
conspiracy plot that was so popular in the paranoid 1970's: Some remarkably
self-assured representatives of what used to be known as the military-industrial
complex plan to start race riots in order to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the Blue Thunder in controlling restless civilians. Frank Murphy, while taking
the Blue Thunder out for a trial spin, just happens to fly by the building where
the plotters are plotting. He understands their awful designs and spends the
rest of the movie trying to convince his superiors that something evil is afoot.

One of the ironies the film makes nothing much of is the fact that Frank is able
to discover this plot only with the help of the Blue Thunder's advanced
monitoring devices.

The screenwriters make obligatory attempts to establish Mr.  Scheider's
character as something more than a function of the plot, which it isn't. Frank
Murphy, as we are shown several times in comically intrusive flashbacks, is
haunted by his memories of Vietnam, especially by a traumatic experience that
forever links him to the arrogant colonel played by Mr. McDowell.

An explanation of just what happened in Vietnam, which is one of the film's two
extremely dim mysteries, is withheld until the end in order to justify Frank
Murphy's strange, almost psychotic behavior.  He's unreliable not only on the
job but with a young woman (Candy Clark) who turns up with a child from time to
time to tell him that she loves him. In addition to the Air Force colonel, the
only other characters in the movie, none more substantial than an electronic
blip, are Murphy's faithful sidekick (Daniel Stern) and his tough, crusty but
understanding police captain, played by Warren Oates shortly before he died last
year.

All of this, however, is simply decoration for a movie whose main reason for
being, obviously, is not to explore character, Vietnam, fascism or urban
problems, but to allow the members of the audience to participate in the action,
and the action isn't bad. In the very long climactic sequence, Mr. Scheider, at
the controls of the Blue Thunder, flying high and low over Los Angeles, is
called upon to face attacks by Air Force fighter-jets equipped with homing
missiles and a one-to-one encounter with Mr. McDowell at the controls of another
chopper.

Though this sequence has been comparatively well photographed and edited, ''Blue
Thunder'' is so lacking in conviction and style in every other way that, at the
end, the viewer is less likely to feel exhilarated, as he does after something
as winning and witty as ''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' than nerve-racked.

What's missing is the feeling of being in charge - if not in control - that one
would have if ''Blue Thunder'' were a real video game and not just a big-screen
imitation. One watches the film with a certain amount of awe for the efforts
being made by the moviemakers but with little sense of participation, which, I
suppose, awaits the film's inevitable metamorphosis into a video game.

Ever since movies began, the people who make them have been searching for ways
by which to bring the members of the audience into the life of the screen. Sound
and color have helped. Periodically we are presented with 3-D demonstrations,
which are never completely satisfactory. The 3-D world is seen in depth, but it
always looks sort of miniaturized, removed and dead until some object comes
crashing out from the frame of the screen.

Huge, semi-surround screens, like that used for the original Cinerama, can
sometimes give the audience a feeling of being inside the action of the movie,
but seldom to any particular dramatic advantage.

Audiences are drawn into movies not by the literal reality of what they're
seeing but by various devices of dramatic invention that invite emotional and/or
intellectual response. At their very best, movies, which we accept in a passive
way, have the effect of prompting us to think and feel in such a manner that the
passive experience becomes something akin to active.

In one fashion and another we work while watching a good film.  However, even
the dumbest video game demands more in the way of physical skill and
coordination - a more active participation - of the player than the best film
demands of its viewer.

Thus it seems possible that video game technology, which appears to be advancing
at a far faster rate than the art of filmmaking, might one day make obsolete all
action-suspense films or, at least, force the people who make them to support
the film's action with something more than the perfunctory plotting of ''Blue
Thunder.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Pat Russell

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
Dioxin Trial To Proceed

BYLINE: By Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 306 words


The progress of a lawsuit filed by Vietnam veterans against the chemical
companies that produced Agent Orange, a Federal judge noted early on, would turn
on whether the companies had withheld information from the Government about the
dangers of the herbicide.  Last week, the judge, George C. Pratt Jr., ruled that
the preliminary evidence showed Washington hadn't been fully informed and that
the suit should go to trial.

''We won an important victory,'' said Victor John Yannacone Jr., an attorney for
the plaintiffs. ''If the judge had dismissed us, we would have been finished.''
The suit, a class action on behalf of 20,000 Vietnam veterans, their widows and
children, was filed nearly four years ago. The case involves veterans'
assertions that exposure to the dioxin in Agent Orange - a defoliant that was
widely used in Vietnam - has caused cancer and other illnesses, along with birth
defects in their children.

The chemical companies had maintained they weren't responsible for any injuries
because they had merely been following Government specifications and that
Washington was fully aware of the toxicity of dioxin. But Judge Pratt, in an
oral opinion delivered in a Uniondale, L.I., courtroom, said it appeared that
some of the firms might have withheld data about the dioxin content of their
product.  He said that the Agent Orange produced by four companies was
relatively free of dioxin and dismissed claims against them. Left standing were
claims against Dow Chemical and four smaller companies.

A spokesman for Dow said the company was disappointed with the ruling. But, he
added, ''We are confident Dow will be vindicated'' and he said that because
''the decision is highly complicated,'' an appeal was being considered. Even
without further appeals, a trial isn't likely to get under way for another year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AUTO UNION SHARES THE INDUSTRY'S WOES

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 986 words


''We are the vanguard in America,'' Walter P. Reuther told the cheering
delegates at the 1947 convention of the United Automobile Workers at Atlantic
City, where he consolidiated his power in the union. ''We are the architects of
the future.''

Mr. Reuther was killed in an airplane crash in 1970 but a cadre of Reuther men
was left to run the union. At the U.A.W.'s 27th convention, which begins today
in Dallas, an era in the labor movement ends with the retirement of the last of
the Reuther men - Douglas A. Fraser, the union's president, Martin Gerber, a
vice president, and regional directors Robert Battle 3d, Ken Morris, Don Ellis,
Bard Young and Ed Gray.

The U.A.W., nearing 50 years old, probably was never all that Mr.  Reuther and
others said it was. But it was in the vanguard of unionism, winning major
bargaining goals, supporting the civil rights movement, condemning what Mr.
Reuther saw as the conservativism of the labor movement, opposing, after a time,
the Vietnam war.

As Mr. Fraser and the others of his generation step aside, the union will be led
for the first time by a man who was not part of the Reuther team. Mr. Fraser's
designated successor, Owen Bieber, a 53-year-old vice president, was just a
teen-ager when Mr. Reuther assumed command of the U.A.W. And he faces a lot of
difficult problems.

The recession and structural change in the auto industry have reduced union
membership from 1.5 million to about 1.1 million. ''It will take decades to
replenish our membership,'' Mr. Gerber said last month.

The union has given billions of dollars in concessions to the auto industry. Now
the General Motors Corporation is moving forward with plans to operate a plant
at Fremont, Calif., in partnership with the Toyota Motor Company, and G.M.
officials say the union will have to start from scratch if it wants to represent
the Fremont workers. The union has also been forced to engage in strenuous
organizing at new Nissan Motor Corporation and Honda Motor Company plants in
Tennessee and Ohio.

Some people in and outside the union question the quality of the union's leaders
at the regional and local levels. Victor G. Reuther, who retired as the U.A.W.'s
director of internatonal affairs two years after his brother's death, said
''there has been some slippage'' among the union's secondary leaders.
Coping With Robots

Mr. Reuther also doubts that G.M., Ford Motor Company and Chrysler Corporation
have achieved the partnership with the union that some company and U.A.W.
officials say exists. ''I still think the Big Three companies haven't made up
their minds that the U.A.W. is an institution they are going to have to live
with,'' Mr. Reuther said.

Whether they live with it or not, the U.A.W. of the future seems likely to
continue to shrink, at least in its auto industry component. The auto
manufacturers are rapidly installing robots and other sophisticated machines and
processes. This seems sure to mean the permanent loss of tens of thousands of
jobs, a notion not accepted by some union leaders a few years ago but conceded
today.

The problems of the union are the problems of the industry, of technological
change, labor experts agree. Even the industry's return to profitability, hailed
last week by financial analysts, could cause difficulties, for workers could
demand wage increases even union leaders might find excessive. It could also
mean a revival of disputes over work rules, among other things.

Over the years the union has had remarkably few critics, although it still often
reacts harshly to criticism it receives. Many liberals have been unwilling to
offend the union, seeing it, despite some warts, as probably the country's best.

One dissident, Paul Schrade, a former regional director who works at a
California aerospace plant, said the union under Mr. Fraser has stifled younger
members who were considered critics of U.A.W.  leadership. Some labor experts in
academia, who asked not to be named, agreed.

Nor has the union demonstrated sufficient commitment to social causes, according
to critics like Mr. Schrade, who was once an assistant to Walter P. Reuther and,
before he fell from grace, a friend of Mr. Fraser. Mr. Schrade said the death
two years ago of the Progressive Alliance, founded by Mr. Fraser in 1978 as a
liberal force in American life, was a particular loss. He is also disturbed that
the union does not elect its top officer through a direct vote of members, but
by convention delegates. That issue is likely to come up at the convention.

Yet, Mr. Fraser was willing to experiment in his six years as president. He took
a seat on the Chrysler board. He thought the union should assist the auto
companies so the greatest number of jobs could be saved. And he sees the union
today as substantially involved in what previously were considered management
matters.

The problems facing Mr. Bieber, selected for the presidency by the union's
leadership in November and expected to be formally installed this week, may be
greater than those faced by Mr. Fraser. The colorless Mr. Bieber has yet to
convince some doubters in Solidarity House, the union's headquarters in Detroit,
that he has any special skills or commitment to social causes. His supporters,
however, regard him as a capable and flexible bargainer.

Douglas Stevens, chairman of the shop committee at Local 595, Linden, N. J., and
a critic of many Solidarity House policies, said pressure from rank-and-filers
and local leaders may help push Mr.  Bieber into forceful positions. Members
showed their willingness to buck Solidarity House last year when, against its
recommendation, they rejected a proposed Chrysler contract.

Victor Reuther believes the U.A.W. remains ''committed to a policy of social
unionism, not just an extra nickel in the pay envelope.'' But others say
maintaining this commitment would take all the skill and zeal Mr. Bieber can
muster.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of unin leaders

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Yanquiology

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


What are the damn Yanquis trying to tell us? You might well ask if you were an
embattled Salvadoran democrat.

You know in your bones that the war is going badly, that your army is a loose
alliance of decent professionals and murderous warlords.  Riding this tiger is
an interim president, plainly a decent man, but he owes his office to the
military.

You wish you believed all that talk about dialogue. But the guerrilla side is
just as confused -five insurgent bands, with their own violent intrigues. They
are formally led by your former democratic allies, who also ride a tiger.

You are now supposed to risk your life to talk with whom? And about what? How
quick these American liberals are to make themselves feel better by putting
strings on the aid they send. But note: they vote the money anyway so they won't
be blamed if the guerrillas win. It's a pretty obvious game to demand that the
President certify reform, human rights and now peace talks; they know the

Reagan people will certify anything to keep the dollars flowing.  How nice,
then, if the Reagan team knew what it was doing. But what was it one of them
said? Something like, ''El Salvador won't be lost on this President's watch.''
Everyone up there, in other words, wants to look good, then let the next crowd
cope.

And what is it their politics demands? Don't ''lose'' El Salvador and don't get
involved in another Vietnam. No lose, no win.  The American commitment is
threadbare and so is the American advice. Liberals preach negotiations,
conservatives preach free elections. Neither group has much regard for the
formidable obstacles to success.

You can only conclude that El Salvador won't be saved, or lost, in Washington.
The outcome really depends on the grit and determination of embattled democrats
like yourself.

And you would be right.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
KISSINGER AT 60

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 14


Henry Kissinger will be 60 this month, which is surprising, since he seems to
have been an elder statesman ever since he was 40.

Former Secretaries of State are supposed to write or at least edit one book and
then depart into the opulent obscurity of some business or law firm. But not
Henry.

He created his own business - Kissinger and Associates - and is in a way sort of
a one-man university. You always know when some new avoidable outrage has
happened, for there is Mr. Kissinger on the tube explaining in his amiable growl
how it might have been avoided.

There are people in Washington who wouldn't notice, let alone praise, him on his
100th birthday. Among these are not a few of his envious former academic
colleagues who will never forgive him for climbing higher and writing better
than anybody since Dean Acheson.  But occasionally Mr. Kissinger forgives them,
which is what really makes them mad.

His birthday is recalled here, not mainly to remember his accomplishments or
forget his mistakes, but to note the contributions he and many other former
officials make to the well-being of the nation.

Presidents and Secretaries of State and Defense are now confronted by so many
intricate problems abroad and so many absurdities on Capitol Hill that they have
no time to handle them, let alone to think steadily about them.

Meanwhile, the jet airplane and the scrambler international telephone have often
proved to be instruments of publicity and escape rather than of sound diplomacy,
and they have diminished the role of our ambassadors overseas, which is not
necessarily a bad thing, considering the political and financial reasons why so
many of them were appointed.

Accordingly, when problems call for sustained analysis and negotiation,
Presidents increasingly have had to call back the experienced old hands to help
out. Woodrow Wilson had his Colonel House, President Roosevelt gave Harry
Hopkins a bedroom in the White House, and other Presidents have used the
outsiders in a more orderly fashion.

Thus, former Ambassadors Ellsworth Bunker and Sol Linowitz were summoned by
President Carter to bring the Panama Canal treaties to a successful conclusion,
a result that didn't amuse Ronald Reagan.

It may be hard to imagine, but the tangles of the Middle East would undoubtedly
be worse than they are today if Ambassador Philip Habib hadn't come out of
''retirement'' to help unravel them.

Paul Nitze, formerly of the State and Defense Departments, is now, at 75,
presiding over the intermediate nuclear weapons negotiations with the Russians
in Geneva, and President Reagan is turning more and more to commissions of
experienced former officials to help win the confidence of Congress and the
public.

This he did successfully in finding a compromise for the Social Security
problem, and he turned to Brent Scowcroft, a former assistant in the White House
for national security affairs, in order to get a consensus on future nuclear
weapons policy.

There are several advantages to this technique. It helps provide continuity. By
bringing in the elder statesmen who have gone over the ground before and are
beyond ambition (Mr. Kissinger excluded), it minimizes the suspicion of
political or personal motivation.

Also, many of these men have been out among the people since retirement and are
not so influenced by the day-to-day Washington preoccupations of the presiding
officers. The revolving door has its uses.

We have had six Presidents and seven Secretaries of State since 1960, each of
whom has come to power tending to believe he has an answer, overlooked by his
predecessors, to our problems.

But the problems of Central America, for example, are not entirely new (we have
been sending in the marines for generations), and the fact that the old boys
didn't solve them in their own time doesn't mean they have learned nothing from
their mistakes.

The same thing is true of our endless negotiations with the Russians over the
control of nuclear weapons. In the days of Acheson and Lilienthal and Baruch,
some of them even thought it might not be a bad idea to get rid of nuclear
weapons. The only difference now is that the problem is more serious.

It's interesting, but not surprising, that Mr. Kissinger wasn't brought in more
by his own party under Mr. Reagan. He is consulted occasionally, but they want
him on tap and not on top.

It's not because of his advice or his modesty. Some criticize and even hate him
for his role in the Vietnam War. Others reject his version of the history of his
days at State and the White House. He has a sense of history and a sense of
humor, often at other people's expense, and he doesn't suffer fools gladly, a
grave weakness in a capital that has so many of them.

In short, Mr. Kissinger's too hot to handle, even at 60. But as somebody once
said, Henry is the only Secretary of State two Presidents have served under.
Maybe it was Henry who said that, which may help explain the mystery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHO LOST CHINA?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The tactical elements of the Reagan policy in Central America are now clear. The
Administration aims to isolate Nicaragua in the region, harassing the Sandinists
by covert war and economic pressure; to support the Governments of Guatemala and
El Salvador no matter how murderous they are, and to smear as pro-Communist
anyone who disagrees with the policy.

The domestic political threat is an important part of the package.  Congress is
restive about Central America, and a touch of McCarthyism may help keep it in
line. Thus Jeane Kirkpatrick, point woman for the policy, said: ''There are
people in the U.S. Congress who do not approve of our efforts to consolidate the
constitutional government of El Salvador and who would actually like to see the
Marxist forces take power in that country.''

The tactic of scaring political critics may be effective in the short run. What
Democrat wants to defend himself against the charge that he favors ''the Marxist
forces,'' or against a future charge that he ''lost El Salvador''? But the
prospect on the ground in Central America is very different.

Isolate Nicaragua? The chance of doing that by running a guerrilla war against
the Sandinist Government and cutting its quota for sugar sales to the U.S. is
zero. Those tactics will be seen by Latin Americans from left to right as Yankee
imperialism.

Latins remember past U.S. intervention in the region too well. They remember
that we put the corrupt and vicious Somoza family in power in Nicaragua. They
remember that a C.I.A. operation overthrew the legitimate government of
Guatemala in 1954, sending that poor country into decades of tyranny and
instability. No, crude displays of Yankee muscle will only evoke sympathy for
the Sandinists. If anyone is isolated, it will be the United States.

Over the years the United States has repeatedly tried to hold back political and
economic change in Central America by supporting oligarchs. But the tactic does
not work. It does not bring the stability we seek, much less democracy. So one
student of the history has just pointed out in a cutting comment on the Reagan
policy.

''The issue is stability'' in Central America, he wrote, ''and stability
depends, as it has for 20 years, upon a reallocation of power. ...

''Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala have always been characterized by
oppression - oppression which has been generally nourished by the U.S. Their
transition to democ-racy is a tortuous process, probably requiring revolution.
If we oppose that revolution, we will lose and will push the winners into the
hands of the Russians and the Cubans.''

Before Ambassador Kirkpatrick reaches for her cleaver, I should say that the
author of that comment was George C. Lodge of Boston, the son of Henry Cabot
Lodge.

The U.S. situation in Central America today is often compared to Vietnam. But
the episode called to mind by the Kirkpatrick-Reagan tactics is the ''loss'' of
China, as the rightists of the 1950's referred to the establishment of the
People's Republic.

In China we wanted to stop revolution instead of dealing with the economic and
political reality on the ground. Then we set out to isolate Mao's regime - and
for 25 years isolated only ourselves.  And, most fatally, the right-wing
ideologues fought their political war by branding as traitors all who disagreed
with them. They drove the serious China scholars out of public life, and by that
''victory'' crippled America's ability to deal with the Far East for a
generation.

It is down that same road that the Reagan Administration wants to take us in
Central America: the road of blindness to facts and resistance to change. And it
wants to push us down that road by political scare tactics that will divide and
weaken the United States.

There are no easy answers in Central America. But at least, now, we should be
able to avoid the worst mistakes of the past, especially the notion that we can
act effectively abroad by methods that violate our own ideals. Walter Lippmann
made the point 22 years ago after another attempted U.S. intervention: the Bay
of Pigs.

''A policy is bound to fail,'' Lippmann wrote, ''which deliberately violates our
pledges and our principles, our treaties and our laws. ... The American
conscience is a reality. It will make hesitant and ineffectual, even if it does
not prevent, an un-American policy. ... In the great struggle with communism we
must find our strength by developing and applying our own principles, not in
abandoning them. ...

''We have used money and arms in a long losing attempt to stabilize native
governments which, in the name of anti-communism, are opposed to all important
social changes. This has been exactly what (communist) dogma calls for - that
communism should be the only alternative to the status quo with its immemorial
poverty and privilege.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
ARGUENDO

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words


William Zinsser has written a book, ''Writing with a Word Processor,'' which
arguably gives the most helpful and humane treatment of the subject and is
surely the most stylish book produced so far on that intimidating machine. I put
it that way because, in recent correspondence, he added a postscript: ''By the
way, what the hell does arguably mean?''

He is not the first to inquire. ''Have you missed the arguably craze?'' asks
Andrew Viglucci, editor of The San Juan Star. He blames sports writers who use
the word as a substitute for perhaps; unhappy with ''He is, perhaps, the
greatest right-hander since the Big Train,'' sportswriters have taken to ''He
is, arguably, the undisputed champ of all time.'' (Pound for pound,
sportswriters are more susceptible to cliche than most.) ''I like
sportswriters,'' avers Mr. Viglucci. ''They are, inarguably, essential to a
daily publication. But they should not be permitted to hide behind such semantic
copouts. ... Do something, please.''

Paula Diamond of New York smacks her hand against a Peugeot advertisement, which
reads: ''Arguably the most comfortable car in existence today.'' She says, ''My
dictionary defines arguable as 'open to doubt or dispute, not certain.' Is
Peugeot's use of arguable arguable?''

Ordinarily, I would let out a whoop and a holler and proceed to savage the
philistines of cliche for taking a perfectly good adverb like arguably, which
used to carry the negative connotation of debatably - ''unproven, suspect'' -
and twisting its meaning into a positive like conceivably - ''it could be argued
successfully.''

But that would be wrong. (Why does that phrase keep coming back to me?) As an
adjective, arguable means debatable, and has long carried a negative
connotation; when you say, ''That's arguable,'' you mean: ''I'm not buying that
line of guff.'' However, as an adverb, arguably has had a long line of positive
precedents. When we say, ''Arguably the sexiest legs,'' we mean: ''Reasonable
people could persuasively put forward the proposition that those legs are
capable of driving most men wild.''

That's strange; I don't know of any other adjective-to-adverb switch of meaning.
Jacques Barzun, the great usagist, disapproves of the use of arguably in a
positive sense, and suggests that advertisers only add an element of disbelief
when using it in their copy, but I think we have tripped over a quirk in the
language. (That should elicit a letter from Randolph Quirk, whose stimulating
book ''Style and Communication in the English Language'' I have been trying to
figure a way to plug for months.)

Instead of wrangling, let us study the adverb's development. The first use in
the supplement to the Oxford English Dictionary is from an 1890 Saturday Review:
''His policy, if sometimes arguably mistaken ... .'' A 1920 citation is about
how a zeal for moral righteousness ''is arguably more purely Jewish in its
origin,'' and in 1959 The Times of London was describing Mozart's sinfonia
concertante for violin and viola as ''arguably the greatest of his concertos.''
In the Barnhart files, a 1960 Harper's use is ''Since the world is absolutely
stiff with arguably uglier objects ... .''

In all these cases, the adverb is certainly not saying ''not bloody likely''; on
the contrary, the meaning is the positive ''a good case can be made for.'' The
Oxford people straddle the issue by defining the word with both positive and
negative elements: ''As may be shown by argument (that's positive -the
connotation is persuasive) or made a matter of argument (that's negative -the
connotation is debatable).'' Lexicographer Bob Burchfield was playing it safe;
he should put more trust in his citations.

My hunch is that the adverb arguably, while obviously sired by the adjective
arguable, was crossed in its etymology with some legal usage, perhaps derived
from the Latin arguendo, which means ''in the course of the argument.'' There is
no blinking away the fact that the positive way the sportswriters and
copywriters are today using arguably is the way the word has been used from the
start.

So to hell with consistency, brother Zinsser. Put this in your
composition-cruncher and follow the bouncing cursor: The adjective arguable is
negative (''I told Orville, I told Wilbur, and I'm telling you - it's arguable
whether that thing will ever get off the ground''). The adverb arguably is
positive (''The smile on that flight attendant is arguably the only reason
people will take the middle seat between two fatties on the shuttle'').

The first letter that comes in will begin, ''Disputatiously ... .''

Hearts and Minds

During the Vietnam War much was made of winning ''the hearts and minds'' of the
people; a colleague of mine at the time, Charles Colson, had a framed motto
about applying pressure to another part of the anatomy: ''and their hearts and
minds will follow.'' In a blurb for ''A Killing Pace'' an engrossing new novel
by Les Whitten, a private eye says with un-Hammettlike fervor, ''No writer in
America has ever looked so deeply into the heart, soul and mind of a big-league
investigator ... .''

''Now that the controversy about what to do in El Salvador is heating up,''
writes Ruth Murray Brown of Norman, Okla., ''we are beginning to hear again
about winning the 'hearts and minds' of the people.'' She has tracked the phrase
to John Adams in 1818 - ''The Revolution was in the hearts and minds of the
people'' - and to the Bible's Philippians 4:7 - ''And the peace of God, which
passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds ... .'' She asks:
''How did the phrase in the Bible, which is merely part of simple benediction,
come to mean the goal of a revolutionary or counterrevolutionary effort?''

Timely question; if you see light at the end of that tunnel, send it in.

Miss Dis of '83

When asked about the abusive attack from Soviet leader Yuri Andropov on
President Reagan's defense strategy, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger
replied: ''Standard Soviet disinformation.''

New York Senator Daniel P. Moynihan, co-chairman of the Intelligence Committee
and a staunch defender of linguistic precision, writes: ''Clearly a misuse of
the word. Cap meant to say misinformation. Or lie. But got caught up in the
etymological escalation that goes on around here.

''Another point,'' adds the Senator, ''Americans don't know what disinformation
is because we don't do any. We don't do any because we have so little facility
in languages. Including our own.''

I shall have to speak sharply to the Senator about sentence fragments, but let
us today take up the difference between misinformation and disinformation.

In verb prefixes, mis means ''badly, wrongly, perversely, or mistakenly,'' while
dis means ''reversing the action or effect of the verb that follows.'' Thus, (I
like thus almost as much as hence) misbelieve means ''to hold wrong views'' and
disbelieve means ''to not believe.'' In the same way, misplace means ''to put in
the wrong place,'' and displace means ''to substitute for.'' Mis louses up, dis
boots out.

Misinformation is wrong, or false, news. It is not information because it is in
error, either by ignorance or design. The basic meaning of the word is
''wrongness,'' and not the motive for being wrong.

Disinformation is false news spread with malicious intent. The word first
appeared in English in The /imes of London in 1955, taken from the Russian
dezinformatsiya, the name of a department of the K.G.B. assigned to black
propaganda. Says Arnaud De Borchgrave, author of a novel about its activities:
''It is the political equivalent of the military deception. Misinformation
becomes disinformation when the false report is deliberate.''

Apply that definition to Secretary Weinberger's accusation. He evidently
believes that Mr. Andropov is deliberately, with malice aforethought, uttering
an untruth. That would be disinformation. The Senator is in error, but he is
merely misinformed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MINNEAPOLIS TO MOSCOW

BYLINE: By Robert MacNeil; Robert MacNeil, executive editor of the Public
Broadcasting System's ''MacNeil/Lehrer Report,'' is the author of ''The Right
Place at the Right Time.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words


A JOURNEY FOR OUR TIMES A Memoir.  By Harrison E. Salisbury.  Illustrated. 546
pp. New York: A Cornelia & Michael Bessie Book/ Harper & Row. $22.50.

IN a plaintive passage in ''Dead Souls,'' Gogol apostrophizes his native Russia,
''a country of dinginess, and bleakness and dispersal.'' He asks: ''What is the
incomprehensible secret force driving me towards you? Why do I constantly hear
the echo of your mournful song as it is carried from sea to sea through your
entire expanse?''

Many Westerners have felt that ''incomprehensible secret force'' driving them to
try to understand the enigma of Russia, and none more than Harrison Salisbury,
who made his reputation as the New York Times correspondent in the Soviet Union.
As he writes in ''A Journey for Our Times,'' that country has dominated much of
his adult life.  This first long installment of autobiography (he promises
another) covers his long relationship with it from World War II up to 1982,
describing the forging of an obsession and a sensibility that have served his
readers for 40 years.

It is a gritty, skeptical sensibility, nurtured in Minnesota, a country of
wilderness and winters similar to Russia's. It was sharpened by Depression-era
newspapering in Chicago, tempered by the competitiveness of the United Press and
refined by the ethos of The New York Times. Yet this hard-bitten, independent
and often lonely journalist is also driven by a poetic and romantic temperament,
sensitive to the echo of that ''mournful song.''

His book vividly captures a great variety of experience. Mr.  Salisbury gives us
a richly warm account of his ''Victorian'' childhood and family life in
Minnesota during World War I. He relates the odyssey of an aggressive, hungry
reporter, from raucous Chicago during Prohibition, to sleepy prewar Washington,
to United Press headquarters in New York as war broke out in Europe, to London
as U.P. bureau chief during the blitz and finally to Moscow, where he became the
correspondent for The New York Times. It is a legendary career, and Mr.
Salisbury tells an unusually candid tale of the stubborn yet frail person behind
the famous byline.

Of the hundreds of memorable people he encountered, he saves his warmest
tributes for the modern writers of the Soviet Union, particularly three poets he
knew personally, Yevgeny Yevtushenko, Andrei Voznesensky and Bella Akhmadulina.
He believes that ''the poets of Russia can tell us more of the future, more of
the state of their land, than analysts of think tanks, strategists of security
councils, and satellite scans by the CIA's high tech. ... How I envy Russia
these poets!'' he exclaims. ''How proud Russia will be a hundred years from now
of their voices, their bravery and their honesty.''

Honesty is a constant theme of this memoir. It is not merely a sentimental
admiration for writers courageous enough to risk the terrors of the Soviet state
- and no Russophile is more sickened than Mr. Salisbury by the wanton cruelty of
that state. It is a conviction that the truth is hard to tell, even in the West.
He writes: ''The truth, I was ultimately to learn, is the most dangerous thing.
There are no ends to which men of power will not go to put out its eyes.'' Mr.
Salisbury recalls that he was kicked out of the University of Minnesota for
telling what he regarded as the truth as editor of the college newspaper and
nearly lost his first big job at the United Press with a feature on the effects
of the Depression on Minneapolis. By his account, the city power structure and
The Minneapolis Journal did not want that truth.

YEARS later, after the death of Stalin in 1953, he charges, editors at The New
York Times ''mangled'' his copy from Moscow because he had ''reported an
important but unpalatable truth'' that ''did not fit the cliche of the day.''
That ''truth'' was that the Soviet Union was not getting ready to strike at the
West after the outbreak of war in Korea, as many in America feared. His
dispatches were finally printed but, he says, without ''a great deal of my
factual observations of the state of Soviet military preparedness.'' He writes,
''The Russia I depicted did not fit the popular image, and without consideration
of what I was really saying, a large gob of smear was thrown in my direction.''

He writes that he was attacked by a few of the paper's higher-ups, no longer
alive, for being ''a Communist dupe.'' Nevertheless, Mr.  Salisbury won a
Pulitzer Prize for his Moscow reporting and went on to write several
best-selling books on Russia, including ''The 900 Days,'' which documented the
terrible but glorious ordeal of Leningrad, the full story of which the Soviets
have not yet shared with their own people.

Mr. Salisbury seems to have taken to heart the admonition of Mr.  Yevtushenko,
who wrote in ''A Precocious Autobiography,'' ''To be enti-tled to write with
merciless truth about others, the poet must be mercilessly truthful when he
writes about himself.'' Suddenly, after rhapsodic chapters on what seems an
idyllic childhood in Minneapolis, come devastating pages about his mother's
chronic tantrums and his patient father's threats of suicide. He does not
disguise the fact that his first wife and his children were all but sacrificed
to journalistic ambition and romantic encounters in New York, London and Moscow.
At one point he begins innocuously, ''During World War II, I got to know a woman
in England. ...'' Then he interrupts with ''Well, let's be frank: I fell in love
with an American nurse in England.''

HALF of this long book is set in Moscow and, well, let's be frank, some of it is
a little tedious, a dry recitation for the record.  There are lists of officials
and journalists and overly detailed accounts of small controversies interesting
only to specialists. But it is worth reading for the episodes that shine
through, such as Moscow on the night of Stalin's death and Mr. Salisbury's
ingenious system for finessing the Soviet censorship.

When he warms up, when he writes about what moves him, ''A Journey for Our
Times'' is superb. One touching passage describes a night in 1966 in a cold
barrack deep behind enemy lines in North Vietnam. ''A little frightened'' about
American bombers, he induced sleep by drenching himself in exquisite memories of
his childhood home. The writing is hypnotic.

How he got to Hanoi will be told in another book that, on the strength of this,
I await eagerly. Mr. Salisbury leaves us in this book as haunted as he is by
Gogol's ''mournful song'' and with a strong sense of the man who has spent so
much of his life straining to hear its music through the grinding rhetoric of
the cold war and the beastliness of the Soviet system.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIAN ASKS CAMBODIA PEACE FORCE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 498 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia, May 15


Deputy Prime Minister Lionel E.  Bowen proposed today that Australian and
Japanese troops form a peacekeeping force in Cambodia to allow the withdrawal of
Vietnamese forces.

Mr. Bowen, whose Labor Party Government has discussed resumption of humanitarian
aid to Vietnam, told delegates to a party conference in Bathurst, New South
Wales, that Australia could play a leading role in bringing a peaceful
settlement to Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

''It would be important if we could play a role with the Japanese, perhaps, on
the basis of a peacekeeping force,'' Mr. Bowen said, suggesting a force similar
to the international group monitoring the Egyptian-Israeli peace agreement in
Sinai. Australia is a member of that force.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978, toppled the regime of Pol Pot and
installed Heng Samrin as President in early 1979.  Hundreds of thousands of
Cambodians reportedly died under the Pol Pot regime as a result of fratricidal
killings, relocations and starvation.

An End to 'This Nonsense'

Mr. Bowen said a peacekeeping force could bring an end to ''this nonsense of
China putting more arms into Pol Pot'' and ''the Soviets putting more arms into
Vietnam.''

''We've got a good chance of getting a first-class war in that region which has
disastrous results not only for that region but also for Australia,'' he said.

During a recent tour of Southeast Asia, Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of
Japan said that Tokyo supported the Association of Southeast Asian Nations'
diplomatic efforts to get Vietnamese troops out of Cambodia but could play no
role in military policy. The Japanese Government maintains that its 1946
Constitution and post-World War II legislation prevent it from sending any
troops abroad, even for peacekeeping purposes.

Australia's Foreign Minister, William G. Hayden, recently completed a
four-country tour of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to discuss the
situation in Indochina and the possibility of negotiating a Vietnamese pullout.
Mr. Hayden discussed a possible resumption of Australian aid to Vietnam, a move
strongly opposed by the five-member anti-Communist group, but did not indicate
on his return whether Australia would take any action.

About 40,000 guerrillas, most of them loyal to the ousted Pol Pot regime, are in
a coalition with anti-Communist forces fighting the Phnom Penh Government and a
Vietnamese force estimated at 180,000.

----

Pullback Plan Reported

TOKYO, May 15 (Reuters) - Vietnam plans to pull its troops back 19 miles from
the Thai-Cambodian border as proposed by Thailand, Japan's Kyodo news service
reported today.

In a dispatch from Bangkok, the agency attributed the information to an unnamed
Western diplomatic source who is based in Hanoi and is now visiting Bangkok. The
diplomat was also quoted as saying that the Vietnamese Government was ''likely
to extend an official invitation'' to the Thai Foreign Minister, Siddhi
Savetsila, to visit Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW LEADER STEERS BLACK BAPTIST CHURCH INTO ACTIVIST COURSE

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 13


The president of the National Baptist Convention, the country's largest black
denomination, says his church has abandoned the staunchly conservative stance
its top officials held in his predecessor's 30-year tenure.

The Rev. T.J. Jemison said the executive board of his church endorsed a nuclear
freeze this month and pledged to bring the denomination into the mainstream of
social activism.

Dr. Jemison's comments, made after he delivered a fiery sermon to the governing
board of the National Council of Churches here last week, signaled a major
change for the National Baptist Convention, whose membership is estimated at
more than six million in 30,000 congregations.

Dr. Jemison, 62 years old, the pastor of Mount Zion Baptist Church in Baton
Rouge, La., was elected president of the denomination by a 3-to-1 ratio last
fall in a surprising defeat over the Rev. Joseph Jackson, who had headed the
church since 1953.

Disagreements With King

Several previous attempts to unseat Dr. Jackson had failed, and he had also
rejected suggestions from some church leaders that he retire as president
emeritus.

During his presidency, Dr. Jackson disagreed bitterly with the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr., a church member, over the denomination's role in combating
social problems. Dr. King and his followers left the denomination in 1961 to
pursue a more activist role.

In the following years, Dr. Jackson continued to oppose many aspects of the
civil rights movement and churches' expanding involvement in social issues. As
Dr. King began to speak out against the Vietnam War, Dr. Jackson defended the
war. He later denounced plans to impeach President Nixon. He was also one of the
relatively few religious leaders who endorsed President Reagan's plans to reduce
money for social welfare and increase military spending.

Although Dr. Jemison often disagreed with the church's president, he stayed on
as general secretary through Dr. Jackson's presidency.

Mandate From God Seen

He says he is now convinced that he has a mandate from God and church members to
be much more outspoken than his predecessor.  ''God wanted a new voice and a new
direction in our church,'' Dr.  Jemison said of his election. ''We are joining
other religious leaders of this nation in opposing the nuclear arms race.''

He has already criticized Mr. Reagan's budget and has said the church will
conduct a registration drive in the hopes of enrolling three million new voters
by the 1984 Presidential election.

However, Dr. Jemison said he did not think the time was right to support a black
candidate for the Presidency because ''I do not believe in symbolic
candidates.'' Black political and religious leaders have been meeting to discuss
whether a black candidate should be on the ticket in 1984, and the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, a member of the National Baptist Convention, is often mentioned.

Renewed Ecumenical Link

As the church increases its political activities, its is also stressing its
renewed involvement in ecumenical activities. Although the denomination is a
longtime member of the National Council of Churches, it had been largely
inactive. ''Now,'' Dr. Jemison said ''We're coming in strong, and we will pay
our way.''

At a meeting in New York, Dr. W. Franklyn Richardson, general secretary of the
denomination, brought the council a check for $10,000 to symbolize the church's
new commitment to the ecumenical organization.

Dr. Richardson, pastor of the 2,000-member Grace Baptist Church in Mount Vernon,
N.Y., is one of a number of young, energetic ministers who have come into the
denomination's leadership in the last year.

''We will help the national council use its strength in relating to
minorities,'' he said. ''And our denomination will definitely represent a
broader view than it has in the past.''

Strong National Church Sought

Baptist churches stress local autonomy, but Dr. Jemison said he wanted a strong
national church so that the denomination could offer grants to churches
expanding local activities.

Although they often speak of political activism, leaders of the denomination say
they are making a major spiritual contribution to other churches by becoming
more active in the National Council of Churches.

''We are interested in evangelism,'' Dr. Jemison said. ''We are offering the
other churches the spiritual strength of our faith in God.''

Unifying the black churches, which are divided into denominations of varying
political and religious views, might be difficult, Dr.  Jemison acknowledged.

Church Unified in One View

But Dr. Richardson said, ''The black church is unified in the view that it is
God's desire for us to be free and that God is on the side of the oppressed.''

Dr. Jemison also acknowledged that he and his aides were relatively new to the
often complicated structures of interdenominational work.  ''It might be tough
for some of our people,'' he said, ''but we're getting help.''

He said other predominantly black churches, including the African Methodist
Episcopal Church, the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church and the African
Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, had advised his denomination on how to make its
views known in the national council.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev. T.J. Jemison

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND LAOS SAID TO DISCUSS MOVES TO IMPROVE RELATIONS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


The United States and the Communist Government of Laos, after years of tense
relations, have quietly begun discussions aimed at upgrading their diplomatic
missions and gaining closer ties, Administration officials said today.

In recent months, they said, Laos has sent several significant signals to the
Reagan Administration that State Department and White House officials view as
opening the way to firmer links between Vientiane and Washington. These include
welcoming and assisting an American group searching for information on United
States servicemen missing in action since the Indochina war, as well as
affording American diplomats access to Laotian Government officials for the
first time in years.

''They want to move forward,'' an Administration official said.  Another
official remarked, ''They appear more flexible, more sensitive.''

S.I. Hayakawa, the former Republican Senator from California who was chairman of
the East Asian and Pacific Affairs Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee before he left Congress last year, is scheduled to visit Laos this
month in the course of an Asian trip to ''further signal our interest,'' one
Administration official said.

Under Hanoi's Dominance

Laos, an impoverished, landlocked nation on the Indochinese peninsula, has
remained under the dominance of neighboring Vietnam since the collapse of the
South Vietnamese Government in Saigon in April 1975. At that point, the Laotian
monarchy was abolished, the coalition Government that sought neutrality
collapsed and the Communist Lao People's Democratic Party was established. There
are currently about 50,000 Vietnamese soldiers and 36,000 Laotian troops in the
country.

United States officials say talks with Laos remain sensitive, largely because of
Vietnam's dominance, if not control, over the Laotian Government. The United
States has no diplomatic relations with Hanoi, mainly because of Vietnam's
occupation of Cambodia.

''We view Vietnam and Laos as different entities despite Vietnam's occupation of
Laos and the top leadership being advised very strongly by Vietnam,'' said one
official. He noted that the Laotians are culturally, ethnically and
linguistically far closer to Thailand and other Asian nations than to Vietnam.

Although the move by Laos to seek better relations with the United States ''has
a dynamic of its own,'' the decision probably has the ''blessing'' of the Hanoi
Government, said one Administration official involved in the talks. Vietnam's
diplomatic isolation because of its occupation of Cambodia, and its heavy
reliance on the Soviet Union, are viewed by United States officials as key
reasons for Hanoi's efforts to ''reverse the current trend'' and open up Laotian
relations with the United States.

Missions May Be Upgraded

According to several officials, the measures under discussion include an
upgrading to ambassador status of the diplomatic missions in Washington and
Vientiane. Currently, the highest-ranking diplomats in both missions, which are
kept to a handful of personnel, are those with charge d'affaires status.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OF LISTENING TO AMBASSADOR KIRKPATRICK AND HONORING HER

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


To the Editor:

Tom Wicker is right, of course, that on college campuses, of all places, ''ideas
should be openly and freely heard and debated.'' Historically, universities have
existed without buildings or even books, but no university worthy of the name
can exist without freedom of inquiry and discussion.

It follows that if Jeane Kirkpatrick had been prevented from speaking or shouted
down, it would be a clear violation of academic freedom.

But whatever may be said of the events at Smith College, Barnard offers a
different case. Its board of trustees, without consulting the faculty or
students, decided that Kirkpatrick's record warranted award of a medal of
distinction.

Does Wicker suggest that, the trustees having spoken, it is inappropriate and a
violation of academic freedom for the faculty and students to assess her career
differently and express their disagreement in a non-disruptive fashion with a
choice made in the name of their institution? Was it a violation of academic
freedom for faculty and students to mount orderly counter-demonstrations in
opposition even to speakers for or against the Vietnam War?

Yes, as Barnard President Ellen V. Futter said, the award of the medal itself
represented a form of speech, but so did the resolutions of the faculty and
students in opposition to the award.

What we have then, in this case, is not the stifling of speech but speech and
counter-speech with due regard for the admonition of Justice Brandeis that the
fitting remedy for counsel thought to be ''evil'' (Kirkpatrick's policy
positions) is not suppression but openly expressed opposition.
SAMUEL HENDEL, New York, May 7, 1983

The writer is visiting professor in Barnard's Political Science Department.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 18, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-INTELLIGENCE DIRECTOR DISPUTES CENSORSHIP OF HIS BOOK ON C.I.A.

BYLINE: By SEYMOUR M. HERSH

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 17


Adm. Stansfield Turner, who as Director of Central Intelligence prosecuted a
former C.I.A. agent for refusing to clear his book with the agency, is disputing
C.I.A. censors over his own book on intelligence.

Admiral Turner acknowledged in an interview that the agency's Publications
Review Board had objected to portions of three chapters in his uncompleted book.
As much as 10 percent of one section was deleted on the ground that it included
classified information that would be injurious to the protection of agency
sources and methods.

The retired Navy admiral served as Director of Central Intelligence in the
Carter Administration. In 1977 he accused Frank Snepp, a former agent, of
violating his security oath by publishing a book about the fall of Saigon. But,
in negotiations that began early this year, Admiral Turner has vigorously
disputed the agency's censorship of his own book.

Turner Prepared to Litigate

He has retained an attorney, Anthony Lapham, who was the C.I.A.'s general
counsel at the time of the Snepp proceedings, and said he was prepared to
litigate if a satisfactory compromise could not be reached.

The former Director has no publisher yet for his book because it cannot be shown
to outsiders until it is cleared by the agency. He said the book focused on the
issues ''of running secret intelligence operations in a democratic society.''

Charles E. Wilson, chairman of the agency's Publications Review Board, confirmed
today in a telephone interview that the board had ''noted some things that are
deemed classified'' in Admiral Turner's book.

'A Highly Negotiated Process'

Mr. Wilson praised the former Director's previous cooperation with the board and
expressed confidence that the current dispute would be resolved short of
litigation. ''If we did end up in court it would surprise me,'' he said. ''This
is a highly negotiated process.''

Before posing a legal challenge to the agency's right to censor his book,
Admiral Turner said, he had ''a number of options.'' ''I can simply print
anything and let them sue me,'' he went on.  ''The onus is on them to stop me
from publishing.'' He added that he could also ''tell them that I don't agree
with their deletions and then they have to go to the Justice Department'' to
decide how to proceed.

Mr. Snepp, who was forced by a Supreme Court ruling in February 1980 to give the
Government $140,000 in earnings from his book, ''Decent Interval,'' published by
Random House in 1977, expressed little sympathy for Admiral Turner. ''I think
Turner deserves everything the censors visit on him because he failed to
recognize just how dangerous censorship was in the first place,'' the former
agent said in a telephone interview.

''I hate to think of anybody being censored,'' Mr. Snepp added, ''but I think
there is poetic justice in the fact that the architect of the C.I.A.'s
censorship should now be feeling the heat.''

In the interview, Admiral Turner defended the intelligence agency's review
program. ''I've endorsed the process that I'm going through,'' he said. ''I'm
not fighting that.''

Number of Modifications Made

His complaint, he added, was over what he termed the ''mechanics'' of the
censorship process. ''It's a bad system to take an internal set of rules and
apply them to external people,'' he said, maintaining that rules designed to
prevent the spread of information inside the agency should not apply to him
because everything that he wrote would be cleared anyway.

At issue, Admiral Turner said, ''are specific anecdotes of operations that I had
experiences with'' while serving as Director of Central Intelligence. ''They
feel that by describing the operations I would violate security,'' he said.

The former Director said he made a number of modifications to his book to meet
the agency's objection. But he added that in many other cases he was convinced
the agency had no basis for asking for deletions.

The overall result of the agency's censorship, Admiral Turner said, was damaging
to his work, which is nearly completed. In one chapter, the C.I.A.'s proposed
cuts ''in effect mean there's not much message left.'' The general tenor of the
cuts, he added, ''changes the chapters and makes them less appealing from a
sales point of view.''

Deletions Called Nit-Picking

Admiral Turner was reluctant to question the motives of the C.I.A.'s censors,
but one of his former senior aides at the agency, who has been involved in the
preparation of the book, depicted the deletions as nit-picking and quibbling.

''Stan Turner understands as well as anyone what is classified and what is
not,'' the aide said. ''He feels there are fundamental issues in carrying out
intelligence in a free society, but there are absolutely unclassified issues
-political science issues, if you will.''

Senior intelligence officials acknowledged that there was a growing enmity
between Admiral Turner and high-level officials in the Reagan Administration,
including William J. Casey, the current Director.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 18, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PROTESTERS AT BEGIN'S DOOR ARE UNMOVED BY PULLOUT ACCORD

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, May 17


For the last 22 days, during an intense period of work on the Israeli-Lebanese
agreement, a group of young people protesting against the presence of Israeli
troops in Lebanon has maintained a vigil outside Prime Minister Menachem Begin's
house.

Now that the accord has been signed, they show no intention of leaving. Accord
or not, they say, they will not relent until the Israeli Army starts to come
home.

The display that Mr. Begin must pass every day includes a constantly lighted
memorial candle, flowers and a calendar-type sign that flips to a higher number
every time a soldier is killed in Lebanon. Today the count stood at 484.
Underneath it, a placard read: ''The price is too heavy.''

'Kind of Hypothetical'

''It's really a kind of hypothetical agreement,'' said Shoshana London, one of
the protesters and a student at Hebrew University.  ''If the soldiers are still
there, they can still get killed. In the agreement, there's not even a calendar
for withdrawal, so it has no effect on our protest. The protest will continue
until there is a withdrawal.

''Four hundred eighty-four seems a very small number compared with 50,000 who
died in Vietnam,'' she added, ''but it's a very small country. Everybody knows a
few people that were hurt.''

Israel Weizer, who lives on a kibbutz in the upper Galilee, said that he had
protested against the war since returning from service in Lebanon and that he
did not plan to go back. ''If they call me now, I won't go,'' he said. ''I would
go to prison instead. I believe a lot of my friends died for nothing.''

The vigil, which started with a core of about a dozen people, now draws from a
list of over 200 people, who take turns maintaining the vigil 24 hours a day.
They say the only reaction they have had from Mr. Begin is an occasional look or
smile in their direction.

In recent weeks Parents Against Silence, an antiwar group that is
demographically different but ideologically similar to the protesters outside
Mr. Begin's home, has been organized. Composed largely but not exclusively of
mothers with sons in the army, the group seems to have taken off in recent weeks
despite growing optimism that an agreement would be signed.

'Affair That Isn't Ours'

Parents Against Silence is not affiliated with any political party or movement
and says it is interested only in ending a situation in which ''our sons are
falling in an affair that isn't ours,'' according to Ruth Barnea, one of the
movement's organizers.

''It's very, very general and very personal,'' she said. ''There are many
bereaved mothers of sons who died in Lebanon, or of sons who are in the reserves
and are being called to serve in Lebanon for the second or third time. It's
natural that your sensitivity is much greater if you're close to something.''

Parents Against Silence, which also started with about a dozen people, says it
expects well over 100 people at a meeting it has called for Thursday.

'We Want to Know When'

''An agreement on paper isn't enough,'' Mrs. Barnea said. ''We want to know when
and how the army will withdraw, especially from those places that really don't
belong to us.

''We bless the agreement and want to support the Government,'' she added, ''but
we want to make sure it passes this stage.'' Raayah Harnik does not belong to
Parents Against Silence. ''Parents Aganst Silence is for parents with in the
reserves or in Lebanon, and I don't have one anymore.'' she said. Her son,
Giora, an officer in an elite unit, was killed at the start of last summer's
drive into Lebanon. Since then, Mrs. Harnik has campaigned against the war.

She said that she did not believe the agreement was cause to relax and that
merely a withdrawal would not satisfy her. ''I think the Government must resign
because of this war,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 18, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Boat People, Launched

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


Stand next to Marjorie Russell, a sewing teacher in Portland, Ore., and you see
one reason for the Senate to pass the Simpson-Mazzoli immigration bill today.
She teaches in the old brick Neighborhood House, where refugees from Hitler once
learned English and table tennis. Now it's a center for Indochinese refugees,
where shy Laotian and Hmong women bend over sewing machines, spinning out knee
pads for loggers.

Next go to Miami, to see the progress of boat people of a different kind.
''Escoria,'' they were called when Fidel Castro ejected them in 1980 -scum. Yet
many of the 120,000 outcasts were genuine refugees. After three years they still
find that life here is hard.  But many are finding their way.

By one estimate, 85 percent have become self-sufficient. Fears of a juvenile
crime wave have evaporated. This migration has produced its first college
graduate, and public school students at the top of their classes. All told,
according to an educator, ''It is a kind of miracle that these people have been
able to survive here and make the progress that they have.''

It's not the first time America has seen the melting pot work. Yet the romance
is fading fast. ''Immigration'' used to evoke popular, patriotic images like
''The Education of H*y*m*a*n K*a*p*l*a*n'' and examples like Toscanini and
Einstein. Now it evokes fears of more unemployment - and less social welfare
money - for Americans.

With the fears come some ugly reactions. Wash-ington has paid to Americanize the
boat people. But this year the help is being cut off with savage suddenness.
More generally, Americans seem increasingly unwilling to distinguish between
desired immigrants, needy refugees and illegal gate-crashers. There's pressure
to close all the doors.

That's where the Simpson-Mazzoli bill comes in. Immigration should be limited,
and this bill offers a sensible, humane way. By making it unlawful for an
employer to hire illegal aliens, it would turn off the money magnets that
attract them. That, in turn, would relieve the pressure to cut down,
indiscriminately, on legal immigrants and refugees.

America needs them, whether to fill labor shortages, reunite families or meet
compassionate responsibilities to boat people like the Indochinese. A few days
ago Anna Quindlen of The Times told the story of one of them, a high school
student from Queens named Neil Luu. Here is how he began his college application
essay:

''I was released from jail in October 1978 and was on a boat in November ... for
my second attempt to escape from Vietnam. I had a chance to reflect upon my life
during those next two days. I thought about where I had come from and where I
hoped to be going, but given the experiences of the previous four years, I was
not certain that my future would be any longer than the boat ride.''

Next fall Neil Luu will enroll at Colgate in Hamilton, N.Y. His future is worth
protecting. So is the American dream.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 18, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: THREE-PART SERIES ON BLACKS IN THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 847 words


WILLIAM MILES, a film maker and documentarian, has spent the greater part of the
last decade illuminating the role of black people in the history of this
country.

His ''Men of Bronze,'' which won an American Film Festival award in 1977,
chronicled the story of the all-black 369th Infantry Regiment (the same regiment
that marched up Fifth Avenue last Sunday in the annual parade dedicated to the
memory of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.). Then there was ''I Remember
Harlem,'' a four-hour portrait of the world-famous New York community that
became so closely associated with the overall black experience in America.

Now, recycling some of the same material, Mr. Miles has produced ''The Different
Drummer: Blacks in the Military,'' a three-part series that begins tonight at 8
o'clock on Channel 13. Once again, the format combines artistic renderings,
archival footage and rare photographs with interviews of veterans and survivors
of the periods being examined. Mr. Miles's fascination with such material is
understandable. He spent 25 years restoring archival films and early film
features with Killiam Shows Inc. and the Walter Reade Organization.

''The Different Drummer'' is concerned with making two key points: 1. American
blacks, despite decades of discrimination and segregation, in and outside the
military, have been extraordinarily patriotic, their presence made abundantly
clear in every major war undertaken by the nation. 2. Today we have the ironic
situation in which the military, finally bowing to the reality of black
participation in its ranks, has become more considerate than society as a whole
of black ambitions to become part of the power elite.  There are now more than
100 black general officers in the four services.

This evening's first installment, entitled ''Unknown Soldiers,'' goes back to
the Civil War, in which 38,000 black men and women died. Written and narrated by
Mel Williamson, the hourlong program is a fairly straightforward compilation of
facts and figures, taking the history up to the beginning of World War II.

We learn, for instance, that in 1860 there were 4.4 million black people in this
country, more than 90 percent of them slaves. The Civil War gave them a chance
to fight for their freedom, and they responded. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant declared:
''By arming the Negro, we have added a powerful ally.'' Later, during the
Spanish-American War, Theodore Roosevelt would write: ''I want no better men
beside me than these colored troops show themselves to be.''

The history is at once stirring and disturbing. Instances of personal valor are
juxtaposed with official policies that kept insisting that the black was, at
best, a second-class citizen. And the prejudice was not restricted to America.
Mr. Williamson notes that in World War I, England requested that black troops be
kept home in the United States. In addition, blacks were not allowed to fight in
combat under the American flag. The black regiments were lent to France, then
proceeded to perform so valiantly that the Germans nicknamed them
''hellfighters.''

This first hour ends with Marian Anderson singing ''The Star Spangled Banner''
at the launching of the S.S. Booker T. Washington, a merchant ship commissioned
by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. It would be under the command of Captain
Hugh Mulzac, the country's first black skipper. Next week, ''The Troops'' will
trace the history of blacks in the military from World War II through Vietnam.
The final program will feature interviews with today's highest-ranking black
officers, who will discuss their careers. The other writer on the project is
Clayton Riley.

Tonight at 9 o'clock ABC-TV will present a television movie that was produced as
a pilot for a possible series, called ''Travis McGee.'' Played by Sam Elliott,
McGee is the character created by John D. MacDonald in a popular series of
mystery novels. This particular story, written by Sterling Silliphant and
directed by Andrew V. McLaglen, is based on the story ''The Empty Copper Sea.''

McGee, who spends a lot of time sailing with his gnarled friend Myer (Gene
Evans), is supposed to be a hardboiled thinker. We no sooner meet him than he is
referring to his ''old who-am-I, what'sit-all-coming-to routine.'' Unfailingly
attractive to beautiful women, he is a bit of a loner who makes it clear that he
is sick of overachievers. An old friend has lost his sailing license after a
boat he was supposed to be piloting ran aground and the owner was supposedly
drowned. The friend thinks he was given a knockout drink and that business
shenanigans were involved.

The plot is not entirely convincing, and Mr. Elliott has chosen to portray McGee
in a style so laid back as to be almost comatose. The beautiful women in his
life include Katharine Ross playing Gretel, a woman washing clothes in an
old-fashioned tub and confessing that ''I have this pioneer hangup - I love
doing things the hard way.'' It is little wonder that, at the conclusion, McGee
is confessing that ''the wind was building and it was good to be at sea again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARXIST-LENINISTS' SOLE AIM IN CENTRAL AMERICA

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


To the Editor:

Excuse me, but I must have missed something. Why do all the participants in your
Op-Ed and letters discussion (most recently, Representative Ackerman, letter May
11) simply assume that Marxist - really some kind of socialist - governments for
Nicaragua and El Salvador would be a bad thing?

he whole debate from President Reagan on down focuses on how best to keep this
from happening or, in the case of Nicaragua, to reverse what has already
happened. This is required, we are told, because of ''America's national
interests,'' but what exactly they are is never made clear.

In what ways would Americans suffer if El Salvador and Nicaragua had socialist
or even Communist governments? Trade? Don't we have extensive trade with the
Soviet Union, our chief antagonist?  Investment? Aren't American firms investing
in China, another Communist country? Loans? Don't our banks lend money to Poland
and to every other Eastern European country? And couldn't we do all of this
in/with Cuba if we wanted to?

Is it a military threat we fear - an overland invasion (through Mexico) by their
tiny, ill-equipped armies? Or perhaps, in an era in which the Russians can
already destroy us 100 times over, we fear their setting up missile bases a jot
closer than the ones they already have?

As for the Domino Theory, what has happened to Thailand and Malaysia since the
end of the Vietnam War? Let no one suggest that Washington is really concerned
with promoting freedom and democracy, since most of ''our'' best friends,
particularly in Latin America, have neither.

What does this leave as possible explanations of our Government's expanding
support for corrupt, exploitative elites - one in power (El Salvador), one out
of power (Nicaragua) -all in the name of ''America's national interests''?

Instead of debating what is the best strategy to keep radical popular movements
from coming to power, we should be asking whether it's true that America's
national interests (which should mean the interests of most Americans) coincides
so neatly with the interests of the wealthy classes of Latin America. If not,
what special interests are served by perpetuating this confusion, and what can
the rest of us do about it?

Now, holding a debate on these questions would truly be in America's national
interests.  (Prof.) BERTELL OLLMAN Department of Politics New York University
New York, May 13, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE AT 35

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


The National Committee for an Effective Congress marks its 35th anniversary this
week the same way it began: by tilting at what it considers the radical right in
American politics.

The oldest and one of the most liberal of the rapidly proliferating political
action committees, it bills itself as nonpartisan. And, indeed, it has at times
supported a considerable number of moderate and liberal Republicans.

But its predominantly Democratic bent is clearly shown in the list of
''Congressional sponsors'' for the committee's birthday bash Thursday night at
the Phillips Collection, a musuem.

Of the 171 sponsors, past and present members of Congress, just four are
Republicans: Senators Charles McC. Mathias Jr. of Maryland and Robert T.
Stafford of Vermont, former Senator James B. Pearson of Kansas and
Representative Claudine Schneider of Rhode Island.

''We keep looking for Republicans we can support,'' said Russell D. Hemenway,
the committee's national director since 1966 who is a veteran of the Democratic
reform movement in New York City, as he sat in the organization's modest
headquarters in a town house five blocks from the Capitol. ''But the moderate
wing of the Republican Party is pretty sick these days. The right wing has taken
over.''

Pictures on the Wall

Time was that there was not such a dearth of Republicans the committee felt it
could support. Walls of the offfices are covered with pictures of many of the
men and women the committee has supported down through the years. Scattered
among the glossy prints of such Democrats as Edward M. Kennedy and Hubert H.
Humphrey are pictures of such Republican Senators as Hugh Scott of Pennsylvania,
Jacob K. Javits of New York, John Sherman Cooper of Kentucky, Thomas H. Kuchel
of California and others from another era.

Last year, the committee supported one lone Republican for Congress, Mrs.
Schneider. And it is not likely that the committee will broaden its Republican
backing significantly for the 1984 elections.

In fact, the committee's initial targets for defeat in the 1984 senatorial
elections are all Republicans: Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, Jesse Helms of
North Carolina, Roger W. Jepson of Iowa, John Tower of Texas, William L.
Armstrong of Colorado, John W. Warner of Virginia, Larry Pressler of South
Dakota and Gordon Humphrey of New Hampshire.

Eleanor Roosevelt an Organizer

''We've got to win back the Senate next year,'' Mr. Hemenway said.  ''If
President Reagan is re-elected, he'll probably have the chance to name some
members to the Supreme Court, to other courts, too, and I hate to think of Strom
Thurmond sitting there running the Judiciary Committee at a time like that.''

The committee's goal to recapture the Senate for the Democrats is reminiscent of
its beginnings in 1948. That spring, Eleanor Roosevelt and other Democratic
liberals, concerned over what they felt was the extreme rightward tilt of
Congress, organized the committee, chartering it in New York City.

While the committee's campaign contributions of $12,601 that year would scarcely
buy a few television spots today, the group helped recapture the Senate for the
Democrats, bringing to that body such newcomers as Hubert Humphrey, Paul H.
Douglas of Illinois and Estes Kefauver of Tennessee.

In the years that followed, the committee broadened its work. It was a leader in
the movement that led to censure of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin. It
supported civil rights legislation and new domestic programs. It was critical of
American involvement in Vietnam. It was among the first groups to call for
impeachment of President Nixon. And in recent elections it has supported
candidates committed to arms control.

After passage in the mid-1970's of the campaign reform law limiting the amounts
of money individuals or groups can contribute to candidates, the committee began
searching for the most effective ways to help candidates of its choice.

A result was the development of an advanced computer system for analyzing
electoral data, pinpointing areas where candidates should concentrate their
efforts.

But even this kind of support service failed in the 1980 Reagan landslide to
head off defeat of some of the committee's prized Democratic Senators, Birch
Bayh of Indiana, George McGovern of South Dakota, Frank Church of Idaho and John
Culver of Iowa.

''That was a disastrous year for us,'' said Mr. Hemenway. ''We're determined not
to let it happen again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ SUGGESTS ISRAEL-SALVADOR ANALOGY

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Secretary of State George P. Shultz, arguing for continued military aid for El
Salvador, today suggested an analogy with Israel. He told representatives
favoring a negotiated accord in El Salvador that Middle East peace talks could
never succeed if Israel were ''unarmed, weak or unsupported.''

When Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, chairman of the
House Appropriations Committee's subcommittee on foreign operations, said he had
heard El Salvador compared with Vietnam but never with Israel, Mr. Shultz added:

''I'm saying that as a general proposition if you're expecting negotiations to
take place there has to be enough strength so that the opposite number sees that
they're better off in negotiations than in the struggle.''

Back From the Mideast

This was Mr. Shultz's first public appearance on Capitol Hill since his recent
mission to the Middle East resulted in the Israeli-Lebanese troop withdrawal
accord. Much of the questioning was about the next steps in the region, as well
as about the Administration's continuing efforts to get additional aid for El
Salvador.

The Administration has been faced with Congressional demands that requests for
additional aid to El Salvador be scaled down and linked to the Salvadoran
Government's willingness to engage in negotiations with rebels.

Mr. Shultz said he was asked on Wednesday by a Congressman if he could turn his
success in negotiations in the Middle East to Central America.

He said negotiations could succeed in Central America, ''but does anybody here
think that the negotiations in the Middle East could work if Israel were
unarmed, weak and unsupported?''

Mr. Long, whose committee cut in half an Administration request for the transfer
of $60 million in military aid to El Salvador, said, ''I agree with you
entirely, and that's why the committee gave you half of what you sought.''

The representative said the other $30 million was withheld to encourage
Salvadoran leaders to seek a negotiated solution with non-Communist lefists.

'You Need Strength'

''I think it is important to move to a peaceful solution,'' Mr.  Shultz said.
''But to get there, you need strength.'' But as to the Salvadoran negotiations,
there was a clear difference between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Long, underscoring the
Administration's differences with the Congress.

Congressional committees have recently attached conditions to aid to El
Salvador, calling for a political dialogue there without conditions. The
Administration has said it does not regard this as contradicting its approach of
rejecting negotiations on ''power sharing'' between the Salvadoran Government
and the rebels.

Mr. Long said that while he also opposed ''power sharing'' he felt that ''you
have to offer them something'' to persuade the rebels to enter negotiations.

Talks About Elections

Mr. Shultz said that in his view the negotiations in El Salvador should be about
elections, ''the conditions under which people participate.''

''They worry about safety,'' he said. ''They worry about the access to all the
ways you would campaign. They worry about the validity of the result, once
obtained, that it would be lived with. These would all be legitimate points to
discuss.''

What seemed to be a comparison between Israel and El Salvador brought a
complaint from one of Israel's strongest supporters on the committee,
Representative Sidney R. Yates, Democrat of Illinois. He said, ''I consider it
an unworthy comparison.''

''I didn't compare Israel with El Salvador,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''I said, if you
want negotiations, can you imagine negotiating in the Middle East if Israel was
weak, unarmed and unable to account for itself. The same thing applies to other
areas.''

Mr. Long, who has been criticial of the Salvadoran Army's ability, said, ''The
difference is when you give arms to Israel, they fight.'' Mr. Yates said that
when economic aid was given to Israel the money went ''to the entire
population,'' while many suspected that aid to El Salvador went only ''to a
small group.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Base, and Bases, in Manila

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 533 words


An old dilemma seems likely to intrude again into Washington's tricky relations
with the Philippines. President Marcos is an authoritarian ally, unashamedly
highhanded. He has just been discovered to have composed a secret decree in 1981
that threatened death to those who ''scurrilously libel'' him. The offensiveness
of this remnant of martial law is not much lessened by assurances that, since
the decree was never published, it will not be enforced.

Mr. Marcos seems unconcerned about the pressure such despotic conduct puts on
his relations with the United States. He knows that Americans place immense
value on continued use of air and naval bases at Clark Field and Subic Bay.
Indeed, as the base agreement comes up for review, he will be pressing for a
much higher rent. Hints to Congress suggest he may want triple the $500 million
currently being paid for five years.

These are the largest bases in Asia, and vital counters to the Soviet naval
buildup at Vietnam's Cam Ranh Bay. Filipinos contend that Washington already
pays more generous compensation for smaller bases in Spain, Turkey and Greece.

How much are Philippine bases worth? Will America make more friends than enemies
by paying more? Is it reasonable for us to attach conditions obliging Mr. Marcos
to live up to his democratic promises?

These are hard questions. Americans ought to be at least as coldblooded in their
appraisal of Mr. Marcos's standing as he is in conducting his affairs. Dollar
for dollar, the bases are worth a lot, maybe even a billion more. Still, in
casting a balance, Americans cannot ignore the nationalist clamor against the
bases and the risks of betting too heavily on a family dynasty that rules
increasingly by force and fraud.

Over 17 years, Mr. Marcos has turned a constitutional democracy into a personal
satrapy. He and his wife have had their successes, and have made themselves
useful as anti-Communist allies. But he has been unable to win protracted wars
with Islamic and Marxist insurgents, and for all his high-blown propaganda, he
is unwilling to put his popularity to a genuine test.

The country's Catholic bishops have decried the Government's economic policies,
which leave poverty untouched by inequitable growth. A recent pastoral letter
protested human rights abuses and warned: ''Legitimate dissent is all too
crudely construed by the Government we have as rebellion and treason, as
subversion in its conveniently amorphous definition.'' A Government that makes
utterance a hanging offense obviously has more to worry about than bad press
notices.

So what ought Americans to do? At the least, bring a long spoon to the
forthcoming negotiations. If more money is to be spent, let it be expressly
earmarked for economic development projects. A search for alternative bases,
possibly in Guam or the Marianas, won't hurt the American bargaining position.
Nor will it hurt to learn what the Filipino opposition thinks of our proposed
arrangements with a dynasty whose permanence cannot be decreed, even by Mr.
Marcos.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'ASIAN SHADE,' TWO SOLDIERS ON LEAVE

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


TWO young men, buddies in a small Southern community, are home on leave before
being shipped to Vietnam, and they are eagerly trying to have a high-spirited
holiday. The situation is familiar, but the play, Larry Ketron's ''Asian Shade''
(at the WPA Theater), has the buoyancy of youth, and the actors - most of them
new faces - inhabit the landscape as if they are natives.

Mr. Ketron is a most prolific playwright, with a play a year since 1976. He has
always had a homespun humor and a gift for local color, but more and more he has
learned to relax and to allow his characters to develop organically. In this
play, he has also jettisoned his archenemy, whimsy.

Before they know it, five days of leave have evaporated for the green recruits,
played by Lenny Von Dohlen and Mark Benninghofen.  Under Dann Florek's astute
direction, the play speeds by just as quickly for the audience, leaving a trail
of warmth and memory.

The two youths are a mass of pos@tadolescent contradictions. They are torn
between to-hell-and-back patriotism and boyish hedonism, proud of being ''in the
military,'' angry at local 4Fs but embarrassed to be seen in town wearing
crewcuts. Borrowing a bungalow from a genial farmer (Tom Brennan), they set up
bachelor housekeeping, hiding out, almost as if they are convicts on a brief
reprieve.

Each has a fondness for his family combined with a reluctance to spend any more
time than necessary in their company. Mr.  Benninghofen is especially
self-conscious at the way his parents stare into his eyes, as if trying to
remember what he looks like.  Neither he nor his friend wants to be pinned down
to anything. With near desperation, they simply want to have a good time, as
represented by two tempting local girls, Marissa Chibas and the flightier Dianne
Neil. The four swim, dance, kid around and, as expected, one relationship begins
to be serious. Shadowing the couple is the imminent overseas shipment.

The author avoids the pitfalls of sentimentality and overstatement. Until a
second-act showdown, a well-motivated outburst of temperament, everything
remains easygoing. Both play and characters follow a natural course.
Occasionally a line seems dislocated in time, with a code of morality that is
more redolent of the 1950's than the 60's. But the writing retains its
freshness. For one thing, Mr. Ketron has a nice way of using a cliche for comic
purpose, as when Mr. Benninghofen hints at a change in their military
assignment: ''Certain moves are being made on the old checkerboard of life.'' In
''Asian Shade,'' everyone, including the playwright, plays the game as if for
the first time.

The relationship between the two boys is particularly wellobserved. While Mr.
Von Dohlen combines impetuosity with sensitivity, the more knowing Mr.
Benninghofen is an opportunist. At the same time, the two girls carefully
measure reputation against desire. All four actors are charming, as is J.
Smith-Cameron as another young woman, who arrives at the end of the evening for
a wistful postscript. ''Asian Shade'' is more a cameo than a full-scale canvas,
but it was conceived with honesty and it is performed with authenticity.

Charming Cameo
ASIAN SHADE, by Larry Ketron; directed by Dann Florek; setting by Ross A.
Wilmeth; lighting by Phil Monat; costumes by Don Newcomb; incidental music by
Denny McCormick. Pre- sented by W P A Theater, Kyle Renick, artistic director.
At 138 Fifth Avenue.  Ernie ...............................Mark Benninghofen Tom
..................................Lenny Von Dohlen Neal
......................................Tom Brennan Casey
..................................Marissa Chibas Jean
.....................................Dianne Neil Kaylene
..............................J. Smith-Cameron

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of J. Smith-Cameron and Lenny Von Dohlen

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK ON CAMPUS: WAR, PEACE, TANNING

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3596 words


This is the season of summation on the college campuses. It is the time of
mortarboards and final examinations and family station wagons lurching down the
Interstate, carrying the children back home.

On the archipelago of campuses across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut -
from Rutgers to Vassar, from Cornell to Columbia - students, professors and
administrators are recounting the year past, its weightier moments, its
frivolities. And the campus correspondents of The New York Times, students all,
have given their reports and recollections.

Whether in Princeton or Poughkeepsie, Middletown or Manhattan, there were the
constants: dancing to Michael Jackson, reading ''Blue Highways'' or ''The
Executioner's Song,'' watching tuition go up again.

But each college, too, had its peculiar passions. At Trinity, College, a
freshman seminar simulated a nuclear war, and at the United States Military
Academy at West Point, the cadets studied nuclear deterrence. At Princeton,
students awaited the arrival of Brooke Shields, and at Rutgers, they turned away
from the liberal arts in favor of business courses. At Fordham, they said
goodbye to ''M*A*S*H,'' and at New York University, they welcomed back varsity
basketball.

Here are highlights of the academic year at some colleges in the area. They are,
admittedly, arbitrary, for in any year, the talk of colleges is bound to be
boundless. From classroom discourse to dormitory bull session, college is
nothing if not a celebration of talk.

Rutgers
In New Jersey's state university, the recession came to influence the
aspirations of students. Inquiry for its own sake was a worthy ideal, but
unemployment ''out there'' was 10 percent.

''Students are terribly career-conscious,'' said Sidney Simon, a professor of
economics for 36 years. ''Ten years ago, business was a dirty word. Now students
are flocking into computer science, accounting and other business disciplines
and turning from liberal arts.''

Catherine Hawn, a student member of the Board of Trustees, put it plainly:
''It's important to have a job when you get out of here.  That's evident.''

And it showed in the popularity of introductory business courses - ''Financial
Accounting,'' ''Managerial Accounting'' - as well as the waiting lists for
advanced economics courses such as ''Money and Banking'' and ''Labor
Economics.''

Student Activism Diminished

The concern with finding work also diminished student activism on the campaign
for a nuclear weapons freeze - a staple on other campuses.

''Students are afraid of not finding jobs or afraid of a renaissance in the
political right, so they're sitting it out,'' said Peter M. Sandman, a professor
of journalism and the media coordinator of the New Jersey Nuclear Wepons Freeze
Campaign.  ''People have asked me what it would take to set up a Rutgers chapter
for the freeze, and the answer is, it would take dynamite.''

But a more immediate matter of self-interest - Governor Kean's plan to trim
Rutgers's $156 million budget request for 1983-84 by $25 million - brought
students, faculty and Rutgers President Edward J.  Bloustein to a protest in
Trenton on March 24. The State Legislature has yet to resolve the issue.

For a release, meanwhile, there was always a game of Ms. Pac-Man in the student
center.  ''People will wait in line for it,'' marveled Gary Bromberg, a
sophomore who is an attendant in the center's game room. ''If there's a movie
playing upstairs, right before it, we're packed.''

Cornell
Infecting the hearts and minds even of art history majors, the computer boom
came to Ithaca, N.Y. Computer use at Cornell University rose by 30 percent.
There is even a vice provost for computing, Kenneth M. King, and he predicted
that the personal computer would soon become as much a student staple as the
typewriter.

''I must have been the most anti-computer person around,'' said Connie Adams, a
senior studying wildlife sciences. ''I thought of them as the automation of
society. I was going to be the last holdout.'' Now, she confessed, ''Computers
are the neatest things.''

But the naturalists of Cornell still had one outlet: the Cornell Tanning
Society, founded 1983. The object of its members was nothing less than achieving
the optimum tan - no small feat, given Ithaca's winters.

''We're not beach bums or surf punks,'' said Michael Oeschwind, the vice
president of the society. ''We're an intellectual group.'' ''All of us have
scarred memories from being taunted while tanning on cloudy days, in the rain or
snow,'' said Ethan Lercher, a member.  ''Most people just don't understand.''

But there were greater concerns at Cornell than a misunderstood tan. In October,
about 150 black students rallied outside the student union building to protest
the departure of 20 black faculty and staff members during the preceding year
and a 20 percent decrease in the enrollment of black students.

''We're not free at last,'' the students chanted, ''but we're slipping fast.''
Some 3,500 members of the Cornell community signed a petition against the
planned construction of a $13.7 million, 11-story tower on the College of
Agriculture quadrangle.

''Nobody,'' responded David L. Call, the dean of the college, ''has seen a
well-done rendering of what the building will look like.'' But John Schroeder, a
graduate student in art history, asked, ''What could be a more outrageously
perverse symbol for Cornell's College of Agriculture than a towering hulk, which
would block the sun from shining on the college's own earth?''

N. Y. U.
When New York University increased tuition from $6,600 to $7,200 for the 1983-84
year, the issue for students was not just money but power. They complained that,
unlike some universities, N.Y.U. does not have student members of its Board of
Trustees.

''Students should be able to have more knowledge about the board of trustees'
meetings,'' said Bill Wilhelm, a student who was cochairman of the Coalition for
Students Rights. ''They should be able to express their ideas and hear the
proceedings. Input is the issue.''

''Why are they barring us?'' asked another student, Eve Heyn. ''Are they hiding
something?'' In the end, students did not win a voice on the board.  And from
Washington Square, the Intellectuals' Hit Parade, or the four most popular
elective courses: Introduction to Psychology, Introduction to Sociology,
Introduction to Computers and Programming and -surprise - Ideas of God in the
West.

What made for the popularity?

Curious About Deity

''People are interested in learning about themselves,'' Samuel Feldman, a
psychology professor, ventured about his course. And judging by the response to
Professor James Karse's course, students are curious about their deity, as well.

One casualty of tight finances at N.Y.U. - the varsity basketball program, which
was dropped in 1973 - is returning. The university announced it would begin
competing in 1983-84 at the small-college level.

The only complaint, at least to one alumnus, was that the team still would be
known as the Violets.  ''Violets? Phooey!'' said the alumnus, Lawrence J.
Pauline. ''I'd even settle for the N.Y.U. Vagabonds, Vanguard, Venom, Vermin,
Vices, Victors, Villains, Vampires, Vultures, Vipers, Vikings or Vichy.''

Vassar
Vassar College discovered a new way of relieving the pressure of tests. On the
midnight before final examinations each semester, students joined voices in the
quadrangle for a primal scream.

The first lasted for 15 minutes, surprising Vassar President Virginia Smith, who
had returned to campus from a trip unwarned of the communal bellowing.

''I think that we have a new tradition,'' said Cheryl Kagan, a student.  In a
more serious vein, Vassar pondered its stresses. A variety of student concerns -
race relations, the denial of tenure to a popular professor, a student's suicide
- led to a campuswide discussion on ''the quality of life at Vassar'' on Feb. 2.

''The theme of Vassar's year - and I'm sorry to say this because I love the
school - was low morale,'' said David Raizman, the editor of Unscrewed, an
alternative newspaper on the Poughkeepsie, N.Y., campus.

Greater Human Warmth

''A lot of it came down to a need for more friendliness,'' said Patrick
Sullivan, the dean of the college and an organizer of the Feb. 2 meeting. ''It's
not that this is a cold place, but people wanted to see a little greater human
warmth.''

In March the subjects on campus were premarital sex, contraception and
masturbation. And the speaker was a 78-year-old woman.  Dr. Mary S. Calderone,
Vassar '25 and an author and educator about sexuality, returned to her alma
mater this March. In nine courses, from religion to biology, she instigated
discussions on matters often left to whispers. By week's end, she had spoken to
all but 200 of Vassar's 2,200 students and left more than a passing impression.

''She's an inspiration,'' said Fatima Sakarya, a student.  Another alumna and
another inspiration was Meryl Streep, Class of 1971. A committee of students and
faculty selected Miss Streep as the commencement speaker. She won an Oscar this
year for ''Sophie's Choice,'' and Vassar professors say they foresaw it all
after her undergraduate performance in the title role of Strindberg's ''Miss
Julie.''

Princeton
Much of student life changed at Princeton University. The increase in New
Jersey's drinking age from 19 to 21 led the university to ban alcohol at
university-sponsored parties. The 13 private eating clubs, where 75 percent of
juniors and seniors dine, stopped buying alcohol. But students older than 21
were allowed to bring their own bottles.

Princeton's residential college system made its debut. It required all freshmen
and sophomores to live in one of five residential and dining complexes.
Meanwhile, the Board of Trustees, upholding a 128-year tradition, voted not to
recognize the campus's fraternities and sororities as university organizations.

''We're not leaving,'' responded Martha Lemons, a member of the Kappa Alpha
Theta sorority.  One day in April, James Wickenden, the Dean of Admissions, left
for vacation in Florida carrying two envelopes. One held a letter admitting
Brooke Shields to Princeton, the other a letter turning her down.

''Did She or Didn't She?'' headlined the Daily Princetonian.  She did. Admitted
to Princeton, Miss Shields decided to leave ''The Blue Lagoon'' for Old Nassau.
FIRST AND LAST ADD

Fordham
Image and change animated Fordham University. In March, the university completed
the first phase of its 11-year fund-raising drive, bringing in more than $21
million in the three-year period. It announced an expansion of the law school,
to cost between $6.8 and $8.5 million. And, in several newspaper advertisements,
it touted ''one of the most well-maintained campuses in the country.''

Forgive the skeptics of St. John's Hall. The ceilings of several rooms in that
dormitory collapsed in January. No one was hurt and the only injury was to
reputation.

''We just heard a noise and jumped out of the way,'' said Mike Sasso, a
freshman.  Tuition, though, was not falling. When the Board of Trustees voted to
raise it about 10 percent to $5,500 for the 1983-84 year, students pleaded
-fruitlessly - for a reconsideration.

'Middle-Class School'

''The board lacks a clear vision of what the student body is,'' said Matthew
McKinley, the president of the student government. ''The majority of students
hold down jobs. It's a middle-class, working school.''

But Richard Bennett, the chairman of the Board of Trustees, said: ''Life is not
easy. It is a murderously difficult job to run a university. We are going to see
that Fordham does not go down the drain.''

The university's most popular courses reflected its Roman Catholic affiliation -
the Rev. Richard Dillon's ''The Passion and Resurrection of Jesus in the Gospel
Tradition'' and the Rev. Gerard Ettlinger's ''Readings on Marriage in the Early
Church.'' For a secular interlude, students liked ''Politics and Human Nature,''
taught by Prof. William Baumgard.

Even more popular, though, was a Fordham alumnus named Alan Alda.  In suite E-6
of the Martyrs Court -Mr. Alda's old dormitory room - his successors at Rose
Hill toasted the final episode of ''M*A*S*H,'' in which Mr. Alda portrayed
Hawkeye Pierce for 11 years. Intravenous bottles filled with martinis hung from
tent flaps.

Reports of Fordham's farewell reached more than 150 newspapers nationwide.
''For one night,'' said Philip Uson, who portrayed the character of Klinger,
''we felt like superstars.''

West Point
Any college gets its share of dignitaries and guest speakers during a year. But
West Point entertained the president of Liberia, a Spanish princess, the
commandants of military academies from Turkey, Pakistan and Morocco and - or at
least so it seemed one November evening - President Reagan.

On the eve of the Army-Navy football game, a limousine carrying a tall,
well-dressed man with black hair pulled up to the pep rally.  Only when the man
mounted the platform to begin his presidential address did the massed cadets
realize the ruse. They had hailed a chief who was only a cadet with a Halloween
mask.

''There was a revolution of expectations,'' said Lawrence Kinde, the first
captain of the senior class. ''And then you couldn't fulfill them.''

An even bigger letdown came the following afternoon, as Navy dispatched Army
24-7. Football coach Ed Cavanaugh resigned after the 4-7 season. He was replaced
by Jim Young, a winner at Purdue and now the harbinger of hopes at West Point.

''We take football pretty seriously here,'' said Mr. Kinde.  One of the few
things the cadets take more seriously is preparing for defense. Many seniors
enrolled in the national security seminar, which included study of the Vietnam
War, the Arab-Israeli wars, nuclear deterrence policy and arms control treaties.

And the final exam? Write a 7,000 word memorandum for President Reagan
predicting future Soviet activity and intentions.

Columbia
Plans proceeded for the entrance of Columbia College's first female students in
September 1983. The university hired special administrative and medical staff
and prepared for a joint, majorcollege women's athletics program with Barnard.

And Barnard, meanwhile, approved a new curriculum, to begin in the fall of 1984,
calling for increased studies of mathematics.  Some seniors regretted that the
change had come too late. Said one, Lisa Deitsch: ''I'm a mathophobe.''
Meanwhile, Columbia and Barnard students continued to flock to such liberal art
courses as Kenneth T. Jackson's ''History of Urban New York.'' And a faculty
member named Zbigniew Brzezinski drew throngs for his class, ''National Security
Policy in the 1980's.''

Increase of 13.5 Percent

A tution increase of 13.5 percent -the largest in the Ivy League, bringing total
fees to $12,753 for next year -stirred Columbia.  ''It's incomprehensible to
me,'' said James D. Weinstein, a junior and member of the student senate, ''that
in this period of low inflation we could have such a high increase.''

The fear of budget cuts led George K. Fraenkel, Dean of the Graduate School of
Arts and Science, to ask, ''What do we have to do? Rob a bank?''

Columbia had a less larcenous solution, beginning a $400 million, five-year
capital campaign in November 1982.  The wooden bleachers of Baker Field, witness
to so many of Columbia's gridiron glories and gaffes, fell to the wrecking ball.
The good news: an $11.3 million stadium will be built on the site and the Lions
have one more year with quarterback John Witkowski, who broke 32 Columbia, Ivy
League and national records last fall.

All the turmoil surrounding American policy in Central America came to Broadway
this spring when Barnard College decided to award its Medal of Distinction to
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the nation's chief delegate to the United Nations and a
Barnard alumna.

The faculty voted 48 to 18 against the award and students collected more than
1,000 signatures on petitions opposing it.  ''The timing is absolutely
dreadful,'' said Sally Chapman, a professor of chemistry. ''What is going on in
Central America is a highly charged political issue. Honoring someone who is so
deeply involved in it does make a statement.''

On May 2, Mrs. Kirkpatrick rejected the award, as well as one from Smith
College, which had caused controversy there. ''I feel deeply,'' she wrote,
''that a university is in the most basic sense defined by its faculty and
students.''

Wesleyan
There was a kaleidoscope of issues on the Middletown, Conn., campus.  A Wesleyan
student, Russell Ford, was convicted of not registering for the draft. Students
held a referendum on the nuclear weapons freeze (it won overwhelmingly) and a
teach-in on American corporate investment in South Africa. A bitter dispute
involved student government financing of several organizations for minority
students.  And 325 Wesleyan students flocked to Washington on March 7 to lobby
for Federal funds for education.

''It's obviously an issue that hits us directly,'' said Rick Mandler, a senior
and the coordinator of the Wesleyan student government. ''It's our lives, not
someone else's.''

To Laura Simon, it was the mice's lives that mattered. The senior turned a
personal cause - animal rights -into a college issue when she separated mice
that had been caged together, to the point of attacking each other, in a biology
experiment.

''I've had people furious at me, especially in the sciences,'' Miss Simon said.
''And whenever people see animals running loose outside they say, 'Oh no, what
did Laura let out now?' ''

Yale
It was a good year for television evangelists, draft resisters and movie stars
in New Haven.

With a merciful lack of ballyhoo, the actress Jodie Foster returned to college.
But in an Esquire magazine article plaintively entitled, ''Why Me?'' she made
reference to her two years of being menaced by John W. Hinckley Jr. and then
drawn into his trial.

Yale University boasted a new star in the freshman Jennifer Beals, who won
critical favor in the film ''Flashdance.'' She spent first semester acting the
part of a Pittsburgh welder fond of night life, then returned to New Haven for
real life as a student.

The Rev. Jerry Falwell of the Moral Majority - the fundamentalist group
castigated by Yale President A. Bartlett Giamatti in 1981 as propagating
''dangerous, malicious nonsense'' -came to New Haven to meet and make friends
with his erstwhile antagonist.

Remaining Friends

Emerging from a 45-minute discussion with Mr. Giamatti, Mr. Falwell said, ''I
told him, 'I feel you were wrong then and I feel you are wrong now, but I feel
we can remain friends.' ''

Mr. Falwell also made some friends in a speech to 400 students.  ''Most of his
issues I agree with,'' said freshman Kathy Quinter.  ''There are probably a lot
of people who feel that way. They just feel suppressed from coming out.''

Yale was not so hospitable to conservatives on one issue. The Yale Corporation
in November 1982 declared the university would provide financial aid to students
who were scheduled to lose Federal aid under a new law denying grants or loans
to students who did not register for the draft. About 200 Yale students did not
register.

''The Government,'' Mr. Giamatti said, ''has linked two issues I can separate.''
In the fall, Yalies favored Vincent's Scully's ''Introduction to the History of
Art.'' Almost one in seven students in the spring semester took Wolfgang
Leonard's ''History of the Soviet Union.'' Waggish students dubbed a popular new
introductory course on Latin America ''Banana Gut.''

A bit of Yale loopiness - the annual game called ''Bladderball'' - was abolished
by Mr. Giamatti. He cited the injuries to several students among the two teams
that tried to move the huge, inflated ball around the lawn of the Old Campus.

''I think it stinks,'' a sophomore, Paul Botts, said of the ban.  ''I liked
bladderball. You have now idea how therapeutic a riot can be.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of students at Wesleyan University photos of
scenes at Fordham, Cornell and Rutgers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ERIC HOFFER, DOCKWORKER-AUTHOR WHO LOOKED INTO LIFE, DIES AT 80

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 37, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 21


Eric Hoffer, an itinerant farm worker who became a longshoreman and whose musing
on life, power and social order turned him into a celebrated author-philosopher,
died today at his home here. He was 80 years old.

Years ago, after he had become famous and the subject of interviews, he roared
back his answer to a question that began with the premise ''you're an
intellectual,'' saying, ''No! I'm a longshoreman.''

Mr. Hoffer's first book, ''The True Believer,'' was published in 1951. He
continued working along the docks as a member of the International
Longshoreman's and Warehouseman's Union and wrote between work assignments.

He left the docks in 1967. In 1970 he withdrew from public life, saying: ''I'm
going to crawl back into my hole where I started. I don't want to be a public
person or anybody's spokesman. I am not the type for it and I dislike it.''

Getting Off the Train

His withdrawal ended his lectures at the University of California at Berkeley,
as well as his column in The San Francisco Examiner and his appearances on KPTV,
the public television station here.

He said of his decision to withdraw, ''Any man can ride a train.  Only a wise
man knows when to get off.'' About that time he said in an interview with Norman
Wilner of the North American Newspaper Alliance, as he discussed the
intellectuals among his recent contacts: ''I think all these college boys and
college professors have been brainwashed. Plato, they say, was a great genius,
but Plato only dealt in half-truths, he shillied and he shallied and he didn't
accomplish a thing. He was an intellectual.''

Asked to comment on Freud, he shrugged and said: ''Ah, don't talk to me about
Freud. Freud lived in a tight little circle in Vienna and inside that tight
little circle was another tight little circle and inside that tight little
circle was still another tight little circle. What applies to that poor man,
Freud, does not necessarily apply to me.''

Invitation From Johnson

In October 1967 he was given a tour of the White House by President Johnson who
had invited him after seeing the longshoreman on a television program.

Mr. Hoffer told Mr. Johnson not to pay heed to the polls that showed his
policies losing public support. He also told reporters that he had never spent a
day in a formal school. The next year Mr.  Johnson put Mr. Hoffer on a
Presidential commission to explore violence and protest. As a member of that
panel Mr. Hoffer walked out of a hearing when a student from Berkeley urged the
study of the causes of protest, the Vietnam War. Mr. Hoffer's attacks on antiwar
protesters made him a target of members of the liberal left.

When President Reagan honored Mr. Hoffer last February by awarding him the
Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian award, he recalled
a visit from Mr. Hoffer when he was Governor of California. ''I got some pretty
good, sound and salty advice,'' Mr.  Reagan said.

After becoming established by the reception to his first book, Mr.  Hoffer
continued to write to the end of his life. His published works included ''The
Passionate State of Mind'' (1955); ''The Ordeal of Change'' (1963); ''Temper of
Our Time'' (1967); ''Working and Thinking on the Waterfront'' (1967); ''First
Things, Last Things'' (1970); ''Reflections on the Human Condition'' (1972);
''In Our Time'' (1976), and ''Before the Sabbath'' (1979).

Partly Blind as Child

Mr. Hoffer was born in New York City July 25, 1902. He often attributed his love
of reading to the fact that he was partly blind as a child as a result of a
fall. His sight mysteriously returned at the age of 15. He spent 23 years as a
migratory worker on farms, in mines and in odd jobs. In World War II, in 1943,
he obtained membership in the longshoremen's union where he remained as a dock
worker until he was forced into retirement at the age of 65.

Much of his writing was in epigrams, such as this on Communists: ''He who clings
with all his might to an absolute truth fears compromise more than the devil.''
Or this: ''Communism is capitalism gone berserk.''

And on himself: ''The main thing is not to take myself seriously.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Eric Hoffer

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC VIEW;
JUST WHAT ARE THE MOTIVES FOR THIS IRREVENENT 'MIKADO'?

BYLINE: By Donal Henahan

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


In the main hall of a school that I once passed through there stood a lifesize
copy of the Discus Thrower, forever poised to fling his saucer into the
admissions office. With the persistence and ingenuity of youth, student
provocateurs would periodically find ways to drag the crouching Grecian figure
into the modern world. Anyone arriving early of a morning might find a football
helmet on the statue's head, or perhaps a colorful sweatband. Another time, poor
old Discobolus would be clutching a slide rule, or maybe wearing an athletic
supporter. It was pure sophomoric humor, but even blase seniors were amused, and
probably a few of the younger teachers, too. It helped downtrodden youth build
solidarity against the ruling elders.

The urge to dress the classics in contemporary clothes is one that also
overtakes people in the performing arts. It is a form of nosethumbing that, at
its infrequent best, is a homage to the past and may scrape the crust off
conventions. Some such aim must be motivating Peter Sellars, the bright young
director whose updated staging of ''The Mikado'' was produced recently by
Chicago's Lyric Opera. Mr. Sellars is the 25-year-old director from Harvard
whose operatic iconoclasms already include a Handel ''Orlando'' in which the
hero was an American astronaut, a Haydn ''Armida'' transported to Vietnam and a
Mozart ''Don Giovanni'' that had the Don shooting dope in the champagne aria and
dining on Big Macs in the supper scene.

Joseph Papp has signed this theatrical meteorite to stage ''The Magic Flute'' in
Boston and later in Central Park. Robert Brustein has engaged him for the new
Peter Maxwell Davies opera, ''The Lighthouse,'' also in Boston. A collaboration
with Andy Warhol is being discussed, naturally, as well as a television
production of Virgil Thomson's ''Four Saints in Three Acts.'' Critics who know
more of Mr. Sellars's work than I do have compared him favorably with Orson
Welles, Mike Nichols, Giorgio Strehler, Sarah Caldwell and, for all I know,
Barnum and Bailey. No one, so far as I know, has compared him with Richard
D'Oyly Carte, the fountainhead of the Savoyard tradition.

Clearly, however, Mr. Sellars is a hot property. He is also a fearsomely
ingenious fellow, as his Chicago staging did not let one forget for a moment.
Without changing the Gilbert text or the Sullivan music much more than they have
traditionally been altered, even by the D'Oyly Carte company itself, Mr. Sellars
draped a new conceptual suit around the old bones of ''The Mikado.'' The
''gentlemen of Japan'' were identically dressed executives.  Nanki-Poo, far from
being disguised as a second trombone, turned up as a rock star with electric
guitar. The three little girls from school were randy, hot-breathed
(??breathing??)numbers who clutched hungrily at Nanki-Poo and boogied clumsily
to the beat of a transistor radio. The Mikado himself arrived in a Datsun sports
car.  Within the framework of a modern Japan that is hard to distinguish from
America, Mr. Sellars made dozens of funny or at least moderately amusing points:
when, for instance, Yum-Yum sings her hymn of praise to her own beauty, she
primped with a hotcomb and gazed fondly into an electrically illuminated mirror.
The show, in fact, depended heavily on a succession of sight gags, some
delightful, others predictable and feeble. At times, when his ingenuity failed
him, Mr.  Sellars was thrown back on merely frantic action, barely related to
the text or to his overall concept.

One such moment - a long moment - came during the singing of the Madrigal
(''Brightly dawns our wedding day'') by Yum-Yum, Pitti-Sing, Nanki-Poo and
Pish-Tush. The two romantically entwined couples ended up flopping about on the
floor, presumably in the throes of prenuptial desire, while attempting to
harmonize. The music, understandably, was all but lost. I assumed that the
director thought so little of Sullivan's score at this point that he wanted to
underline its genteel vulgarity by giving it the ''Animal House'' treatment.
But, as was made clear in an essay by the director himself that was distributed
to the press, he meant nothing of the sort.  ''The madrigal is the loveliest
music in the score,'' he writes. ''A joke, yes, but not a joke.'' And yet he
found it necessary to undermine that same music. Someone is off the track here
and I suspect it is the director, not the essayist. There were a good many other
such moments of failing inspiration, when jokes and horseplay made the work
itself seem incidental to the production's cleverness.

What Mr. Sellars and his collaborators produced in Chicago, I would say, was not
''The Mikado,'' but ''A Mikado,'' a trendy commentary on the work in the manner
of the black ''Hot Mikado'' of a generation ago or, perhaps, the pop ''Pirates
of Penzance'' that Mr.  Papp recently brought to Broadway. Mr. Sellars's staging
poked the Savoyard tradition in the ribs rather hard, emphasizing the broad
humor and brashness of the original ''Mikado'' but ignoring the fey charm and
understated wit that both the text and the music are so rich in. I think I would
tire quickly of Mr. Sellars's version, witty though it is.

In fact, when Donald Adams, who was the lovably bloodthirsty Mikado of some
2,000 performances in his D'Oyly Carte days, appeared in this production and did
his familiar turn, I found myself thinking kind thoughts about the tradition he
represents. Mr. Adams made me realize how much I would like, once more, to see a
genuine, unashamed D'Oyly Carte performance. That, of course, will never be
possible because, after more than a century of preserving the Savoy stagings as
if in formaldehyde, the company died last year of that dread disease, loss of
government subsidy. Gilbert and Sullivan themselves still live, however, and
they may even survive the trip in the timemachine that Mr. Sellars treated them
to in Chicago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON ARMS CONTROL, THE RISING PRESSURE IS MAINLY POLITICAL

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE United States and the Soviet Union have been maneuvering vigorously on
nuclear arms control without making appreciable progress. In the process, the
two sets of talks in Geneva, on medium-range and intercontinental-range forces,
are coming to bear the full burden of Soviet-American relations - perhaps too
much weight to make headway now or perhaps so much that real movement will
become politically irresistible later.

Both sides have put forward seemingly new positions on medium-range weapons. But
the changes, Soviet and American officials acknowledged privately, are more form
than substance. The American negotiator, Paul H. Nitze, and his Soviet
counterpart, Yuli A. Kvitsinsky, took up their jousting again last week, after
their governments had effectively rejected each other's ''new'' proposals.

As for the strategic arms reductions talks that resume on June 8, there is
mostly confusion. President Reagan appeared to be promising some Congressmen
that he would build small, so-called Midgetman missiles and thus increase the
total number of missile-launchers. But he also indicated to several senators
that he would seriously consider a proposal for destroying two existing warheads
for every new one. The mathematics does not work but the politics does: Congress
now seems ready to approve the MX and last week, the House Appropriations
Committee voted to free $625 million of previously frozen funds for MX.
Yesterday in his weekly radio address, Mr.  Reagan again attacked proponents of
a nuclear freeze, which he likened to trying to prevent fires by closing the
fire department.

Administration officials see little prospect for a breakthrough in coming
months, but they admit to feeling growing pressure to conclude agreements. They
know the pressures will grow and they hope Moscow will feel the pinch as well.

The hurdles to agreement on medium-range forces remain formidable.  Washington
no longer insists on the elimination of all medium-range missiles, saying it
will accept an equal number of warheads on each side. Moscow no longer insists
on taking missile-launchers as the unit of measure and now says it will agree to
equal numbers of warheads - in effect, 300 for the Soviet Union, 300 for Britain
and France but none for the United States. Furthermore, Washington insists on
limits on Soviet SS-20's aimed at Asia as well as Europe.  Moscow insists Asia
is separate. Washington continues to put off discussion on medium-range bombers,
while Moscow demands equal limits now. The two sides have not come close to
agreeing which bombers should be included.

For good measure, there are the problems of verification, with the
Administration calling for virtually open-ended on-site inspection.
Beyond December, Into 1984

It is fashionable in the Administration to argue that Moscow will become more
flexible once the deployment of new American missiles in Europe begins in
December. But Soviet officials appear to be looking beyond December to see
whether Mr. Reagan will run for a second term. His low esteem for the Soviet
Union is returned in kind. Moscow does not want to do anything to contribute to
his re-election. But if a second term seemed a foregone conclusion, the Russians
might seek to cut a pre-election deal before Mr. Reagan's hand was strengthened
by a new mandate, much as North Vietnam moved to settle with Richard Nixon when
it became clear he would win in 1972.

If, as appears to be the case, Soviet leaders assume they can do little to
prevent deployment of the missiles, they would not lose much by waiting.
Meanwhile, they could continue to use the issue to sow discord between Western
Europe and the United States.

Strategic arms reductions are also in limbo. Mr. Reagan has called for deep
cuts. This means reducing the totals of Soviet land-based and submarine-launched
ballistic missiles by two-thirds and cutting American missiles by half to a
ceiling of 850 each. The 850 missiles would be permitted to carry no more than
5,000 warheads, down from the present 7,500 on each side. The Administration is
also demanding that the Russians reduce their large land-based missiles, the
heart of Soviet strategic credibility, by two-thirds, to no more than 110
SS-19's and 100 SS-18's.

Moscow wants to start from the agreed but unratified SALT 2 ceilings of 2,250
intercontinental-range missiles and bombers, reducing that total by 25 percent.
Washington counters that it won't even discuss bombers and their air-launched
cruise missiles unless Moscow will agree to limits on missile throwweight or
payload. As for sea-launched cruise missiles, Moscow demands that their range be
restricted to below 600 kilometers; Washington won't discuss them.

Into this thicket came American politics with a vengeance. Mr.  Reagan wanted
the MX missile, but his bipartisan Scowcroft commission reported that to get it
he would have to abandon his cherished ''window of vulnerability'' -the
presumption that a Soviet first strike could destroy American land-based
missiles - and change his strategic arms proposal. Thus was the door opened to
innovations and politics.

Several Congressmen urged Mr. Reagan to adopt the commission's suggestion to
build 500 or 1,000 new Midgetman missiles with singlewarheads, make them mobile
and thus reduce the risk of a Soviet first strike. This would mean dropping Mr.
Reagan's ''deep cuts'' ceiling of 850 missile launchers and agreeing instead to
increase the number of missile launchers. Mr. Reagan seemed to think that was a
good idea and told the Congressmen so in a letter.

But the next day, he sent off another letter advising a pair of senators that
their very different idea was a good one too. The senators also wanted to speed
the shift to single-warhead missiles, but by a ''build down'' process. For every
new warhead deployed, two old ones would be destroyed. If Mr. Reagan were to
agree and deploy 1,000 Midgetmen, he would be left with the disagreeable choice
of dismantling the entire Minuteman force with its 2,100 warheads, or of
abandoning plans for 100 new MX missiles with 1,000 warheads.

Administration officials said that Mr. Reagan would decide on his new approach
this week or next. Whichever way he goes, the Russians are likely to portray it
as yet another gambit to delay negotiations while the American military buildup
proceeds. Their reaction to anything new is generally negative, although they
have shown interest in a new single-warhead missile in their own testing
program.

Washington, meanwhile, is listening carefully to noises from Moscow about a
summit. Some Administration experts believe that Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet
leader, might want to use a meeting with Mr.  Reagan to consolidate his hold on
domestic power, thus co-opting the followers of his predecessor, Leonid I.
Brezhnev. But that would mean going against the presumed views of the military
and the K.G.B.  in his present power base, much as Mr. Reagan would be leaving
behind his right-wing Republican supporters. There are fears on both sides that
eagerness for a summit and an arms-control accord would be read by their
opposite numbers as a sign of weakness. Very slowly and somewhat unsurely, these
new political factors are coming into play.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Nitze with Yuli A. Kvitsinsky in Geneva

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

In Nasty Fix

BYLINE: By Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 269 words


One perk of high-level Government service has come to be a shot at making big
bucks on a book. However, Adm. Stansfield Turner, Director of Central
Intelligence in the Carter Administration, is having trouble bringing his
manuscript in from the cold, The New York Times disclosed last week, because of
objections raised by C.I.A. censors.  There was irony in the Admiral's dilemma;
at his direction, the agency's blue-pencil artists and a flying squad of lawyers
went after Frank Snepp, a former agent who had failed to clear his book about
the fall of Saigon with the C.I.A.

Mr. Turner complained that substantial portions of his book - which, among other
things, describes his term as spymaster - had been deleted for no apparent
reason. The retired Navy admiral has hired a lawyer, Anthony Lapham, who should
know his stuff; he was the agency's general counsel at the time of the Snepp
proceedings.

Mr. Snepp, whom Mr. Turner accused of violating his security oath in 1977 by
publishing ''Decent Interval'' without submitting it for review, wasn't
sympathetic. ''I think Turner deserves everything the censors visit on him
because he failed to recognize just how dangerous censorship was in the first
place,'' said Mr. Snepp, who was ultimately ordered by the Supreme Court to give
the Government $140,000 in royalties. Many other present and former officials
may have similar troubles soon. Federal agencies and departments were recently
set to drafting regulations to implement an administration directive that those
who have had access to secrets must in many cases submit their written words for
review.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMORIAL DAY FILM SALUTES EAST END

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 13, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words


AT the beginning of the 14-minute film ''Memorial Day,'' an elderly man raises
the American flag. Then the parade passes by the firehouse, the John Drew
Theater and other familiar sites on East Hampton's Main Street.

The faces, too, are familiar: members of the American Legion, the Fire
Department, the Girl and Boy Scouts, the Baton Twirlers, the ''Bonackers''
(whose name is derived from the clams found on Acabonack Bay) and the policeman
who changes step in midmarch to mark time with the East Hampton High School
brass band. And everywhere the children with their high-flying balloons.

At the end, an elderly woman implants a mini-flag in a graveyard.  Afterward,
the usual list of technical screen credits appears: the cameramen, production
assistants and editors. The final acknowledgement reads: ''and a very special
thanks to the townspeople of East Hampton.''

To Michael Ackerman Ulick, the director of ''Memorial Day,'' which has been
alternately called a short subject, a photographic essay, a silent short (it has
no dialogue), a film of picture and music, a slice of Americana and a
sentimental journey, that's the most crucial credit of all.

The film will be shown free of charge every 20 minutes on Memorial Day at
several East Hampton theaters. (After that it will precede the regular film
feature.)

This is Mr. Ulick's ''personal'' statement for posterity; he avoids the term
''documentary.'' The passing parade, which was shot during the actual annual
East Hampton event last year, Mr. Ulick fears, might indeed pass into oblivion.

''Some townspeople told me their children probably won't live here any more
because they won't be able to afford it,'' he said.  ''Farmers are being forced
to sell off acreage if they have a bad season. They're talking about a new
highway. The whole area is changing drastically. The texture we love, that naive
American quality, may disappear.''

After a recent screening for the ''fathers of the town,'' Mr. Ulick said, ''they
laughed at themselves in the right places and they cried at themselves in the
right places.''

Although he has been spending summers hereabouts - in Bridgehampton, Sagaponack,
East Hampton and Wainscott - since 1956, Mr. Ulick, who will return to Wainscott
next month, laments such local changes as the shutting down of an old laundry.
which then became a fashionable restaurant; the conversion of a 160-year-old inn
to a new restaurant - he refers to these as ''negative metaphors'' -and the
overall aura of the Hamptons as a haven ''for the effete and elite.''

Beyond its local showing, Mr. Ulick plans to enter the film in various festivals
including one in Moscow, where he sent a cable declaring his mission. It read,
in part, ''to appeal to a higher order, that of human feelings.''

''I hope they'd see the universality of how a small town commemorates its dead
and that maybe that feeling of loss, of mourning would bring us a little closer
together,'' he added.

Since noncommercialism is a qualifying factor in many film festivals, Mr. Ulick,
who financed ''Memorial Day'' with his own funds - $100,000 worth - is not
accepting a fee from the United Artists Company, which, he maintains, ''is
showing the film here to be more civic-minded and community-involved.''

Unless a short subject is acknowledged by awards, it is difficult to distribute,
Mr. Ulick said. ''It prevents theater owners from getting people in and out of
the candy counter for business.''

''Memorial Day,'' he hopes, will also be shown to schools and civic groups.
Although the film consists of much flag-waving, Mr. Ulick insisted it is
''nonpolitical and non-nationalistic.'' ''The American flag,'' he said,
''happens to be the symbol of our country but nothing here is jingoistic,
chauvinistic or saberrattling. After Vietnam, some people thought they'd never
look at another march, but this one evokes different feelings and is open to
interpretation.''

Mr. Ulick's film, he realizes, is the culmination of his life pattern. Committed
to perpetuating traditions and preserving memories of past yearnings in places
that have since changed, he remembers growing up in Hewlett when it was ''a
quaint little town, right out of an Edward Hopper painting, with a nearby farm
where the family actually went around in a horse and wagon.''

His father, whose surname was Ackerman, was ''the local druggist and a member of
the Volunteer Fire Department.'' When he died, Mr.  Ulick's mother remarried.
The family moved to Connecticut for a couple of years and then returned to the
Island, settling in Great Neck, which was then ''also quaint.'' That was in
1952, when Mr.  Ulick was 14.

After graduating from high school in Great Neck (''I sat next to Francis Ford
Coppola in the graduation photograph,'' he said), Mr.  Ulick went to ''a bunch
of colleges'': St. Lawrence (where he attended with honors), New York University
(where he did poorly) and finally Adelphi University, where he received an
undergraduate degree.

As an aspiring actor, inspired by the golden age of Off Broadway, when he saw
Geraldine Page in ''Summer and Smoke'' and Jason Robards Jr. in ''The Iceman
Cometh,'' Mr. Ulick had a ''difficult time'' and continued the dropout route,
moving to California, coming back, landing a job in an advertising agency that
he did not like, becoming a photographer at the same time. After working as a
production assistant in a film company, he ''ended up'' directing commercials
during what he calls another ''golden age'' - this one of adventurousness in
advertising.

For the last three years, Mr. Ulick has been the owner of a highranking,
high-powered Manhattan-based commercial production house, famed for its catchy
and funny promotions of, among other, car mufflers, antacids, airlines and
computers, in which such celebrities as Muhammad Ali, Mickey Mantle, Charlton
Heston, Joe Frazier, Roger Daltry and Bill Cosby have appeared.

What is his credo as a director of commercials? ''I take it seriously, but I
don't think of it as an art form even though I utilize artistic principles while
doing it,'' he declared.

Contrasting commercials with a commemorative film such as ''Memorial Day,'' Mr.
Ulick said: ''Commercials are contrived. You cut everything down to an essence
so it fits in so many seconds.  There is nothing casual about it. You can do 30
takes to get a perfect one. In 'Memorial Day,' we went for the moment while it
was happening and that was it.''

Only one moment - the man putting up the flag, which was discovered by Mr. Ulick
''after the fact'' - was recreated for the film, and shot on Labor Day. Seventy
minutes of ''real time'' from the preparade preparations to the graveside
ceremony were pared down to 14 minutes of footage.

''I wasn't sure whether I could do it,'' Mr. Ulick said, ''but I followed my
instincts. These people still believe in something. It's almost like a living
folk art. Hardly anyone's watching them except maybe their families. The chi-chi
summer crowd is not there. There are more participants than spectators, but year
after year, they keep marching, which proves its own point. They're doing it for
pride, for preservation and for themselves. The film is about those townspeople,
not the 50,000 Manhattanites who come out here every summer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Michael Ulick

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR ISN'T VIETNAM;
ILLUSIONS ROLL ON

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel; Ronald Steel, a senior associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, is author most recently of ''Walter Lippmann
and the American Century.''

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 801 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Is El Salvador just Vietnam closer to home? Clearly not. Vietnam was always part
of another world. Its social structure, its customs, its language and religion
were too mysterious and impenetrable for us. It was either somebody else's
colony (France's), or somebody else's sphere of influence (China's).

But El Salvador is another story. The Spanish language and Roman Catholicism are
familiar. We have been involved there for such a long time. It is part of
''our'' hemisphere. Like all nations around the Caribbean, and unlike Vietnam,
it is within our ''sphere of influence.'' That means we feel we have proprietary
rights there.

El Salvador is just down the road from Mexico. Compared to the Viet Cong, the
insurgents there are weak and isolated. They have no friendly giant on their
border, as China was to Vietnam, to restrain us. With just a little more money,
and perhaps a few more ''advisers,'' we are told, Government forces can carry
the day. No American troops, of course. At least the President and his staff
hope not.

They may well be right. El Salvador is a tiny country. The guerrillas are
outnumbered and outequipped. They have few modern weapons and no airforce. This
is not a full-scale civil war like that in Vietnam so much as a classic Latin
American insurrection of peasants against soldiers. We have put down similar
uprisings before, sometimes with our own forces. United States troops, after
all, occupied Nicaragua until 1933. No, El Salvador is not Vietnam.  Yet the
analogy keeps recurring. There is a deep feeling among the public and in
Congress that this war, like the one in Vietnam, might drag on interminably,
sucking us in ever deeper. This arises not from the circumstances, which are
very different, but from the pronouncements in Washington, which are remarkably
similar. The President, while assuring us that El Salvador is not at all like
Vietnam, nonetheless conjures the same images his predecessors did.  He asserts
that this is a struggle between democracy and tyranny.  More importantly, he
insists that we have a ''vital interest'' in the survival of the ruling regime.
Such sweeping statements bear scrutiny. First of all, democracy. That is not why
we are supporting the Government of El Salvador any more than why we were in
Vietnam.  If our ''friends'' win, the country will remain a despotism ruled by
landlords through the army. If the guerrillas take over, it will probably also
be a despotism ruled by the army and a cadre of ideologues. In either case,
democracy is not the issue. Nor was it in Vietnam. To say that the Communist
regime that now rules Vietnam is a vicious, nasty dictatorship is true. It is
also irrelevant. We did not go into Vietnam to bring democracy but to prop up a
collapsing regime. The same is true of El Salvador. Before the insurrection
began, we cared no more about bringing democracy to El Salvador than we do today
about bringing it to Chile. Let us please avoid hypocrisy and stop talking about
democracy. Let us then talk about interests. Do we have what the President calls
a ''vital interest'' in El Salvador? If so, he has not made it clear what that
might be, any more than his predecessors did in the case of Vietnam. All during
the long years of agony in Vietnam, we could never explain adequately, even to
ourselves, why we were there. One week it was to contain China, another to bring
about the universal triumph of world law, and yet another to keep little
yellowish-brown men from invading Akron and Missoula. It is not surprising that
the consensus at home finally collapsed. The wonder is not that we fought the
war for so long but that we didn't leave years earlier. Our withdrawal from
Vietnam did not result from weariness or a ''failure of will,'' but from a
realization that nothing that happened there was worth the sacrifices it
involved. American security was not much affected by who ruled Vietnam. It is
not today. There was no serious interest, let alone a vital one. The same is
true of El Salvador. It is an impoverished little country that does not endanger
us regardless of who rules it. It would be nice if it were to become a
democracy. That is also unlikely, and whether it is a tyranny of the right or of
the left does not affect our security. Naturally we are offended by the idea of
foreign bases or troops. This, of course, we have the power to prevent and
should not hesitate to do so. Beyond that our involvement in its internal
affairs should be minimal. While El Salvador is not Vietnam, the same illusions
govern our policy toward it. If we have a ''vital interest'' in keeping the
present regime in power, the President has not been able to demonstrate it.
Until he does, we will be drawn ever deeper into a struggle we do not understand
over issues we cannot explain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Commencement Day, a Time for Parting Words and Rejoicing;
GRADUATES HAILED AS 'BETTER ROUNDED PEOPLE'

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: STORRS, Conn., May 22


The University of Connecticut held its 100th commencement today, and Charles and
Augustus Storrs would probably have been surprised by it all.

The Storrses, who donated 150 acres of rolling farmland to the state for the
school, could not have guessed the number of graduates today, about 3,000, or
the other changes that have occurred since fewer than a dozen students graduated
in 1883 from what was then the Storrs Agricultural School, said John A.
DiBiaggio, the university's president.

''The students now leaving here are better educated, better rounded people,'' he
said at a luncheon following the ceremonies.  ''And there are certainly more of
them.''

In addition to awarding undergraduate and advanced degrees, the university
conferred honorary degrees on four people, including Victor Borge and Clifton R.
Wharton Jr., the Chancellor of the State University of New York.

In a commencement address, Douglas Edwards, a CBS News commentator, defended the
college graduates of the 1980's, who he said were thought to be career-oriented
and overly pragmatic.

''You are not the vocal generation that graduated in the late 60's and early
70's, when the Vietnam War was dividing us so painfully,'' he said. ''Well,
perhaps that's all to the good. Perhaps you'll be heard from in ways that we
don't expect. Perhaps your political and social creativity is ahead of you
instead of behind you, as it seems to be with so many activists of a decade
ago.''

Speech Delivered Twice

Because no building on the campus could accommodate all the graduates, Mr.
Edwards had to give his speech twice, once in the Jorgensen Auditorium and again
in the field house.

Lattie F. Coor, president of the University of Vermont, delivered an address to
graduate students at a special commencement ceremony for them.

Mary Jean Vigneau, a communications major, said she was apprehensive about
graduation because she had not yet found a job.  ''The people I know discuss
jobs all the time,'' she said. ''I wish I didn't have to worry about it today.
I'm sending out lots of resumes.''

Another graduate, Jane Cashman said she had been lucky. With her degree in
finance, she will soon join a business consulting company.  ''It's terrible,''
she said. ''I'm the only one of my friends who got a job.''

There were 2,324 candidates for bachelor's degrees today and about 700 advanced
degree candidates. The University of Connecticut School of Law awarded 188 law
degrees on Saturday, and the medical school will hold its commencement
Wednesday.

These were the recipients of the honorary degrees:

VICTOR BORGE, comedian and musician; Doctor of Fine Arts, for entertaining
''millions in Europe and America with his sophisticated combination of piano
artistry and comic genius.''

MALCOLM COWLEY, author, critic and educator; Doctor of Letters, for illuminating
''our national culture of the 1920's and 1930's in lastingly influential
books.''

JOHN H. FILER, chairman of Aetna Life and Casualty; Doctor of Humane Letters,
for being ''a pioneer in helping to define an enlightened new view of those
social responsibilities which corporations have to the communities, national,
state and local, in which they live and work.''

CLIFTON R. WHARTON Jr., economist and university chancellor; Doctor of Humane
Letters, for ''not only his mastery of his field but also for his concern for
the increasing problems of the underdeveloped countries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Maureen McMahon and Jay Trelli at UConn

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HOW PARAMOUNT 'SEVEN' FARED AT THE BOX OFFICE

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, May 22


In the spring of 1981, under the pressure of movie budgets that were spinning
out of control and an expected strike by Hollywood directors, Paramount rushed
six low-budget movies into production and made an arrangement to help finance a
seventh.

Occasionally referred to as ''The Magnificent Seven,'' the movies were both a
response to what was happening in the movie industry at that moment and a
clinical test. Could movies with budgets between $4 million and $8 million
flourish in a high-budget atmosphere? Could the often endless preproduction
process be shortened and movies hurried into production without harming the
final product?

Of the seven movies, the co-financed film, ''Young Lust,'' was such a mess that
it has yet to be officially delivered to Paramount. The studio washed its hands
of a second, ''White Dog,'' by selling it directly to pay-cable. ''I'm Dancing
as Fast as I Can'' earned a pitiful $400,000 in the few cities in which it was
released. ''Jekyll and Hyde ... Together Again'' and ''Partners'' were also
box-office failures. ''Some Kind of Hero'' was a moderate box-office success,
selling $24.5 million worth of tickets. Since a studio usually gets about half
the money spent at the box office, this film brought Paramount $11 million in
film rentals.

'Officer' Paid for All

But the remaining film, ''An Officer and a Gentleman,'' has earned $125 million
at American box offices so far. It was the fifth most successful movie of 1982
and it is still climbing. Released last August, it is still selling nearly
$500,000 worth of tickets each week.

Paramount has already earned more than $60 million from ''An Officer and a
Gentleman,'' enough to pay for producing all seven movies, with about $25
million left over. (The advertising costs on most of the movies are canceled out
by revenues from cable and television.)

''Was I surprised that any of the pictures would have failed?'' asked Barry
Diller, the chairman of Paramount. ''No. Was I confounded that 'An Officer and a
Gentleman' was that successful? Yes.''

''My theory,'' said Paramount's president, Michael Eisner, ''was that one would
be a giant hit, one would be a giant turkey, the others would be in-between -
hopefully more toward the profit side.''

'Dependent on Third Parties'

Part of Paramount's decision in the spring of 1981 came from what Mr. Diller
called his ''frustration'' over the way things work in the movie industry today,
when studios no longer have writers, directors or actors under contract.

''You're so dependent on third parties - having to put a project out to actors
or directors,'' he said. ''You need one creative element to get things moving.
One day, I said, 'Let's just make pictures. We'll have to make some compromises,
but let's try to make the pictures as best we can.' ''

At that moment, Paramount had some 13 projects far enough along in development
to be considered. There was no consensus on which of the 13 projects to pick.

''My mandate, order, instruction was to deliver product,'' said Don Simpson,
then president of production at Paramount, now the independent producer of
''Flashdance,'' a movie about a young woman from Pittsburgh who welds by day and
dances by night that has become a surprise box-office hit.

Cost Narrows Choices

''It's Philistine-in-the-Temple-time to say it,'' Mr. Simpson said, ''but we do
have to service our distribution stream. We needed product in the can if there
was a directors' strike.''

The choices were narrowed somewhat because the movies couldn't be large scale or
take long to make. They couldn't, for example, use events that are difficult to
stage, such as hurricanes or car crashes, that might put them behind schedule.
The budgets on ''The Man Who Lost Tuesday,'' by Colin Higgins, and
''Interface,'' a science-fiction story acquired from Francis Coppola, couldn't
be trimmed enough. ''Born in the U.S.A.'' by Paul Schrader needed Bruce
Springsteen to star in it, but Mr. Springsteen was unavailable.

The final choices were made on the basis of advocacy.  ''Advocacy,'' Mr. Diller
said, ''is what gets pictures made in this company - somebody loving something.
I can't usually be talked out of making a movie I love, but I can be talked into
making a movie somebody else loves.''

Division of Opinion

Mr. Eisner wanted to make ''White Dog,'' a Sam Fuller project based on a Romain
Gary story about a dog trained to attack black people; ''Jekyll and Hyde,'' a
comic movie in which Jekyll turns into Hyde by using what appears to be cocaine,
and ''I'm Dancing as Fast as I Can,'' a film starring Jill Clayburgh and based
on a novel about Valium addiction. He said he hated ''Partners.''

Mr. Simpson wanted to make ''Partners,'' a comic mystery starring Ryan O'Neal,
about a straight policeman and a homosexual policeman who are forced to live
together; ''Some Kind of Hero,'' a film with Richard Pryor about the travails of
a Vietnam war veteran, and ''An Officer and a Gentleman.'' He said he hated
''I'm Dancing as Fast as I Can'' and ''White Dog.''

''Looking back, I should have thrown my body over barbed wire to stop 'White
Dog' from being made,'' Mr. Simpson said. ''I wouldn't have stopped any of the
rest.''

It is axiomatic in Hollywood that box-office hits cannot be predicted. Too much
depends on the how the words on paper are turned into film and on the chemistry
between actors. As Paramount executives debated the projects, they felt that the
best script was the one for ''Partners.'' The least passion was directed toward
''An Officer and a Gentleman.'' ''It was liked, not loved, disliked not hated,''
Mr. Diller said.

Gere Initially Refused Role

At first, Richard Gere turned down the role in ''Officer'' of the naval air
cadet who becomes a man. In fact, he turned it down five times before he bought
some property and needed cash to pay off his mortgage. At the last minute, the
studio found an actress to play opposite him by exercising its last option on
Debra Winger. The role of the drill sergeant that won an Academy Award for Lou
Gossett, who is black, was written for a white actor and offered to four top
white character actors who turned it down.

If the studio's first choice of actor or director wasn't available, a second -or
third - choice was made. Tight cost controls eliminated such perquisites as
first-class airplane tickets and the Winnebago trailers in which stars can
lounge between scenes.

''Richard Gere didn't have a place to hide. If it was raining, he had to sit in
the makeup trailer,'' says Mr. Simpson. Several actors turned roles down because
of the lack of such perquisites. Paramount also eliminated the expensive
practice of allowing certain crew members to rent their own equipment to the
studio.

Financially and creatively, did it work?

'Had to Push Scripts'

''We had to push some of the scripts much faster than we should have,'' Mr.
Simpson said.

'' 'Partners' was the essence of a badly made movie, partly because it was
rushed against a date,'' says Mr. Diller. ''The rush had no creative effect on
'I'm Dancing As Fast As I Can.' 'I'm Dancing' is playing well over cable; we'll
make several million dollars on cable and network television sales. And 'Some
Kind of Hero' would never have happened without our being energized to make a
movie right then.''

According to Mr. Simpson, three years earlier Paramount had made a blind
commitment to Richard Pryor. It was time to put him in a movie or write him a $1
million check. ''Some Kind of Hero'' had been owned by Paramount for several
years, and the studio ''had chased everyone from Robert Redford to Nick Nolte.''
The script was quickly rewritten for Mr. Pryor.

Despite the success of ''An Officer and a Gentleman,'' Paramount is not likely
to repeat the experiment of rushing low-budget films into production. Studio
executives say that the 1981 experiment depended both on an impending strike and
a shortage of films that had finished production. Also, in the intervening two
years, most studios have become more cautious and less willing to spend over $10
million on any movie. It is a quite different atmosphere from 1980, when studios
felt that the more money they spent, the more money they were likely to make.

In Hollywood, there are no infallible formulas for making money.  ''We don't
ever expect a particular movie to fail,'' says Mr.  Diller, ''but we know some
will fail. Someone here - one of our younger executives -asked why we make 18
movies if we only expect five to be successful. Why don't we just make those
five?'' He sighs. ''I wish it were that easy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Gere and Debra Winger photo of Jill
Glayburgh

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CANNES OVER, FILMS FACE THE PUBLIC

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words

DATELINE: CANNES, France, May 22


At 8 A.M. Friday, barely four hours after the last party on the last day of the
36th Cannes Internattional Film Festival came to an end, workers were already
tearing down the gigantic, glittery billboards in front of the Carlton Hotel.
The remnants of what had taken a year to plan and pay for would be cleared away
in a matter of days.

But while the frantic life at the festival was over, life for most the films
that were shown was just beginning. Now, they will have to make it on their own.

True, many films got a publicity or critical boost here that will help them in
the marketplace. But while success at Cannes can increase a film's audience in
France and in other parts of Europe, it is by no means a guarantee of fame or
profit. That is especially true if the film is seeking a market in United
States.

Winning prizes at Cannes is important to that share of the American film
audience that loves to go see foreign films. Certain films that win raves here
can actually break out of that ''ghetto,'' as foreign film makers sadly refer to
their share of the market in United States. But it is the fact that the
''ghetto'' exists that limits the influence that Cannes - or any other foreign
festival - is likely to have in the United States.

No U.S. Feature Films Win

This year, the festival's jury, presided over by William Styron, the American
novelist, gave no awards to American feature films. Only a short film, ''Too
Much Oregano,'' won a palm. According to Gilles Jacob, director of the festival,
it was the first time American films had been shut out of the major awards since
1969.

But things might have been otherwise. There was strong sentiment on the jury to
honor Bruce Beresford's ''Tender Mercies,'' to give perhaps the best actor's
citation to its star, Robert Duvall. This possibility was abruptly eliminated in
the first week when the film was put out of competition on a technicality.
According to a variety of people familiar with the jury's work, Serguei
Bondartchouk, a Soviet director and a jury member, asserted that the film was
ineligbile because it had been shown at a festival in New Delhi.

That was only one of a number of controversies that raged inside the jury. The
night before the prizes were to be awarded, there were what some described as
''vociferous arguments,'' and Mr. Styron, who could not be reached for comment,
was reportedly not entirely comfortable with the final selections.

When he distributed the awards on Thursday night, he likened his job as
president of the Cannes jury to that of being the President of the United States
or of France. The jobs were similar, he said, because they were equally
impossible.

No One Entirely Dissatisfied

The jury ended up giving out so many awards - the controversy over whether to
salute Robert Bresson's ''Money'' or Andrei Tarkovsky's ''Nostalgia'' was
settled by having them share a prize - that no one was entirely dissatisfied.

Critics here generally expressed greatest disappointment over the failure of
Nagisa Oshima's ''Merry Christmas Mr. Lawrence'' to win any mention at all. The
film was about the interaction between British prisoners of war and their
Japanese captors, and it had won many favorable reviews. Mr. Oshima took the
loss philosophically, however, his mood helped by the fact that Universal
Pictures' Classics Division purchased distribution rights for the United States.
Another Japanese entry, ''The Ballad of Narayama,'' starring Sumiko Sakamoto,
won the Golden Palm, the fesitival's highest award.

Some French fans of Jerry Lewis expressed sadness that the film in which he
starred, Martin Scorsese's ''King of Comedy,'' did not take a prize. There were
also partisans of Patrice Chereau's ''Wounded Man,'' a violent story of a
homosexual love affair. The film included some extraordinarily explicit sex
scenes and therefore also drew its share of vehement detractors.

Other nonvictorious films likely to get a boost from the festival were Peter
Weir's ''Year of Living Dangerously,'' James Ivory's ''Heat and Dust'' and Ruy
Guerra's ''Erendira,'' a film about a woman who sells her granddaughter into
prostitution.

Other Films Gain Attention

Among the noncompetition films that seemed to get a good deal attention were Ann
Hui's ''Boat People,'' a tough look at Vietnam after the war, and John Sayles's
''Lianna,'' a low-key story of a lesbian love affair. The closing film was John
Badham's ''War Games,'' a story of a young computer enthusiast who gains access
to a Pentagon computer and threatens, accidentally, to blow up the world.

Was the festival a success? In numerical terms, probably yes.  According to Mr.
Jacob, the number of people from the film business who filed for credentials
jumped this year to 10,000 from 6,000 last year. The number of journalists
accredited totaled 3,000. ''We have to careful that the growth in attendance
doesn't become cancerous,'' he said wearily the day before the festival closed.

Mr. Jacob, a warm man who selects the films and takes criticism of them
personally (''He gets hurt as if the films were members of his family,'' said a
friend), declined to make a comparative analysis, saying only that he thought he
got a fair representation of what was good on the world market.

Government Financing Questioned

But Claude Baigneres, a critic for the the rightist Le Figaro, complained that
the rule that excludes films that were shown outside their own country kept out
the best films. ''It is very evident that if 'Tootsie,' 'Gandhi' or 'La Nave'
had been in competition,'' he said, ''the barrier to be jumped to figure in the
race for palms would have been of another altitude.''

Finally, there was much controversy - particularly in the anti-Socialist press -
over the number of films at the festival that had been underwritten by
government money. The festival itself, after all, is large paid for by the
government.

Mr. Jacob, who has worked under both rightist and leftist governments, said that
there was no political pressure on him. An associate said this was probably
true, but for a reason.

''You have to understand that the French always have worries about the
Government - any Government - in the back of their heads,'' this associate said.
''So when someone in Mr. Jacob's job looked at a movie that the Government would
like, he'd probably be inclined to say, 'That's a good film.' The result is that
no pressure is necessary.''

The final party of the festival was put on by M-G-M/U.A., and at about 1 A.M.
Friday, the Ambassador's Room at the much-criticized Festival Hall came alive
with English fanfares. A group of wigged men in old-fashioned English dress
arrived carrying a gigantic cake made in the form of a lion - the M-G-M one.

''This is it!'' exclaimed Timothy Leary, the former Harvard professor who once
introduced his students to drugs. He was clad in a tuxedo and running shoes.
''This is the end of the American Empire!'' he said. It may or may not be, but
it was an appropriate end to a week of tinsel and glitter, overindulgence and at
least a few films that will survive beyond all that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sumiko Sakamoto

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
A Saigon Premier of 60's Among 'Boat People'

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 83 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, May 23


A Prime Minister of South Vietnam was among a boatload of refugees that has
arrived in Singapore, a senior United Nations refugee official said today.

Nguyen Van Loc, who was Prime Minister for seven months in 1967-68, told the
local office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees that he had
escaped from a port in southern Vietnam on his 14th attempt.

Mr. Loc, 62 years old, arrived with 32 other so-called boat people on May 13
after being picked up by a French cargo ship.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BROTHER STILL PURSUES MYSTERY OF ARMY PILOT WHO VANISHED ON COAST IN;
1958

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1218 words

DATELINE: NEW FLORENCE, Pa., May 23


When First Lieut. Paul Byron Whipkey, a 26-year-old pilot and company commander,
disappeared from Fort Ord, Calif., on July 10, 1958, the Army listed him as
absent without leave.

In time, the Army charged him with desertion. Twenty-four years passed. But his
family refused to believe the Army. For all those years, they demanded an
explanation why the young officer had vanished so mysteriously.

Then, in April 1982, the Army Board for Correction of Military Records held a
three-day hearing and concluded that Lieutenant Whipkey died the day after he
disappeared.

The board's report, issued July 1, said his ''unauthorized absence'' was excused
as ''unavoidable'' and his death ''was incurred in the line of duty, not due to
his own misconduct.''

On Aug. 26, 1982, the Army Adjutant General's office issued a certificate of
honorable service and acknowledged Lieutenant Whipkey's death without
explanation.

'So Many Questions Still'

But his brother, Carl Whipkey, will not give up. ''The Government knows what
happened to my brother,'' he says. ''There are so many questions still
unanswered.''

Carl Whipkey, 55, a communications technician who lives 65 miles east of
Pittsburgh, has accumulated thousands of Government documents in his 25-year
''life's work'' on his brother's fate.  Despite the Army's reluctance to enter
the case, Carl Whipkey has offers of help from Senator Charles H. Percy,
Republican of Illinois, and Senator Jeramiah A. Denton Jr., Republican of
Alabama.

The continuing murkiness and his failure to pierce the Army bureaucracy has led
Mr. Whipkey to suspect that his brother was a secret agent killed by fellow
agents, or that his aircraft was shot down over the Soviet Union, or that he is
suffering or has succumbed to illness from secret Army nerve gas or atomic tests
of the 1950's.

''I would be satisfied even if the Army would say they can't tell us for
security reasons,'' Mr. Whipkey says. ''But until then, we can't rule anything
out.''

He Earned Engineering Degree

By all accounts, the blond, 5-foot 8-inch-tall Lieutenant Whipkey was an
all-American young man and a superior officer. He grew up in Pittsburgh's
suburbs, earned a civil engineering degree and his Army commission with honors
at Pennsylvania State University in 1954 and won his Army pilot's wings and was
assigned to Fort Ord in 1956.

On July 10, 1958, Lieutenant Whipkey told fellow officers there that he was
''going to get a drink'' in town.  A few hours later, hundreds of miles away in
Mojave, Calif., he checked into a motel, according to the Federal Bureu of
Investigation, which looked into his suspected desertion after the routine 60
days had passed. The next day, July 11, Lieutenant Whipkey bought 14 gallons of
gas in Mojave, according to the F.B.I. findings included in the Army's 1982
report. It appears he was never heard from again.

Carl Whipkey, informed his brother was missing, said he became suspicious July
12 when he telephoned Fort Ord and was told officers were finishing a job begun
the day before, packing his brother's belongings into 11 wooden crates for
shipment home.

'Superhyper Superquick'

''When you catch them packing up your brother's clothes one day after he
disappeared, you get super-hyper superquick,'' Mr. Whipkey says.

Five weeks later, according to the Army, California fish and game officers found
his red and white 1956 Chevrolet in ''a desolate and forbidding region'' of
Death Valley.

The car was 15 miles from the main road, 150 miles from Mojave and 400 miles
from Fort Ord. The auto was ''found to be in very neat order,'' the Army report
says, and contained Lieutenant Whipkey's suitcase, personal belongings and dog
tags. There was no sign of the officer.

The Army board report said it appeared that he might have ''wandered'' out into
the desert and succumbed in the extreme heat, and that the shifting sands made
it nearly impossible to recover his body.

It is here the Army closes its public files on Lieutenant Whipkey.

Little Hope on Questions

An Army spokesman, Margaret Tackley, recently referred an inquiry about him to
the board's eight-page report, which says that the passage of time has made it
''remote, if not impossible,'' to ''end all questions'' about the disappearance.
Last week, after another press attempt to get an official statement, the Army
said it would have no further comment.

In June 1977, Mr. Whipkey sought information from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation under a Freedom of Information Act petition.  In 1978, he says,
the F.B.I. told him it had destroyed field files on the case in December 1977.
But Mr. Whipkey claims he has discovered an unknown, dark side to his brother's
Army career.

According to Mr. Whipkey, his brother flew in five atomic test explosions in
Nevada. He says he suspects his brother was exposed to radiation and, in his
duties in the testing area, might have seen evidence of secret experiments
involving humans.

The Army report acknowledges that Lieutenant Whipkey was assigned to temporary
duty as a pilot at Camp Desert Rock, Nev., from July to October 1957. But it
does not mention atomic tests and says ''extensive investigations'' failed to
support Mr. Whipkey's other assertions.

It does confirm that soon after Lieuteant Whipkey's Nevada duty, he developed
black moles on his body and warts on his hands. His brother and the Army agree
that the lieutenant complained of not feeling well, of constant colds and weight
loss, and that his personality changed, and he became more nervous.

According to Army records, several months before he disappeared, Lieutenant
Whipkey, then 25 years old, had all his teeth removed and was fitted with
dentures.

Fellow Officer Testified

A retired lieutenant colonel, Charles Lewis of Enterprise, Ala., testified last
year that he recalled that two Army intelligence agents interviewed Lieutenant
Whipkey on the Camp Desert Rock flight line in the atomic tests.

Mr. Lewis said he and other officers noted Lieutenant Whipkey ''appeared to be
nervous and uptight'' after the agents left. His nervousness prevented him from
flying several observation missions, Mr. Lewis said.

''Paul's actions were always ethical on and off the base,'' Mr.  Lewis
testified. ''But Paul became suspiciously silent to others when the agents were
mentioned or appeared on the scene at the airfield or the officers' club.''

Don Bailey, then a Democratic Representative from Pennsylvania, a Vietnam
veteran, appeared before the Army board on his constituent's behalf, ''convinced
there are a great many questions about what happened to a very loyal fellow
officer.''

The American Legion is helping Mr. Whipkey and his lawyer press claims for
almost $14,000 in death benefits, G.I. insurance, back pay and interest.

''Whether it is a cover-up or just a bungled investigation, it seems to us there
are still some unanswered questions,'' Bob Bishop, a state American Legion
officer, said.

The Army report acknowledges that although the F.B.I. ''conducted a thorough
investigation'' into the disappearance, the Army made ''no encompassing
investigation.''

''Apparently,'' it concludes, ''the responsible individuals who were aware of
his disappearance on 10 July 1958 were of the opinion that he would eventually
return.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Carl Whipkey

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 25, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Olympic Security Aide Hired

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 62 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 24


Col. Charles Beckwith of the Army, retired, has been hired as a special Defense
Department consultant to study security for the 1984 Olympic games in Los
Angeles, a White House spokesman said today. Colonel Beckwith, one of the most
decorated soldiers in the Vietnam War, led an unsuccessful mission to rescue
American hostages in Iran in 1980.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 25, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

House Passes Bill to Extend Counseling Plan for Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 24


The House voted Monday to extend through September 1987 the Government program
that provides psychological counseling to Vietnam veterans at 136 centers
nationwide.

The measure, sent to the Senate by voice vote, also would create an Advisory
Committee on Women Veterans to study the concerns and needs of an estimated
800,000 former servicewomen.

Under existing law, the ''vet centers'' are to be disbanded in September 1984.
On a related matter, the House tentatively approved a bill that would permit
unemployed or ill veterans holding mortgages guaranteed by the Veterans
Administration to borrow up to $8,400 to maintain payments on their homes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ADVISERS IN SALVADOR: A DELICATE MISSION

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1368 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, May 25


Every morning at military headquarters the Chief of Staff sits down with his
officers in a room ringed with large maps to discuss war strategy. Four United
States Army officers are at the same table.

At the army base in the central province of San Vicente on a recent afternoon,
American soldiers in fatiques shouted orders to Salvadoran soldiers. Inside a
large dining room, an American checked his pocket dictionary for the translation
of a word he wanted to use on a chart.

These men are among the 55 American advisers based in El Salvador - the limit
imposed by the Reagan Administration - to ''train'' the country's soldiers.
According to the advisers, this mandate has a broad definition since an
assignment in El Salvador can run from teaching soldiers to operate a radio to
advising some of the military's highest officers.

As one Salvadoran who works at the high command put it, nothing gets done unless
the Americans are consulted first.  While none of the Americans have been seen
in combat, there is no doubt that they enter areas where combat is a distinct
possibility.  One American officer said five of the group's members had been
shot at in the last year.

In one incident, an officer said he had been checking equipment that had been
damaged. As his helicopter lifted off, guerrillas fired on it. He said that
other such instances had occurred but that he had never found it necessary to
fire back.

Another adviser said it was impossible to do his job without entering areas
where he would be at risk. ''The trick is not to get caught,'' he said.

Part of the risk comes from the realities of advising troops in the middle of a
war. ''It is ridiculous to consider that there is going to be the same risk in
an assignment in El Salvador as there is at an American base,'' an American
Embassy official said.

The fighting between Government troops and leftist insurgents has spread to a
large part of the countryside and advice and training are needed most in
provinces where the guerrillas are strongest.

In two separate incidents, American advisers have been sent home for carrying
the definition of ''training'' beyond that of even the embassy. In the first
instance, an officer was filmed carrying an M-16 rifle. In the second, three
officers were relieved of their duties here after an adviser was wounded while
flying on a mission to check a communications link in a region where there had
been heavy fighting.

Separate from the work of the advisers is that of the military attache at the
embassy. Four officers work in the attache's office, including a full colonel,
and they do not count under the 55-man limit on advisers.

As in other countries, part of the attache's job is to collect intelligence. And
that, according to an embassy official, means visiting areas where battles have
recently taken place.

One of the officers, for example, visited the town of Cinquera the day after a
recent heavy battle. The town was considered secure because Government troops
were in the area.

''How do you go out and gather information without some risk?'' the official
asked.  The advisers include two mobile training teams who teach basic battle
skills to enlisted men, those who advise at the commander level and those who
work on overall strategy. The advisers are split about evenly between officers
and enlisted men.

Those who work at the command level are generally stationed in El Salvador for
six months or longer and have the rank of lieutenant colonel. Four advisers work
at the high command, where they are assigned to the highest ranking officer in a
particular division, and one each is assigned to the commanders of the the air
force and navy.

Their objective, a West Point graduate who works at the high command explained,
is to ''attempt to put in our way of doing things'' and at the same time make
the Salvadoran officer feel that he is the ''prime mover.''

Major Sweep Expected

In the next two weeks, Salvadoran troops are expected to begin a major sweep in
San Vicente and Usulutan provinces. The plan was initiated by the United States,
and so-called operational training teams of three to four advisers are based in
the two provinces in an attempt to insure that everything goes well.

The teams advise the provincial commanders on everything from planning to the
reorganization of the command structure. They will be based in the provinces for
the next six months, or about as long as the military is expected to take to
complete its objective of destroying the numerous guerrilla camps.

The advisers in San Vicente, the provincial capital, are free to move around the
city, but those in Usulutan leave the army barracks only under heavy guard
because the city is not considered secure.

Mobil training teams that teach basic skills are also stationed in the provinces
of San Vicente and La Union.

14 Advisers at Army Base

Fourteen advisers are working at the provincial army base in San Vicente, a city
that sits in a valley and was unprotected until the Americans suggested posting
guards on the high ground.

Inside the base last week, young Salvadorans were lined up in rows with their
sleeping bags. Three Americans shouted orders. Inside the officers' dining room,
two other Americans were setting up a display board for a class. Yet another
American sat reading through papers.

When asked why the commanders in San Vicente and elsewhere have been reluctant
to use small night patrols and other counterinsurgency methods, an adviser
explained that the existing command structure did not allow for such tactics.

''One of the biggest problems here is that they don't have enough officers and
so the commander ends up taking on all the responsibilities and then the
planning becomes ineffective,'' he said.

On a Professional Level

Some Salvadoran political analysts believe that some of the problems the
Americans are having in persuading the Salvadorans to use small patrols come
from the natural resistance soldiers have to taking advice from a foreigner.

Many of the advisers in El Salvador have been chosen personally by Col. John
Waghelstein, the group's commander and one of the army's leading experts on
counterinsurgency warfare. ''I've got everything from ultraliberals to the other
end of the spectrum, but that doesn't make any difference,'' the colonel said.

''We encourage them to keep it on a professional level. It doesn't make any
difference how brilliant you are or how strong your logic is, it all depends on
how the Salvos relate to you. If there is a lack of progress, the first thing I
look for is a personal conflict.''

Salvadoran officers interviewed were complimentary about their American advisers
and said more were needed. ''They do a good job, they have some experience that
we need, and they don't get in our way too much,'' said an air force officer.

Some Cultural Exchanges

If the Americans' military advice is not always heeded, the Salvadorans and
Americans have at least participated in some cultural exchanges. Salvadoran
officers have taken to wearing Lacoste shirts, chinos and trendy sunglasses when
off-duty while the Americans generally sport guayabera shirts, cowboy boots and,
for security, a sidearm.

The advisers, most of whom are veterans of the Vietnam War, differ on whether
they should be more involved in El Salvador. Some like to talk about how
American troops could end the war here in six months.  One suggested that the
United States move into El Salvador, Nicaragua and then Cuba.

He said, however, that the war was still being run by the Salvadorans and that
was part of the problem.  ''You have to be very careful how you give advice,''
he said. ''If you give it like an order, it doesn't work. This is their war and
they don't let you forget it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. advisor instructing Salvadoran soldier
(page A8) photo of U.S. advisor monitoring Salvadoran soldiers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

20,000 Cambodian Refugees Leave Thai Haven for Home

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 101 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 25


About 20,000 Cambodian refugees who fled to Thailand after a major Vietnamese
dry-season offensive in western Cambodia three months ago have returned home,
Thai and United Nations relief workers said today.

They said the followers of the ousted Pol Pot regime were voluntarily
repatriated to a Pol Pot guerrilla stronghold and settlement just inside
Cambodia.

The Cambodians sought refuge in Thai territory in early march when their camp 25
miles north of the Cambodian border town of Poipet was destroyed in fighting
between guerrillas and Vietnamese-led forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM THE ADMINISTRATION PAPER ON CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1438 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


Following are excerpts from ''Background Paper: Central America,'' a white paper
made public today by the State and Defense Departments:

Castro's Strategy

Fidel Castro brings to his renewed and expanded political-military activism in
Central America his own personal experience in achieving power in Cuba, seeking
to export revolution in the Western Hemisphere, particularly during the 1960's,
as well as nearly two decades of highly effective collaboration with the Soviet
K.G.B. and Soviet military. He also has cultivated close ties with the Palestine
Liberation Organization, Libya and pro-Soviet factions in Africa and the Middle
East in support of terrorism and subversion.  Castro has a method of operation
with the following principal components:

- Unification of the extreme left.

- Establishment of a ''broad coalition'' - led by the extreme left but including
some non-Communist opposition elements - which makes direct or ambiguous
promises of a ''broad based'' government after victory.

- Use of the ''broad coalition'' and systematic propaganda and political action
techniques to obtain non-Communist international support and isolate the target
governments from Western political and material help.

- Provision of Soviet bloc, Cuban and other anti-Western military support as an
incentive for extreme left unity.  This approach proved successful in Nicaragua.
It was then turned against El Salvador in late 1979. Similar efforts have been
made in Guatemala since 1980, accompanied by stepped-up covert activities
against Honduras and Costa Rica starting in 1981 and 1982. The rapid expansion
of these violent techniques in Central America is illustrated by the fact that
while the total armed strength of the extreme left in El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras and Costa Rica was estimated at about 1,450 in 1978, by 1981 it was
nearly 8,000.

El Salvador

Soon after defeating Somoza, the Sandinistas began training guerrillas from El
Salvador and other Central American countries.  This was the beginning of a
steadily expanding partnership between Cuba and the Sandinistas in exporting
subversion in the region - a partnership that has included the establishment in
Nicaragua of numerous guerrilla training camps, the transportation of tons of
weapons and the establishment on Nicaraguan territory of guerrilla command and
control facilities along with a variety of propaganda and covert activities.

During the first three months of 1982, arms shipments into El Salvador surged.
Cuban-Nicaraguan arms flowed through Honduras into El Salvador by sea, air and
overland routes. In February, for example, Salvadoran guerrilla groups picked up
a large shipment on the Salvadoran coast, near Usulutan, after the shipment
arrived by sea from Nicaragua.

In addition to vitally needed ammunition, these supply operations included
greater quantities of more sophisticated heavy weapons.  Deliveries in 1982
included M-60 machine guns, M-79 grenade launchers and M-72 antitank weapons,
significantly increasing the guerrillas' firepower. One guerrilla unit received
several thousand sticks of TNT and detonators from Nicaragua (only five sticks
are needed to blow up an electrical pylon).

Guatemala

In April and July 1981, Guatemalan security forces captured large caches of
guerrilla weapons at safe houses in Guatemala City. Traces made on the serial
numbers of U.S.-manufactured weapons revealed that 17 of the M-16/ AR-15 rifles
found had been shipped to American units in Vietnam in the late 1960's and early
1970's. Several vehicles captured at the safehouses bore recent customs markings
from Nicaragua.

During 1982, both Cuba and the Soviet Union increased their efforts to bring
about a firmly unified guerrilla command in Guatemala. On Feb. 9, 1982, a
Guatemalan guerrilla leader called a press conference in Havana to proclaim the
unity of the four principal Guatemalan guerrilla groups. The Cubans and the
Soviet bloc have continued to provide military training and support to various
factions of the Guatemalan insurgency.

Honduras

Our information shows that Nicaraguan agents and Salvadoran extreme left groups
have played a leading role in the Honduran operation:

- The Salvadoran guerrillas have links with almost all Honduran terrorist groups
and assist them in subversive planning, training and operations.

- The December 1982 kidnapping of Honduran President Suazo's daughter in
Guatemala was the work of a Guatemalan Marxist-Leninist guerrilla faction.

- Discussions reportedly were held in mid-1982 among the Cubans, Sandinistas and
Salvadoran insurgents about terrorist activities against the Honduran
Government.

- Captured Salvadoran and Honduran terrorists have admitted that explosives used
in bombing attacks in the Honduran capital were obtained in Nicaragua.

Costa Rica

Cuba and Nicaragua also have made Costa Rica a target for subversion. During
1982, for example:

- Cuba funded a new leftist political party designed to unify various leftist
elements and attract broader popular support.

- The Cubans and Sandinistas provided weapons and training for Costa Rican
leftist terrorists.

- Since the beginning of 1982, several guerrilla arms caches and safe houses
have been discovered in Costa Rica.

- In March 1982, the Costa Rican Judicial Police discovered a large arms cache
in a house in San Jose. Among the nine people arrested there were Salvadorans,
Nicaraguans, an Argentine, a Chilean, and a Costa Rican. Costa Rican police so
far have seized 13 vehicles designed for arms smuggling and more than 170
weapons, including machine guns, TNT, fragmentation grenades, a grenade
launcher, ammunition and 500 combat uniforms.

- Nicaragua has instigated terrorist actions in Costa Rica, leading to increased
tensions between the two countries. Although the Sandinistas denied complicity,
the July 3, 1982, bombing of the Honduran airlines office in San Jose took place
at Nicaragua's direction, according to a Colombian M-19 member arrested by Costa
Rican authorities on July 14, 1982.
Soviet and Cuban Propaganda Activities

The Soviets and Cubans met in June 1980 with several Salvadoran insurgent
leaders in Havana to establish a strategy for an international political
campaign on El Salvador. Evidence from captured guerrilla documents indicates
that the strategy includes:

- PROPAGANDA: Spokesmen should emphasize that the Salvadoran ''revolution''
represents the people and is fighting against oppression and for freedom from
outside intervention. The United States seeks direct military intervention in El
Salvador to keep the junta in power.

- INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT: Representatives should gain recognition and support for
the insurgents from a broad range of international organizations and political
and regional groups.

- U.S. INITIATIVES: Representatives should strengthen ties with sympathetic
American organizations and seek support from American politicians.

- PUBLIC POSTURE: From the outset, representatives should call for a dialogue to
seek resolution of the conflict. ''The policy of a dialogue is a tactical
maneuver to broaden our alliances, while at the same time splitting up and
isolating the enemy.'' Representatives should take up the banner of peace and
maintain that they seek only lasting peace and justice.

- HUMANITARIAN ORGANIZATIONS: The Salvadoran insurgents should establish a front
organization to funnel aid and money from humanitarian organizations.

Extent of Outside Support

Since the Sandinista victory in July 1979, both Cuba and Nicaragua have steadily
increased the size and quality of their ''revolutionary'' military forces. The
Soviets have played a major role in this militarization of the region.

Soviet military deliveries to Cuba increased dramatically in 1979 to an average
of more than 65,000 tons by 1981. They apparently remain at this level today.

The Soviet bloc, with Cuban support, has been assisting Nicaragua's large
military buildup which includes weapons, military equipment, airfields, military
bases and extensive military training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prime Minister Castro, and Humberto Saavedra

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAYS CUBA IS FOSTERING CENTRAL AMERICA SUBVERSION

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


The Reagan Administration charged today that Cuba was expanding its
''political-military activism'' in Central America and that Cubans, Nicaraguans
and guerrillas from El Salvador were jointly planning terrorism in the region.

The charges were contained in ''Background Paper: Central America,'' a document
made public by the State and Defense Departments. It portrayed Cuba as directing
subversion throughout the isthmus, working through both the Sandinist Government
of Nicaragua and leftist groups in other countries.

The document had little new information. One official called it ''a compendium
of background materials'' supporting the Administration contention that turmoil
in Central America is caused largely by outside interference. Nearly all the
incidents cited took place last year or earlier, and most have been publicized
before.

The document said Cuba ''played a major role'' in training commandos who raided
the Ilopango air force base outside San Salvador last year. It said Cuba had
financed ''a new leftist political party'' in Costa Rica. It charged also that
Nicaragua ''has instigated terrorist activities in Costa Rica'' and that Cuba
was trying ''to intimidate Honduras and its leaders into passivity through acts
of terrorismn.''

At a briefing on the document, a Defense Department official said 20 Honduran
leftists had recently completed a course in guerrilla warfare and related
subjects in Cuba, and that 16 more Hondurans recently arrived in Cuba for
similar training. He said this information came from a captured Honduran
leftist.

U.S. to Train More Salvadorans

Asked about reports that the United States would soon begin training Salvadoran
troops at a new base in Honduras, the official confirmed that 2,400 Salvadorans
would be trained in Honduras over the next six months.

The base where they will be trained, he said, ''will remain a Honduran
facility,'' although a 100-member American mobile training team will teach the
courses, he said.

In addition, the official said, 525 Salvadoran officer candidates will be
trained at Fort Benning this year. The candidates began arriving there this
week, he said.

In today's document, previously published material included reports of arms
shipments intercepted on the way from Nicaragua to El Salvador in 1981 and
charges that some M-16 rifles found at guerrilla safe houses in Guatemala in
1981 had originally been shipped to American forces in Vietnam.

The document said an airfield 23 miles north of Managua was used in 1981 to
service ''unidentified aircraft'' carrying weapons to rebels in El Salvador.
''This particular route has been closed down, but air infiltration over new
routes continues to this day,'' the paper said.

Internal Dissent on the Report

Some Administration officials reportedly argued against releasing a paper such
as today's because it contained so little that was new.  Among them, according
to a State Department official, was Thomas O.  Enders, who was Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs until today, when he was nominated
to be Ambassador to Spain.

Mr. Enders was said to have been overruled by others, including William J.
Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, who were eager to reiterate their
accusations about foreign intervention on behalf of leftist guerrilla groups in
Central America.

The Reagan Administration issued a ''special report'' in 1981 alleging that
''the situation in El Salvador presents a strikingly familiar case of Soviet,
Cuban and other Communist military involvement in a politically troubled third
world country.'' In 1982 the Administration made public photographs that it said
backed the charge that the Soviet Union was helping Nicaragua improve its
military installations. Both points were repeated in the paper made public
today.

Critics of the Administration said the earlier documents were not conclusive
evidence that leftist movements in Central America were being directed from
abroad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Salvadoran soldiers at Ft. Benning, Ga.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Briefing

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 830 words


A Lure for Tourists

T he six-month-old Vietnam Veterans Memorial is already one of Washington's
most-visited monuments. The memorial, a trenchlike slash in the earth near the
Lincoln Memorial, has been visited by well over a million people since it opened
last November.

Sandra Alley, spokesman for the National Park Service, said that at this rate
the Vietnam Memorial, as an attraction, was now third to the Smithsonian
Institution's Air and Space Museum and the Lincoln Memorial. On any given day
the visitors include hundreds of relatives of the 57,939 dead or missing men
whose names are inscribed on the memorial's sloping wall. Index books help the
visitors find the names of the dead. The visitors are easily the quietest at any
Capital monument. Some weep.

Since December, veterans' delegations from 15 states have taken turns keeping a
24-hour vigil at the monument. President Reagan first visited it on May 1, more
than a month after the millionth visitor.  On Memorial Day his Administration
will be represented at a wreathlaying ceremony by W. Paul Thayer, Deputy
Secretary of Defense, who helped raise about $1.5 million for the memorial when
he was a businessman in Texas.

Jan Scruggs, president of the memorial fund, noted that there had been no
demonstrations near the memorial because the veterans running the fund agreed to
regulations that keep demonstrators at a distance. ''We didn't want Jane Fonda
one day and Jerry Falwell the next,'' he said, referring to the actress-activist
and the active moralist.
No Time for Sleep

''T he enemy never sleeps,'' Lenin is supposed to have warned the Bolsheviks.
Well, Senator Jeremiah Denton wasn't even dozing when he learned that 28 Soviet
citizens were invited to an antiwar conference in Minneapolis. They were invited
under the sponsorship of two Soviet agencies, the Institute for the U.S.A. and
Canada and the U.S.S.R.-U.S.A.  Friendship Institute. The invitation was from
the Institute for Policy Studies, a Washington-based leftist research
organization.

The Senator, an Alabama Republican who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam, and
several of his colleagues wrote to Secretary of State George P. Shultz asking
that the Soviet guest list be vetted for members of the KGB, the state security
police. The department found that one of those seeking visas with the Soviet
delegation was a KGB officer, Alexander Astafyev, and another was a senior
intelligence official for the Communist Party Central Committee, Nicolae
Mostovets. The visas were denied, and the five-day conference opened Tuesday
with only 26 Soviet citizens in attendance.
From Glory to Mothballs T he National Aeronautics and Space Administration has
agreed to cancel plans to scrap the gantry from which the first man was
propelled to the moon in July 1969. It had wanted to scrap the tower at the
Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Fla., but was blocked by a suit in
Federal court in Washington brought by the National Trust for Historic
Preservation, a private organization that fights the destruction of structures
it considers of historical and architectural importance.

NASA contended that the trust's demand that the tower be dismantled and stored
would cost $1.8 million, and that the tower's reerection, if ever demanded,
would cost $8 million to $10 million.  After discussions out of court this week,
NASA and the trust reached agreement yesterday that the 380-foot launching tower
be taken apart and stored and that they would talk more about reassembling it as
a monument. The gantry is not designated a national landmark, but it is on the
National Register of Historic Places. From it went not only the Apollo 11 craft
that put Neil Armstrong on the moon, but also the Apollo that docked in space
with a Soviet Soyuz craft in 1975.
'This Is a Recording'

W hen the news broke that an American naval officer had been assassinated in El
Salvador, reporters needing information called the Pentagon public affairs duty
officer, whose assignment was to be on duty after daytime working hours. What
the callers got was a recording of the officer's wife saying she and her
husband, Capt.  Jerry L. Sexton of the Air Force, were not in.

Henry E. Catto Jr., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, said that
Captain Sexton had been guilty of ''an error in judgment'' and that steps would
be taken to prevent a recurrence.  Captain Sexton has been reassigned to
different duties, and other public affairs officers have been informed that a
repetition would mean an end to their careers.  James F. Clarity

Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LIFE PRISON TERMS GIVEN 2 POLICEMEN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 27


Two police officers were sentenced today to life prison terms and a third got a
sentence of six years to 10 years for convictions growing out of a motel brawl
that left one man dead.

''Let the message be loud and clear to the small minority who believe with
authority they are above the law,'' said Judge Robert Barton. ''The message is
that society will not tolerate police brutality.''

Judge Barton sent the three to Walpole State Prison. A lawyer for one of the
officers has already filed an appeal of the conviction and a lawyer representing
the other two said he would file appeals next week.

The three were found guilty May 12 by a jury that deliberated for a week.
Officers John McLeod, 38 years old, and Richard Aiello, 30, were sentenced to
life terms for second-degree murder in the death of Vincent J. Bordonaro, 54.
State law mandates a life term for seconddegree murder.

Officer McLeod received an additional two-and-a-half-@ to threeyear sentence for
assault. Officer Aiello was sentenced to a concurent eight-@ to 10-year term for
other assault charges. Officer McLeod will be eligible for parole in 17 years
and Officer Aiello will be eligible for parole in 15 years.

Sentence for Manslaughter

Officer John Macauda, 30, got the lesser term for manslaughter and was sentenced
to a concurrent five-@ to 10-year term for additional assault charges. He will
be eligible for parole in four years.

None of the officers showed any reaction to the sentences. But afterward,
Officer McLeod's wife, Debbie, and members of Officer Macauda's family fell into
one another's arms, weeping.

Rose Bordonaro, the wife of the victim, sat in the courtroom, her eyes closed.
She declined comment after the sentencing.  But a shouting match developed
between Mrs. Bordonaro's friends and the friends and family members of the
police officers outside the courtroom.

The officers were charged with beating seven men in a raid on July 23, 1982, on
the King Arthur's Motel and Lounge on the Chelsea-Everett town line. Mr.
Bordonaro, a bar patron from Everett, died a week later of head injuries.

Two officers, William McClusky of Everett and Michael Nadworny of Chelsea, were
acquitted of all charges in the violence. Officer McClusky had been charged with
murder and Officer Nadworny with assault and civil rights violations.

Facing Another Charge

Officer Nadworny remains suspended from the Chelsea department pending his trial
with five other Chelsea police officers who are charged with falisfying records
after the raid.

The prosecution said the raid, which it termed ''street justice,'' was in
retaliation for a beating that Officer McLeod suffered earlier at the bar. He
had been off duty at the time.

At the trial, witnesses said the police chased a dozen customers into a motel
room, broke down the door and beat the occupants with clubs and nightsticks.

Officer McLeod, bloodied and battered from the earlier fight, was then led into
the room and encouraged to ''finish them off,'' witnesses testified.

According to testimony, Officer McLeod then beat the men in the room, shouting,
''I'm John McLeod and don't you forget it.'' The three convicted officers took
the stand in their own defense while the other two did not.  Officer McLeod, a
Vietnam veteran, joined the Everett police on March 26, 1975. Officers Aiello
and Macauda both joined on June 27, 1977, and both had received departmental
commendations for actions taken while on duty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of police officers John McLeod and Richard Aiello

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM EX-PREMIER TELLS HOW HE ESCAPED

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, May 28


A former South Vietnamese Prime Minister, now a refugee awaiting resettlement,
says he had to abandon his wife and child as he fled his homeland in a flimsy
wooden craft under cover of dark.

Nguyen Van Loc, Prime Minister in 1967-68 under President Nguyen Van Thieu, said
in an interview last Tuesday that he made his escape on May 10 after hiding with
his family for nearly 18 months south of Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

It was his 14th attempt to escape, he said, but his wife and 11-month-old child
could not join him as planned because fishermen demanding money to keep their
departure a secret stopped them from taking a rowboat to the refugee craft.

Mr. Loc, 62 years old, said his wife had saved the money for the trip while he
was in a labor camp near Hanoi. He said he was sure she and their child would
get out of Vietnam soon.

Near Starvation Diet

Mr. Loc said he had spent four years in the camp before being returned to Ho Chi
Minh City.  ''I nearly died in the labor camp, where I was kept with about 1,500
others on a near starvation diet,'' he said. ''They let me return to Saigon in
1980 only after they felt that I was dying.''

Mr. Loc said two or three people died of malnutrition or disease every week at
the labor camp.  The inmates, most of them former South Vietnamese military and
security personnel, politicians and high-ranking Government officials, were
ordered to clear a jungle swamp, farm the area and build a dam, he said. They
were also made to cut boulders and carry them one mile to build their own homes
and the dam, Mr. Loc said.

''The stronger among us were made to pull the plows at a jungle clearing hardly
suitable for cultivation,'' he said.

Says Camp Still Exists

He added: ''Each person was given a monthly ration of 34 pounds of corn and some
salt. On very rare occasions we were given a small quantity of vegetables.'' the
former Prime Minister said the camp, described by Vietnamese officials as a
re-education center, was still in operation.

He said he was sent there after being held six months at a police detention camp
near Ho Chi Minh City after the Communist takeover of South Vietnam in 1975.

''I weighed 154 pounds when I arrived at the camp,'' he said, ''and only 115
pounds when I returned to Saigon.'' Mr. Loc, who was picked up by a French
container ship on May 12 with 32 other so-called boat people, said resistance to
the Hanoi Government was growing in southern Vietnam.

Thousands of Vietnamese are planning to leave, he said, and will not be deterred
by the Government's use of extra naval patrols.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VETERAN FIGHTING DENIAL OF BENEFITS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, May 28


A disabled winner of the Medal of Honor, denied Social Security benefits because
he was deemed capable of a full day's work, has appealed the case.

Roy P. Benavidez, a retired master sergeant in the Army Special Forces, said
today that the Government's move to cut off his civilian disability compensation
was ''an insult to my integrity, to the military and to all veterans.''

The action, begun two months ago, is part of the Reagan Administration's review
of civilians and veterans on the Social Security disability rolls. In 1980
Congress ordered the executive branch to evaluate those disabled and to
determine if they were too incapacitated to work, and charges were made that the
criteria were too strict.

Mr. Benavidez has been ordered to undergo a complete medical examination
Thursday. He said it would be the third such test since he appealed the
Government's decision in April.

Benefits Temporarily Continue

The Social Security Administration, citing privacy rules, has denied comment on
the case, but a spokesman said Mr. Benavidez would continue to recieve benefits
while the appeal is in process.

(In Washington Friday, Larry Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary,
said President Reagan was ''personally concerned'' about Mr. Benavidez, United
Press International reported.)

Mr. Benavidez, 47 years old, says the decision that he can work is erroneous. In
a telephone interview from his home in El Campo, between San Antonio and
Houston, he said a punctured lung and two pieces of shrapnel in his heart were
two of many Vietnam War injuries that qualify him for civilian and military
disability payments.

He was retired from the Special Forces, or Green Berets, in 1976, with an 80
percent disability classification. He said the Social Security Administration
sent him monthly checks for seven years because it originally determined that he
was unfit for any civilian work.

Two years ago he received the Medal of Honor from President Reagan, who cited
his ''conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity'' in saving the lives of eight
soldiers in Vietnam in 1968.

Reagan Lauded Him in Speech

In a speech made on a visit to San Antonio this month, the President said Mr.
Benavidez was a reminder that when soldiers ''place their lives on the line for
us, we must make sure that they know we're behind them and appreciate what
they're doing.''

Mr. Benavidez said today that that appreciation appeared to have disappeared.
''It seems like they want to open up your wounds and put a little salt in,'' he
said. ''I don't like to use my Medal of Honor for political purposes or personal
gain, but if they can do this to me, what will they do to all the others? It's
like someone's trying to make fun of you.''

Mr. Benavidez said his appeal, being heard by an administrative law judge in
nearby Victoria, Tex., was ''for my buddies more than for me.'' He said the
reviews of Social Security records had brought protests from veterans being
denied benefits on the basis of superficial information and cursory medical
examinations.

Mr. Benavidez said a member of President Reagan's Private Sector Initiative, a
group of businessmen who help those in need, called him to offer assistance in
finding a job he could do in El Campo, whose economy is based on farming. If he
is removed from the civilian benefit rolls, Mr. Benavidez says he will accept
the offer.

----

Congressman Presses for Bill

WASHINGTON, May 28 (AP) - Representative John P. Murtha, Democrat of
Pennsylvania, urged the Reagan Administration today to drop its opposition to a
pending bill providing on-the-job and vocational training to disabled veterans
who have been unemployed for 15 of the last 20 weeks.

In the Democratic Party's response to President Reagan's weekly radio address,
Mr. Murtha said the ''Administration's unemployment has exacerbated the Vietnam
veterans' problem of being the last hired and the first fired.''

Mr. Murtha said the Office of Management and Budget should release $3 million
that would put into effect Small Business Administration pilot projects for
Vietnam veterans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roy P. Benavidez

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RIVAL PARADES IN L.I. VILLAGE TO MEMORIALIZE FALLEN

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: SAG HARBOR, L.I.


In wartime they marched together, carried the flag together, grumbled about C
rations together and fought together. Monday, because they cannot agree on how
to honor their buddies who died in the nation's service, the local Veterans of
Foreign Wars and American Legionnaires will march in separate Memorial Day
parades.

The issue is how festive the holiday should be in this village on Long Island's
east end.  Last month, the local V.F.W. post said it would not participate in
the parade because the Legion - the parade sponsor for as long as anyone can
remember - planned to allow floats, antique cars and drill teams to join the
customary procession of veterans in uniform.

''I can just imagine the millions of Americans who gave their lives,'' said
Theodore Babula, the 37-year-old V.F.W. post commander and a Vietnam veteran.
''If they were on Main Street and saw that kind of celebration, they'd say,
'What did we fight for?' ''

A March in Solemn Silence

Instead of marching as usual in the Legion parade, Mr. Babula said the V.F.W.
would hold its own parade, a solemn affair with his men marching silently.

The legionnaires, who have about 130 veterans in the post here, say they never
meant to diminish the dignity of the holiday, and are angry with the 60-member
V.F.W. post for seceding from the parade.

The legionnaires say the V.F.W.'s action reflects the difference in attitudes
between the Vietnam veterans who lead the local V.F.W.  and the World War II
veterans who lead the Legion.

''There shouldn't be all this friction,'' said Jack Trunzo, a legionnaire who
was a staff sergeant in the Army Signal Corps during World War II. ''We fought
our wars, they fought their wars and now we ought to be done with it. Everybody
did his part and that's all that matters.''

Day's Spirit Is the Crux

The V.F.W. says that what matters most is the spirit of the day's activities.
''If you watched a mission go off with 14 planes and 1 or 2 didn't return,''
said Mitch Dombkowski Jr., a V.F.W. member who served as an airman aboard the
aircraft carrier oCoral Sea during the Vietnam War, ''this hurts you.''

''I've had enough,'' the Mayor, Ferdinand Runco, said the other day. ''The
American Legion has always had a parade, they invited me and I'm marching.''

On Monday, the two parades will cover essentially the same route, stopping for
wreath-laying ceremonies at each of the village's war memorials.

Events Begin 2 Hours Apart

The V.F.W. parade is scheduled to start at 7 A.M. Two hours later, the sound of
taps beside the World War I memorial at Otter Pond will signal the start of the
Legion parade. Later in the day there will be a softball game, but Legion
officials say they are not involved in organizing it.

In Sag Harbor, which has sent its sons to every American war since the
Revolution, the differences over the parade have turned friend against friend,
often after angry shouting matches, some of the veterans said.

The dispute began when George A. Finckenor Sr., a legionnaire who is also the
village historian, typed a letter on official village stationery urging local
civic organizations to muster up for the parade.

Mayor Runco said that he wished Mr. Finckenor had used a different letterhead,
and that village officials had not approved the fourparagraph, single-spaced
call to march.

Suffolk's 300th Anniversary

The letter said this year's Memorial Day parade would be ''augmented'' with
''additional units, floats, bands, etc., to help celebrate the 300th anniversary
of Suffolk County.'' Mr. Finckenor said the floats he had in mind were
dignified, patriotic ones. ''I didn't want anything like a Rose Bowl parade,''
he said.

Frank Onisko, the Legion's post commander, said that when the letter arrived at
the Legion post, he took it straight to the board of directors, who by tradition
advise him on what is appropriate for the parade.

''We said if there were anything like Minsky's burlesque, we didn't want it,''
Mr. Onisko said. ''We said no hoopla, and we said we want to screen everything
first.''

But the V.F.W. saw the situation differently. ''It is not the time to celebrate
with softball games and other tournaments and it is not the time to sell hot
dogs and soda,'' said Mr. Babula. ''It is time for us all to bow our heads and
pray.''

Age Diffference Is Cited

Volleys of letters to the local newspaper followed. ''There's a difference in
ages, and that's how it all started,'' said Mr. Onisko, who is 68 years old and
won five battle stars in World War II as an Army corporal in North Africa, Italy
and southern France. ''If you mature, you think a little differently about the
conflict you were in.''

But Mr. Babula, who was a petty officer third class during the Vietnam War,
disagreed. ''I can't see why there's a generation gap,'' he said. ''In a couple
of years I'll be a grandfather, possibly.''

Mr. Babula said that four out of five of the members of the V.F.W.  post served
in World War II or Korea. The Legion says that the majority of its members did,
too.

Mr. Babula said, ''Hopefully our stand this year will accomplish one thing, and
that is that next year we can all be back together as one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sag Harbor, L.I. photo of Frank Onisko, William
Muller of American Legion photo of Theodore Babula of Veterans of Foreign Wars

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Headliners;
Boat Personage

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


Despite his status as a former Prime Minister of South Vietnam, Nguyen Van Loc
apparently didn't make the ''A'' list for evacuation after the fall of Saigon.
Mr. Loc, now 62 years old, has finally made it out of Vietnam after 13
unsuccessful attempts, officials at the Singapore office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees said last week. Mr. Loc, who was Prime Minister
for seven months in 1967-68, told the U.N. officials that he and 32 other ''boat
people'' had been picked up by a French cargo ship off the coast of southern
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nguyen Van Loc

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW ROMANCE WITH TONALITY

BYLINE: By Tim Page

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4439 words


There is still a lot of good music waiting to be written in C major.  ARNOLD
SCHOENBERG (circa 1945).

''I certainly didn't sit down and consciously decide to become a tonal
composer,'' declares David Del Tredici. ''I fought it all the way. I came of
musical age in the 1960's, when atonality, whether you happened to like it or
not, was widely considered to be the only viable contemporary musical language.
So I had a lot of conditioning to shed. I simply set Lewis Carroll's
words in what seemed to me the most appropriate way - that is to say, tonally.
As a 'modern' composer, I kept waiting to write the obligatory dissonances, for
the wrong notes to arrive. But they never did.''

So says the composer of ''Final Alice,'' a vast, phantasmagorical setting of the
last pages of ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland'' for soprano and large
orchestra. Since its premiere in 1976, ''Final Alice'' has become a bona fide
contemporary warhorse. It has been performed by no fewer than nine major
American orchestras, including those from Boston, New York, Cleveland, Los
Angeles and Philadelphia. When the digital recording of ''Final Alice,''
featuring the soprano Barbara Hendricks and the Chicago Symphony Orchestra under
the direction of Sir Georg Solti, was released in 1981, it went quickly to the
top of the classical charts and remains a steady seller.

After many performances of Del Tredici's extravaganza, audiences rise to their
feet for a jubilant ovation. Clearly, Del Tredici has struck a sympathetic chord
with ''Final Alice'' -a hyperactive, exhilarating late-Romantic dream, which
sounds like ''Der Rosenkavalier'' on amphetamines: full of soprano whoops, lush
orchestral explosions and an agreeably cracked vision of the world.

Since ''Final Alice,'' David Del Tredici's work has been continually in demand.
In 1980, he was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for ''In Memory of a Summer Day,'' a
continuation of his ''Alice'' cycle, a literary obsession which dates back to
1968. A new recording of ''Summer Day'' has recently been issued on Nonesuch
Records, featuring the soprano Phyllis Bryn-Julson and the St. Louis Symphony.
At 46, Del Tredici may be counted with Philip Glass and Steve Reich as one of
the most successful classical composers of his generation.

With an older colleague, the Philadelphia-based composer George Rochberg (see
box, page 24), Del Tredici is in the vanguard of a movement that has come to be
known as neo-Romanticism. Some indication of its importance can be drawn from
the New York Philharmonic's decision to entitle this week's spring festival
''Horizons '83: Since 1968, A New Romanticism?'' The festival, which begins this
Thursday, will run for nearly two weeks and include six Philharmonic concerts.
There will be performances of works by John Harbison, Barbara Kolb, Lukas Foss,
Peter Maxwell Davies and others.  Del Tredici's ''All in the Golden Afternoon''
is the highlight of the opening program.

A bachelor, Del Tredici still lives in the same moderately sized loft in the
West Village that he has occupied for 10 years. It is sparsely furnished, tidy
but comfortable, the walls lined with bookshelves and photographs. An open
score, cluttered with pen and pencil markings, lies on a draftsman's table.
There are two upright pianos, covered with books on subjects ranging from James
Joyce to bodybuilding.

Chronologically, Del Tredici might be categorized as middle-aged, but the
adjective that immediately comes to mind is ''boyish.'' The composer is
athletically trim, neither tall nor short. His brown hair is cut short, his
engaging smile rather mischievous, and the laughs come easily. More than that,
he has endless enthusiasm, and when he talks about his music in a twangy voice,
he conveys the impression that he is a man doing exactly what he was put on
earth to do.

''Listen to this!'' Del Tredici runs to a piano, where he zestfully pounds out a
passage from ''Final Alice.'' ''These are such simple chords, you know, but it
was so thrilling to write them. I felt liberated, like I had discovered a whole
new musical world. I found such life in these chords!

''Music is not a religion, nor is it a duty,'' he goes on. ''It is
an entertainment. All that a composer really does is realize his own particular
musical fantasy with a certain selection of notes, rhythms and timbres. But some
of my colleagues were very upset by this new direction of mine. To them, writing
within a tonal framework was more than eccentric. It was somehow wrong -
decadent, even immoral. And, like most 20th-century composers, I was writing for
my colleagues.''

Like most such appellations, neo-Romanticism is an easy catch phrase, but it may
have more validity than most. Jacob Druckman, the New York Philharmonic's
composer-in-residence and the artistic director of its spring festival, notes
that much of the 20th century's serious music has been shaped by a rather cold
''Apollonian'' logic, but that lately one can discern a steady reemergence of
more passionate ''Dionysian'' elements in various idioms.

ARALLELS MAY BE DRAWN between modernism and Marxism, whose followers envision
history as an irresistible and logical flow.  Modernists have the same
breathless faith in progress -Bach led to Mozart, to Beethoven, to Wagner, and
on to Schoenberg, who, despite his disclaimer, struck what seemed to be a death
blow to tonality sometime around 1912. A true musical modernist believes that
although audiences have systematically rejected atonal music for 70 years,
eventually they will catch up to it, and composers have a duty to proceed
accordingly.

Despite the claims of social and cultural clairvoyants, the future hasn't worked
out quite as planned. A loss of faith in benign, rational man-made progress has
sparked a re-evaluation of ideals.  For their part, composers, freed from
believing themselves subject to a preordained continuum, are finding inspiration
in modes declared obsolete by a previous generation.

This same libertarian spirit is apparent in other artistic fields: One need only
enter a SoHo gallery or breeze through a small-press catalogue for abundant
proof. Artists who were raised on 20th-century pronouncements - representational
painting is finished, there is no such thing as an omniscient narrator, etc. -
are discovering that such strictures apply only if you want them to.

Some musical observers see neo-Romanticism as a sellout to popular taste.
Specifically, not all have liked Del Tredici's neo-Straussian flamboyance. The
composer Ned Rorem, who admires Del Tredici's ability to express humor in music
- ''not even Beethoven could do that!'' - feels that the later Alice works are
too long and overwrought. The conductor Erich Leinsdorf, quoted by John
Rockwell, a New York Times music critic, in his recent book ''All American
Music,'' dismisses ''Final Alice'' as ''totally without merit, parlaying the
major sixth chord into a 58-minute work.''

The conductor Leonard Slatkin, who recorded ''In Memory of a Summer Day'' with
the St. Louis Symphony, disagrees: ''David is almost single-handedly responsible
for bringing audiences back to new music. To the average listener, David's music
seems simple and charming, but for the musician, it's a technical and emotional
challenge of the highest order.''

''Child Alice,'' which comprises ''In Memory of a Summer Day,'' ''All in the
Golden Afternoon'' and two other sections entitled ''Happy Voices'' and ''Quaint
Events,'' is even longer than ''Final Alice'' - and more conservative in its
harmonic language to boot.  Die-hard modernists, such as the organized claque of
disgruntled composers which disrupted a 1980 San Francisco Symphony performance
of ''Happy Voices'' in Ann Arbor, Mich., are bound to disapprove.

Del Tredici coudn't care less: ''I remember standing on a corner, sometime
before I turned 5. I looked up at the flowers and the sky, and suddenly
had this overwhelming sensation of happiness that I would never truly grow up. I
want to trap the ecstasy of life within my music; I want to create sounds so
beautiful that time will stop.''

For many exalted listeners, it does.

David Del Tredici was born in Cloverdale, Calif., near San Francisco, in 1937.
He was the son of an Italian accountant and his German wife, and was raised in
what he calls a ''Catholic, nonmusical, supportive'' environment. Del Tredici's
first close exposure to music came when one of the nuns in the private school he
attended taught the boy to play ''Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star'' on the piano.
Soon Del Tredici was taking private lessons, and practicing two or three hours
every day.

''My first public performance was with Liberace,'' Del Tredici remembers. ''He
used to tour the fashionable hotels, just before his big success on television,
and he came to San Francisco's Fairmont. I won a local audition and played with
him. I still own the souvenir toy piano he signed and gave to me.''

At 16, Del Tredici was studying piano with Bernard Abramowitsch, and made his
debut with the San Francisco Symphony. During his brief career as a virtuoso,
Del Tredici played Liszt and Tchaikovsky concertos with Arthur Fiedler, and won
an award for instrumental performance in 1955.

But shortly afterward, the young man had a discouraging experience at the Aspen
Music Festival. ''I had an absolute ogre of a teacher.  Suddenly, all the joy
went out of playing. It became drudgery. I lost all interest in the piano.
Deciding that a change was necessary, I sat down and wrote my first composition.

''I found that I already knew how to compose. I had played a lot of Schoenberg
and Berg and loved their music. It was this whole new musical world, and it
thrilled me. And so, when I started to compose, I just created my own version of
German expressionism.''

This first composition was entitled ''Soliloquy,'' and it is the most dissonant
work Del Tredici ever wrote. ''A friend of mine was studying with Darius Milhaud
at Aspen,'' he says, ''and asked me to play my piece for Milhaud, who was a
certified Great Man. I was scared to death. When I had finished playing, he
looked at me and said, in that taciturn way of his, 'My boy, you are a
composer.' That's all it took. From then on, I resolved to study seriously.''

Del Tredici did his undergraduate work at the University of California at
Berkeley, where he studied with the composer Seymour Shifrin, graduating Phi
Beta Kappa in 1959. After graduation, the budding composer accepted a Woodrow
Wilson fellowship to do graduate work at Princeton University.

Princeton was then the center for the American atonal avant-garde.  A form of
mathematical, ultrarational serialism was in the air, and many young composers
reduced music to a collection of formulas and academic in-games. The image of
the composer as Faustian, ivory-tower experimenter was not new, but it was
nurtured and institutionalized at Princeton.

Some fine music came out of this hothouse - especially the wonderfully lucid
work of Milton Babbitt, the most outspoken of the American serialists - but
there was also much that was arid and pedantic, extolling complexity as the
highest musical value. One didn't just listen to a new piece of music; one
dissected it. And there was a general embarrassment about tonality among young
composers: One was atonal or one was out of the revolution.

Although Del Tredici studied with two of the least doctrinaire professors - Earl
Kim and Roger Sessions - and looks back on his piano studies with Robert Helps
as ''immensely important,'' he was unhappy at Princeton: ''I was there at the
height of the serial movement, with these structural autopsies being passed off
as fully realized music. The Princeton group seemed to be trying to take the
expressionist element out of German expressionism - trying to make a code out of
what had been a wild and mercurial emotion.''

So Del Tredici dropped out. After a year in Cali-
fornia, he came to Manhattan: ''I did the classic New York thing - played dance
classes, got a job in Jersey City conducting a choir, taught one day a week at a
neighborhood school in New Haven, and composed during my free time.''

In 1963, ''in a more resilient frame of mind,'' Del Tredici returned to
Princeton, where he received his M.F.A. the following year. At the suggestion of
his friend the composer Stanley Silverman, Del Tredici sent a tape of his music
to Aaron Copland, and was subsequently invited to participate in the prestigious
Fromm Foundation concerts at Tanglewood. ''I Hear An Army,'' to a text by James
Joyce, was given its first performance at Tanglewood. The soprano was Phyllis
Bryn-Julson, who is still working with Del Tredici today, nearly 20 years later.

The soprano vividly recalls the young composer's difficulties with the musical
establishment: ''Everybody else was working on gloomy tracts about the Vietnam
War or existential despair, shot through with fashionable pessimism, filled with
mathematical complexities you couldn't hear. David was different; he was writing
gentle, lyrical music with a sense of humor.''

Del Tredici has always needed the impetus of words to inspire his best work, and
James Joyce's
writings provided the momentum for a series of compositions in the 1960's.
''Joyce appealed to me,'' he says, ''because of his inventive wordplay and his
renegade Catholicism - an intriguing combination.''

N 1968, DEL TREDICI LEARNED OF an opening at Harvard, and quickly took the
teaching job. ''I gave up my wonderful $50-a-month apartment on Third Avenue and
moved north.'' He enjoyed the job for a while - one of his students was John
Adams, whose ''Grand Pianola Music'' will be heard at the Philharmonic's
festival this week - but soon found that academic concerns were hampering his
composition.  Although Del Tredici spent his summers at art colonies, he felt
''creatively dead'' for nine months of every year, and produced very little.

Opting for a complete change, Del Tredici moved to a one-room schoolhouse in New
Hampshire, to devote himself to composition full time. ''It was a disaster,'' he
recalls. ''Within two months, I wasn't sleeping, and I couldn't compose.''
Striking a happy bargain, Del Tredici moved back to New York, but took a
professorship at Boston University for one semester a year.

The young composer Steven Mercurio, a former teaching fellow at the Juilliard
School, studied with Del Tredici in Boston four years ago.  ''David taught me
the most important thing a composer can learn,'' he recalls, ''to have the
courage of my convictions, and to write the kind of music I enjoy, without
caring about what others will think.''

Del Tredici continues to spend summers in the country. ''The nice thing about
MacDowell or Yaddo or Tanglewood is that it's a bounded, very finite package of
time. You can be absolutely monastic for a while, get a lot of work done, and
then return to the real world.''

When Del Tredici is in New York, his day begins at 8 A.M., when he immediately
turns on the television set. As he eats a small breakfast, he watches the
''Today'' show and looks over yesterday's sketches. ''The television helps
remove the tension of working,'' he explains. ''I trick myself into creation.
After I have digested yesterday's music, I go to the piano, where I do most of
my composing. I feel like I'm in a trance when I go to the keyboard, like a pure
fool. I free-associate and inevitably it leads to something, which I play with
for the rest of the day.''

Del Tredici composes un-til 1 P.M., when he takes a break and enjoys his
favorite soap opera, ''All My Children.'' After that, he works until 5, and
follows this with physical activity - running a few miles, or a workout on
Nautilus equipment. At 10, Del Tredici has dinner, may visit with friends, and
then usually turns in around midnight.

''I need to work for seven or eight hours a day, for two-week stretches,'' the
composer says. ''I can't compose if I don't have time to think. I leave the
phone unplugged a lot of the time.'' Why not get an answering machine? ''Because
then I'd have to call everyone back.''

Del Tredici explains why all of his post-1968 compositions have concentrated on
the ''Wonderland'' books: ''I've always said that I liked the combination of wit
and whimsy and mathematical exactitude in Carroll. But I also like the hard edge
to the nostalgia. The Alice books are friendly, but just a little bit violent.
There are all sorts of possibilities for the composer.''

There are now six Alice pieces, each one progressively less dissonant:
''Pop-Pourri'' (composed in 1968, revised 1973); ''An Alice Symphony'' (1969);
''Adventures Underground'' (1971, revised 1977); ''Vintage Alice'' (1972);
''Final Alice'' (1976); and ''Child Alice (1977-81). Currently, Del Tredici is
setting ''The Spider and the Fly,'' by a Victorian writer named Mary Howitt
-''Lewis Carroll without Carroll,'' as he puts it.

Del Tredici is often asked if he would like to write an opera.  ''Well, it would
be a natural thing for me,'' he says. ''I'm already writing concert pieces for
voice that last longer than many operas.  But I've never started an opera
because the right text hasn't come along.''

Such concert pieces as ''In Memory of a Summer Day'' and ''Final Alice,'' with
their overripe orchestrations and high tessitura for soprano, remind many
listeners of Richard Strauss's operas. The comparison amuses Del Tredici. ''I
never knew Strauss's music, because I was a pianist,'' he says, ''and he wrote
very little for the piano. And they certainly weren't holding up the
conservative Strauss as a model for young composers at Princeton! But I've
learned a lot from him recently, and it's been a real discovery. Strauss was
probably the master orchestrator of all time. And so much more.''

Del Tredici's musical tastes are eclectic. Although he used a rock band in some
of the early Alice pieces, he is not fond of much popular music (''I used to
like the Beatles'') and despises jazz (''It's never meant a thing to me, with
its endless regularity and suggestions of smoke-filled rooms'').

''I love Schumann,'' he adds, ''for his quirky eccentricity and utterly
spontaneous feeling - those crazy fantasias, which the pianist has to re-create.
I also used to enjoy playing Liszt, because it was a challenge to make all that
bombast and rhetoric have a meaning.''

Among the recent American composers, Del Tredici deeply admires the late Samuel
Barber: ''He was a great artist - underrated and sneered at, a victim of
totalitarian modernism. Barber's music manages to be luxurious, decadent,
austere and deeply felt at the same time. From the beginning, he seemed
perfectly formed.''

Del Tredici's turning to a tonal idiom does not preclude respect for men such as
Roger Sessions, Leon Kirchner and Aaron Copland, all of whom have continued to
write in a thornier, more dissonant style.  The respect is mutual; Copland,
whose later, less frequently played music is often atonal, believes that ''Del
Tredici is that rare find among composers - a creator with a truly original
gift. I venture to say that his music is certain to make a lasting impression on
the American musical scene. I know of no other composer of his generation ...
who composes music of greater freshness and daring, or with more personality.''
Leon Kirchner concurs: ''In our desperation to be predictive and scientific,
composers involved themselves with silly numbers games. Bach and Beethoven never
had to talk about their formal command; they had it in spades. In David's work,
the technique is similarly assured.''

But there may be some surprises in store for the audience Del Tredici has won.
After six Alice pieces, and the similarly spirited ''Spider and the Fly,'' the
composer is thinking of setting the words of another writer, possibly William
Burroughs, the avant-garde author of ''Naked Lunch,'' among others. ''I like the
crazy electricity of his work,'' Del Tredici says. ''A Burroughs cycle would
have to be hard-edged, modern, dirty, raunchy, urban - the exact opposite of the
Alice compositions.''

Does this mean that his neo-Romantic period is coming to an end?  Del Tredici,
finishing off a can of Coors beer, leans back in his chair with a grin, saying,
''Maybe it's time for something new. My tonality is not historically inevitable,
you know. Remember, there are still a lot of good pieces waiting to be written
with 12-tone rows!''
APOSTATE MODERNIST
he ''neo-Romantic'' contemporary music to be featured in the New York
Philharmonic's spring festival signifies, in the composer Jacob Druckman's
words, a ''gradual change of focus, of spirituality and of goals'' on the part
of today's composers. Their music, Druckman notes, reveals ''a steady
re-emergence of ... sensuality, mystery, nostalgia, ecstasy, transcendency.''

The festival offers works by many composers - among them, Charles Wuorinen,
Donald Martino and Toru Takemitsu - who are decidedly not neo-Romantics. But in
nearly every case, one senses a lessened fascination with formal considerations
and a new desire to communicate. Wuorinen, a die-hard atonalist, without
compromising his formal rigor, has managed to make the result more palatable for
a general audience. On the other hand, the hypnotic, repetitive minimalism of
Steve Reich has grown beyond an obsession with structure into a near-symphonic
lushness. Content before form - an old idea revitalized. ''Wherever we are
going,'' concludes Druckman, ''we know we are in an era of fascinating change.''

Many composers have worked in an idiosyncratically conservative style for most
of their careers -Gian-Carlo Menotti, John Corigliano, Peter Mennin and Ned
Rorem, among others. Rorem, in particular, is annoyed by the publicity given to
recent converts to tonality: ''Everybody makes a fuss over somebody who quits
smoking, but never over the person who is smart enough never to have started.''

But the neo-Romanticism espoused by David Del Tredici and George Rochberg is a
reaction to the strictures of modernism - it is a style they have consciously
adopted, not something they have been doing all along, ''naturally.''

Rochberg is often paired with Del Tredici as the best known of the full-fledged
neo-Romantics. But there are many differences between them; Del Tredici's new
idiom came about through a bubbling enthusiasm, while Rochberg's later work
springs directly from personal pain.

Rochberg, a tall, gray-haired gentleman, whose abundant sense of humor never
interferes with his urgent seriousness, was born in 1918 and studied at New
York's Mannes School of Music and the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia. Rochberg
will retire this summer from the University of Pennsylvania after teaching there
for 23 years. When he arrived, he was one of the foremost American exponents of
atonality.  By the mid-1960's, he had begun to re-evaluate his esthetic, and he
will leave Penn as modernism's most articulate apostate.

''Modernism ended up allowing us only a postage-stamp-sized space to stand on,''
as he puts it. ''We cut the rest away.'' Rochberg's opinions are strong and
expressed with quiet conviction: ''I remember my discussion with the Italian
composer Luigi Dallapiccola in 1963. I asked him, rather offhandedly, what he
thought would happen after the 12-tone school had run its course. The question
visibly shocked him.  'Nothing,' he said. 'We're here. This is our language. I
see no reason to wonder about it.' ''

However, after the long illness and premature death of Rochberg's son in 1964,
the composer found he could no longer continue writing serial music. ''It was
finished, empty, meaningless,'' he recalls.  And so began his quest for a
musical language that would better suit his creative needs. During the next few
years, Rochberg made many experiments, including some ''collage'' pieces,
featuring quotations from different composers from the past and present, as well
as original music in different styles and from various perspectives.

With the Quartet No. 3 for Strings (1971), Rochberg broke ranks.  The work
contained a genuine late-Romantic, Mahlerian adagio: the harmonies diatonic, the
mood languorous and the melody presented in a fashion that was straightforward,
passionate and unembarrassedly tonal. Rochberg's move shocked many of his
colleagues, inspiring much commentary in conservatories and music journals.

In recent works, such as the fourth, fifth and sixth string quartets, Rochberg's
stylistic variants are more homogeneous. These works are Romantic in many ways,
but there is no sense of self-conscious synthesis, facile quotation or
reactionary throwback.  One listener compares the quartets to ''extremely late
Beethoven.'' Others may be reminded of Bartok, Mahler, Haydn, Schoenberg and
Mozart, but the final product has an intensity that is entirely Rochberg's own.

Yet Rochberg has not become a strict proselytizer for tonality: ''Everyone must
find his own voice. I reserve the right to compose 12-tone music in the future
-or any other music I choose. I've tried very hard to rid myself of that
stultifying conception of historical line, and if I want to contrast dissonant
chromaticism cheek by jowl with a more accessibly tonal style, I will do so. All
human gestures are available to all human beings at any time.'' - T.P.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Del Tredici at home, and in Greenwich Village
photo of a teen-age Del Tredici with Arthur Fiedler, 1955 photo of George
Rochberg

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

7 SUMMIT LEADERS PRESS THE RUSSIANS ON NUCLEAR TALKS

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1549 words

DATELINE: WILLIAMSBURG, Va., May 29


The leaders of the seven nations at the economic summit meeting called on the
Soviet Union tonight to negotiate constructively on reducing nuclear weapons and
warned that any attempt to divide the West would fail.

The statement came after daylong discussions on its wording, taking up
unexpected portions of the leaders' agenda, and leaving an impression of
divisions at a conference intended to express economic solidarity and converging
views.

But the statement, which was endorsed by France and Japan even though they are
not members of the military wing of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, had
the mark of a success for the Reagan Administration, which pressed for a firm
definition of the Western security stance at the conference.

French Objections Raised

French officials said they had initially raised objections to issuing a
statement on arms control before a statement on the main work of the conference,
economic matters, was made. They also said they did not wish to be committed to
positions endorsed by the NATO allies but not specifically by France.

In their meetings, the leaders challenged President Reagan's assurances that the
economic recovery in the United States is enough to bring prosperity to the rest
of the world, aides reported. They insisted that their economies will remain in
the doldrums unless American interest rates are brought lower and the budget
deficit reduced more than Mr. Reagan has proposed.

The leaders also moved closer to agreement on convening a conference to study
ways to change the monetary system. The French have requested such a conference.
(Page 38.)

Shultz Reads Statement

The statement was read to reporters by Secretary of State George P. Shultz in
the presence of the foreign ministers.  Mr. Shultz told reporters that the
leaders agreed on the importance of the issue in dinner discussions tonight and
decided then on making a statement.

As originally scheduled, the declaration was to have been read at noon, but
because of difficulty with the wording, the conference sources said, the
delegation heads, led by President Reagan, and the foreign ministers, worked on
compromise versions in the morning. The discussions about the missiles were
resumed after a lunch of crab, lobster, sturgeon, Virginia ham, southern fried
chicken, lox and bagels.

''We call upon the Soviet Union to contribute constructively to the success of
the negotiations,'' now under way on reducing medium-range nuclear weapons in
Europe, the statement said. ''At-tempts to divide the West by proposing
inclusion of the deterrent forces of third countries such as those of France and
the United Kingdom will fail.''

The reference to the French and British systems dealt with Moscow's insistence
that they be included in any calculations on NATO's nuclear weapons strength in
Europe. The United States says the British and French nuclear weapons are
independent forces outside NATO's control.

The leaders said they hoped an agreement would come shortly in Geneva, with the
negotiations determining the level of deployment in the NATO countries. Current
plans call for deploying the first of 572 Pershing 2 and cruise missiles in
Europe in December if cuts are not achieved in the Soviet force of 243 SS-20
missiles targeted on Western Europe and of 108 targeted on Asia.

The countries involved in the deployment, the statement said, will go ahead on
schedule.

Public Opinion Campaign

The statement also indirectly addressed the Soviet campaign to pressure Western
public opinion to block or delay the deployment.  ''Attempts to avoid serious
negotiation by seeking to influence public opinion in our countries will fail,''
it said.

Mr. Shultz, speaking with unusual passion, said the declaration was ''a very
strong statement put out by a group that hasn't made a statement on security as
such.''

He suggested that the statement had some elements of a response to the Soviet
warning on Friday that NATO's deployment could prompt a stationing of new
nuclear weapons in Eastern Europe. The Secretary of State called the Soviet
comments a ''very threatening statement across the bow of this meeting.''

France was not the only nation to raise objections to the statement.  West
Germany, Canada and Japan also expressed concerns, which led to a nearly
seven-hour delay in its publication and the impression that the delegations fell
into haggling and a degree of general irritation.

Why the French Object

Claude Cheysson, the French Foreign Minister, said that France did not know
about the projected statement until Saturday night, and that he was concerned
that it be the first item of news from a conference called to discuss economics.
For all his apparent dissatisfaction with the style used to prepare the
document, Mr. Cheysson said it would have been ''unthinkable'' for France not to
endorse it.

Earlier, another senior French official said there was wide agreement among the
participants on basic opposition to what they consider a Soviet nuclear build-up
but differences concerning the tone of the statement.

France's difficulties, the official said, involved its position as a member of
the Atlantic alliance outside NATO's military wing. The original American
version, he said, made apparent references to NATO that were difficult for
France to go along with.

''We're not at NATO here,'' the official said.  The same kind of difficulties
were apparent for the Japanese, the only delegation at the conference without a
direct link to the Atlantic alliance.

Differing Versions of Problems

There were several versions of what slowed agreement on the document, suggesting
the extent of its sensitivity. The French maintained that the West German
delegation found the initial wording too combative and insufficiently oriented
toward achieving a settlement at Geneva that would permit the allies to forgo
deployment.

A West German delegation source, in turn, denied this and said Chancellor Helmut
Kohl served as mediator in the talks between Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of
Britain and Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau of Canada, the two leaders he
thought represented the hard and the conciliatory positions on the issue.

Other European sources had differing explanations for the French position. One
was that Mr. Mitterrand, as a Socialist, may have felt that the statement,
coming during the British election campaign, could represent a disservice to the
British Labor Party, which rejects deployment of cruise missiles in Britain.

Another account was that Mr. Mitterrand felt that in offering French support for
a statement on the missiles before the drawing up Monday of the final communique
on the economic situation, he was losing considerable leverage in influencing
its tone.

Questions on German Position

Security issues, in general, forced their way to the front of discussions
through the first two days of talks.

Both Mr. Trudeau and Amintore Fanfani of Italy reaffirmed their support for the
NATO deployment and negotiation program. A spokesman for Prime Minister Yasuhiro
Nakasone of Japan reported that the West German Chancellor told him he foresaw
''great difficulties'' in installing the weapons in West Germany.

This brought about a quick reply from Mr. Kohl's spokesman, Peter Boenisch, who
said that West Germany was not expecting any more difficulty than any other
country in NATO during deployment, and that the missiles ''will be put in
place'' if the talks do not bring concrete results.

Mr. Boenisch said there was no accuracy in newspaper stories that said Mr. Kohl
planned to press President Reagan at a meeting Monday for more flexibility in
the American negotiating position at Geneva.  He said Mr. Kohl had ''absolutely
no doubts'' about the seriousness of the United States negotiating position.

Pageantry Goes On

The differences did not get in the way of the quiet pageantry of the summit
conference.

The leaders' day began at 8:30 A.M. when President Reagan led four members of
the group into the Bruton Parish church, which was built in 1715. Mr. Mitterrand
and Mr. Nakasone did not attend the ceremony.

The Rev. Cotesworth P. Lewis, who in 1967 criticized President Lyndon Johnson
over the Vietnam War, prayed that the summit meeting participants hear ''what
the good Lord would want them to hear.''

After the 17-minute service, the group went to the House of Burgesses - the
scene of much of Patrick Henry's revolutionary oratory. Inside, the participants
were left alone, without staff. Mr. Reagan sat at the head of the table, faced
by Mr. Mitterrand at its opposite end. Each of the leaders wore a light plastic
headset linked to an electronic translation system.

The group had lunch at the Raleigh Tavern, and then met in an afternoon session
at the Williamsburg Inn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of 7 summit leaders in Williamsburg

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS' FEAR: THEY'LL GET THE BLAME FOR 'LOSING' CENTRAL AMERICA;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


Although Democrats far outnumber Republicans on the House Foreign Affairs
committee and could easily prevail on most issues, including aid to Central
America, they have spent a considerable amount of time searching for bipartisan
compromises.

Two weeks ago the Democrats on the committee, who account for 24 of its 37
members, fashioned such a compromise on military aid to El Savlador, which was
adopted by a vote of 36 to 1. Now they are seeking a compromise on a proposal to
end covert aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Some Democrats say that in this quest for solutions that can be supported by
both parties they are coping with Congressional realities and the unlikely event
that Congress would adopt legislation that was supported only by the
liberal-dominated Democrats on the Foreign Affairs Committee. Others cite
growing Congressional concern over an abrupt termination of covert aid.

Underlying these arguments is the belief that this political strategy dictates
the search for the broadest possible consensus.  Put bluntly, the Democrats do
not want to be blamed for the ''loss'' of Central America; nor do they want to
be blamed for weakening the Presidency. Republicans made political capital in
1980 by charging that the weakness and vacillation of the Carter Administration
were responsible for both the fall of the Shah and the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan.

Speaker Opposed to Compromise

Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. disagrees. He opposes efforts to fashion a
compromise. The Massachusetts Democrat believes that the best strategy is
confrontation with the Administration over its policies in Central America,
which he considers to be futile. The Speaker believes that economic aid, not
military assistance, has been the key to United States successes abroad. ''Every
time we get into confrontation - using arms - it hasn't helped us at all,'' he
said last week. ''The policies over the years in which we've had successes
started with the Marshall Plan.''

An aide to the Speaker said: ''There's a sense of deja vu here for the Speaker.
He takes pride in the fact that he was one of the first big-city Democrats to
oppose the Vietnam War. To him, the question isn't 'Who lost Vietnam?' but 'Who
got us into Vietnam in the first place?' What looks like a safe vote may end up
being politically irresponsible.''

Representative Wyche Fowler Jr., a Georgia Democrat, is also mystified by the
negotiating efforts. ''I don't know why people are looking for political cover
on Central America,'' said Mr. Fowler, a member of the House Intelligence
Committee, which approved a ban on covert aid to Nicaraguan rebels by a
party-line vote of 9 to 5.

''I do think it's important to have as broad a consensus as possible,'' he said,
''but we've had no definition of what it is that the Administration wants to
achieve in Central America, outside of the catch phrase of containing
Communism.''

Adamant Foe of Covert Aid

Similarly, Representative Gerry E. Studds, a liberal Democrat of Massachusetts
and perhaps the most adamant opponent of covert aid on the House Foreign Affairs
committee, said: ''It eludes me why people search for bipartisan policy at all
cost. Bipartisanship is the code word that lets members go the other way on the
MX and duck the problems of Central America.''

He added, ''I'd be astonished if there's something that can be acceptable to
both the President of the United States and a majority of the Democrats on the
committee.''

But Representative Clement J. Zablocki, Democrat of Wisconsin, chairman of the
Foreign Affairs Committee, said, ''When we had the El Salvador issue, who would
have thought we would have obtained almost unanimous agreement?''

Some Democrats believe the Administration made the major compromise by
accepting, as a condition for continued military aid, the opening by the
Salvadoran Government of a ''dialogue without preconditions'' with the
opposition forces. But others felt the condition was too vague to be meaningful.


Practical and Political Reasons

The willingness of the committee Republicans to compromise on Nicaragua was
asserted by Representative William S. Broomfield of Michigan, the committee's
ranking minority member. ''Our side will support just about anything that gives
some flexibility to the Administration,'' he said. ''I'm not opposed to keeping
their feet to the fire, so Congress has some role in this.''

Democratic supporters of compromise believe there are practical as well as
political reasons for such a strategy. Representative Lee H.  Hamilton, Democrat
of Indiana, noted that a ban on covert aid to Nicaraguan rebels ''might get
through this committee and this House, but it's not likely to pass the Senate
and be signed by the President and become law.''

In this view, committee action would be a futile gesture that would waste a lot
of time and ultimately change nothing. Supporters of compromise believe it would
be far better to adopt a weaker measure that would be signed into law.

The prospects of a compromise are not encouraging, however.  The distance
appeared even greater this weekend, when the Administration announced it was
replacing Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, with Langhorne Anthony Motley, the Ambassador to Brazil.

Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida, who fashioned the El
Salvador compromise in more than 30 meetings with committee Republicans and
Administration officials, said that on covert aid to Nicaragua ''we have to make
an effort to find some common ground.''

''The main thing is to get guys to take a second look,'' Mr.  Fascell said.
''That's precisely what's happening. Everybody's talking to everybody else.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: A SERMON TO LEADERS

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: WILLIAMSBURG, Va., May 29


The Bible provides the first of the required scripts to make sense of this
weekend's economic summit conference as something more than a nostalgic trip by
democracy down Colonial lanes.

''The nations make much ado and the kingdoms are moved,'' says the 46th Psalm,
the text that inspired this morning's sermon from the Rev. Cotesworth P. Lewis
as he faced five of the summit leaders - President Francois Mitterrand of France
and Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan did not attend - in Bruton Parish
Church on Duke of Gloucester Street. Mr. Lewis is the clergyman who once
preached directly to President Lyndon B. Johnson in opposition to the Vietnam
War.

He was meek this morning, citing the 46th Psalm's quotation from the ultimate
summit dweller: ''I will be exalted among the nations.''

All had gone well on their first night's meal together, according to
relentlessly exuberant reports from the headquarters of the American hosts. No
leader apparently noticed that security guards had slipped and dropped the key
lime dessert pies on the floor in their zeal; the instant joke was that the pies
had been ''wrestled to the ground.''

But the first culinary bulletin was good: ''They loved the gumbo,'' said Michael
K. Deaver, the President's deputy chief of staff who has been darting about as
the summit's palate master. The opening offering on his agenda was a Cajun menu.

The morning psalm was far terser than the 46 pages of choreography mapped out in
one of the summit meeting's several step-by-step guides that are being treated
like holy scripture this weekend.

''The President and heads of delegations depart the Capitol and proceed to
Raleigh Tavern,'' read a midday rubric in the guide. Sure enough, there they
were on Duke of Gloucester Street, moving obediently through pages 21 to 31
inclusive this day, and trailed past the apothecary shop and scrivener's house
in this reconstituted Colonial ghost town by clambering gangs of factotums and
news gatherers.

They paused at the displays of Colonial wares along the way, and Prime Minister
Amintore Fanfani of Italy, showing some adaptiveness as drizzle hit the summit,
picked up a basket and used it as a rain hat.

Each turn in the agenda includes a lengthy session of photo posing to show the
world that the leaders are still together, and, yes, smiling once again, and,
yes, chatting inaudibly beyond camera range. They tolerated a full 30 minutes of
such summit aerobics in the House of Burgesses this morning, but eventually the
smiling chitchat sagged to some tabletop finger-drumming for President Reagan,
and blase doodling by President Mitterrand.

''If you think this is bad, they used to use flash powder,'' Mr.  Reagan finally
said, restoring some smiles as the camera shutters whirred like locusts.

The Colonial restoration, a monument to the arts of scrupulous replication as
much as history, has had the quality of a movie set this weekend, alternately
busy or eerily deserted as the summit scenario makes use of its various
telegenic buildings.

Taped and looped at shoulder level for miles along the village's wooded borders
runs a single ribbon of bright yellow plastic that serves as a continuous
security marker. It is an odd sight that clashes with the fife and drum motif
and, while it might inconvenience a swooping sparrow, it could hardly repel the
infamous Libyan ''hit squads'' and other interlopers said to be high on the
Secret Service's watch list.

There was a handful of demonstrators just beyond one turning of the tape, and
their message was tauter than the language that the summit foreign ministers
wrestled over today. It was: ''Repent and Disarm, Please.''

While the controlled beauty of the area has a costume drama look, it shows some
sci-fi time warps, too: a helicopter bearing a leader suddenly swoops down to an
old slave plantation. The summit principals finally sit together privately in
the Colonial austerity of the House of Burgesses, but their images flicker on
television screens in the room above. There the translators work, respeaking the
large and small talk wired up from the relatively relaxed looking scene below.
When the leaders dine in private session, the tranalators are there at their
elbows for what are termed ''whisper'' translations.

After a day's Colonial strutting and nuclear age conferring, President Reagan
retreats to considerable solitude at night, sleeping in the Providence Hall
estate house with only a security detail on hand and with none of his usual
staff principals in the nearby rooms. They are in adjacent lodgings where,
according to one account, White House protocol has relaxed considerably with
Sherpas, such as a Cabinet minister in one case, occasionally serving as
schleppers when a document or cold drink needs fetching.

''He dined alone at Providence Hall,'' one official briefer on the President's
summit eve routine began, sounding positively Jeffersonian. ''That's true,'' a
Reagan aide elaborated later. ''But he watched a little TV, too, in between
boning up on the summit.''

The news was a relief since White House aides, in their accounts of how serious
Mr. Reagan is about the summit meeting, had made the President sound like a
student grind on the eve of his S.A.T. exams.  It was a humanizing note, akin to
the moment on Saturday when the military band's endless renditions of ''Hail to
the Chief'' were eased for a teasing snatch of Beethoven's own summit
communique, ''Ode to Joy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prime Minister Thatcher and Gaston Thorn photo
of Prime Minister Fanfani

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vietnamese Refugee, 17, Leads Pensacola Class

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 84 words

DATELINE: PENSACOLA, Fla., May 30


A Vietnamese refugee who spoke no English when she came to the United States
eight years ago is now the valedictorian of her high school's senior class with
a perfect 4.0 grade average.

The student, Dung Nguyen, 17 years old, said today she would challenge her 334
senior classmates at Pensacola High School ''to do their best'' at graduation
ceremonies Tuesday.

Miss Nguyen, who has won a scholarship to Baylor University for premedical
studies, said she had especially enjoyed her science classes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Medal of Honor Winner Says He Doesn't Want Charity Aid

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 141 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


A Vietnam War hero who has been denied Social Security disability pay said today
that White House aides had told him President Reagan wanted to help him through
private aid groups, but he declared, ''I don't want charity.''

''I want what I'm entitled to under law, authorized by Congress,'' said the
veteran, Roy P. Benavidez.  Mr. Benavidez, a former master sergeant in the Green
Berets who received the Medal of Honor from Mr. Reagan in 1981, was severely
injured in a 1968 rescue mission in which he saved the lives of at least eight
other members of the elite Army unit.

To get the pay, Mr. Benavidez, 47 years old, of El Campo, Tex., has to ''be
unable to do any job in the economy,'' said Paul Simmons, deputy Social Security
Commissioner.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Why Poles but Not Salvadorans?

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 580 words


This is a story about a case of bureaucratic doubletalk, which is harmless, and
a double standard, which is not. The doubletalk is ''extended voluntary
departure,'' which means giving visitors to this country a port in a sudden
storm. The double standard is that the United States gives such refuge to people
from most of the world, but not to people from El Salvador. Why not?

There are refugees and there are refugees. Some come here precisely to find a
permanent haven from persecution - Jews fleeing Hitler in the 30's, boat people
fleeing Vietnam in the 70's. But others come here as visitors and are turned
into refugees, while here, by events at home. To force them to return before the
turmoil ends might be a death sentence.

The Ugandans, for example, who were here during Idi Amin's bloody last days ...
or the Iranian students in colleges across the country when the Ayatollah came
to power ... or the Poles visiting in this country when martial law was declared
in theirs ... or, now, the Salvadorans.

Some societies provide for temporary safe haven by law. American law makes no
such provision but this country has evolved an informal one, under the Attorney
General's prosecutory discretion: extended voluntary departure. That means if
you are in a class of people found to need temporary haven in an emergency, you
can stay. Even if your visa expires tomorrow morning, you have an extra six
months, say, to wait out the storm back home, maybe longer.

For instance, if you are a Pole who was caught here when martial law was
declared in your homeland in December 1981, your extended voluntary departure
deadline is about to be extended yet again, to December 1983. Over the years,
the Government has granted this kind of haven to other nationalities, too -
Cubans, Czechs, Chileans, Ethiopians, Nicaraguans, Ugandans and Afghans. Why
does this Administration refuse to grant such safe haven to Salvadorans?

One explanation concerns danger. State Department officials contend that the
violence in El Salvador is not sufficiently intense or widespread to justify
extended voluntary departure. It's a puzzling argument, coming just at the time
the Administration wants Congress to spend much more to help end the Salvadoran
violence.

It would appear to be precisely in our foreign policy interest to affirm that
conditions in El Salvador are dangerous, not to deny it.  Nor would
acknowledging the violence disparage the Government that the United States
wishes to assist.

A second, more plausible explanation is numbers. There are only about 5,000
Poles affected by extended voluntary departure but probably 100,000 Salvadorans
- or more. Not many Poles are able to sneak into this country to take advantage
of the grant of temporary haven. But officials fear that a great many
Salvadorans would try sneaking in if they became eligible for it, turning it
into a de facto amnesty for illegals.

Perhaps so, but what does that have to do with peril? If El Salvador is
dangerous, as the State Department reports in other contexts, then forcing
Salvadorans to return home may subject them to danger and death. Why does the
Reagan Administration err on the side of peril? Why not, temporarily, err on the
side of safety? Why let Poles stay but not Salvadorans?

Fairness, not to mention humanity, calls for a better answer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TOWN BATTLES MEMORIAL DAY APATHY

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: BOUND BROOK, N.J., May 30


One day about two weeks ago, Mike Colalillo heard that somebody had toppled the
27-foot flagpole at the War Memorial here. He could believe it -vandals had
stolen 20 flags from the memorial over the years - but it angered him
nonetheless.

The 67-year-old Mr. Colalillo had raised the money to build the memorial in
1965. Since then, every Memorial Day parade had ended there with a service for
Bound Brook's war dead.

The memorial is not much to catch a passer-by's eye - just an engraved stone,
four small flagpoles and one very large one, all on a grassy triangle next to a
gasoline station and across the street from a liquor store.

But in a small town - a mile-square town of 10,000 people, a town where almost
everyone knew any local boy felled in wartime - the memorial meant something.

Viewed as Act of Ignorance

At least it did to people of Mr. Colalillo's generation, those who fought in the
world wars or in Korea. The younger people, the generation of Vietnam and
beyond, did not seem to share the sentiment.

Mr. Colalillo saw the toppling of the flagpole as an act not of malice but of
ignorance, and one sign among many that Memorial Day had come to mean something
very different to the different generations in Bound Brook.

''It gave me a sad feeling,'' Mr. Colalillo said. ''Everybody wants to come to
this country to be an American. The foreign-born want our freedom, our liberty.
But, you know, our own American-born kids don't respect it. It disgusts me.''

Yet the parade stepped off this morning in Bound Brook the way parades always
have in the small towns that dot America like pinpricks on a road map. The
people who remembered wars felt passion and loss, even now. Their old and
unresolved sorrow is as much a Memorial Day tradition as a brass band.

Feeling the Poignancy

George Plesa, the Mayor, thought of his brother-in-law, who was imprisoned by
the Nazis and who is still reluctant to speak of it.  Michael R. Imbriani, a
state judge, remembered Mike Piccillio, the high-school baseball teammate killed
in the Battle of the Bulge.

Rabbi Aaron Decter of Congregation Knesseth Israel here recalled being an Army
chaplain on D-Day: ''I was in Normandy, and when the fighting was over, I was
asked by the War Department to make sure all the Jewish men got proper burials,
with the Mogen David, the Star of David. And I buried hundreds of them myself. I
felt the poignancy so very strongly.

''And when I returned home in 1946, it was difficult for me to perform any more
burials. I thought of Normandy constantly, and Memorial Day brings it up. Every
Memorial Day, I think of the extreme waste of our greatest national resource,
our young men.''

As he spoke, the parade commenced. There were the high-school band and the Cub
Scouts and the Brownies. The National Guard rode in three tanks, and the John F.
Kennedy Democratic Club rode in a green convertible. As the heads of the
marchers bobbed by, it became evident how many of those heads were gray-haired.

Contribution of Immigrants

''The younger people, I don't think they associate Memorial Day with what it is
- a memorial,'' Mayor Plesa said. ''The Cub Scouts, the Brownies - they know
they're representing themselves for something, but they don't know exactly what.
Maybe their parents will tell them later.''

There would be a lot to tell. The British and the Americans fought a battle for
Bound Brook, about 40 miles southwest of New York. Some local people say the
Stars and Stripes flew for the first time at a nearby encampment.

And when the immigrants flocked here, they proved their muster as Americans by
going to war for an adopted land. Outside the public library, where the parade
began, is a stone engraved with the names of the Bound Brook men who fought in
World War I. They are the names of new Americans and their offspring, from
Vincenzo Abbodante to Henry G. Zimmerman.

From that marker, the parade moved down Hamilton Street to Main Street, past
Borough Hall and the Ivy Hook and Ladder Company, past the Good Times Tavern and
S. Klompus & Company, past the train station where Franklin D. Roosevelt once
campaigned.

Plenty of Empty Space

Some families sat on porches. Two or three heads poked out of second-story
windows on Main Street. Women in plastic rain bonnets dashed into the street to
click their Instamatic cameras. But there was not a big crowd, Judge Imbriani
noticed.

''Ten years ago,'' he said, ''there were stacks of people watching. Now you can
sit anywhere on the curb on Main Street. There's plenty of empty space. And you
look in the parade -the only young people you see are in the bands, the Scouts.
All the others are older.''

He watched the Monte Carmelo Society's car drive by, carrying three adults, then
spoke again.  ''I guess it's apathy,'' Judge Imbriani said. ''Maybe it was
Vietnam. But no matter what you think of wars, it shouldn't diminish your
memories of the people who served in them.''

The parade moved the final few blocks to the War Memorial. All the marchers and
perhaps a hundred spectators gathered around a speakers' platform lined with
bunting.

Bugler Looks Back

Everyone listened to a few speeches, two prayers and a roll-call of America's
wars. Then, as always, Bill Burke played taps.  As he played, he said later, he
thought of relatives and friends who had died in war. He thought of his own
service in Korea. And peering beyond the bell of his bugle, he noticed how old
everyone around him looked.

''I was looking at the veterans' organizations,'' he said, ''and the younger
fellows just aren't coming in. The Vietnam veterans aren't joining. They called
Vietnam a 'police action,' but they died for the same things -liberty, freedom.

''There will be future generations who won't know their heritage.  They won't
know what this is all about.'' But some people still cared, for the large
flagpole stood in place today.  In the last two weeks, Mr. Colalillo had
beseeched his friends and neighbors, as he had to build the memorial 18 years
earlier. E & E Electric donated three lengths of pipe. A man named Jerry Mondone
assembled it. Mensing Concrete gave concrete for a foundation, and Romano
Construction poured the concrete and anchored the pole. Then, as always, Herb
Patullo planted geraniums beside the memorial.

''These days, nobody works for nothing,'' Mr. Colalillo said. ''But everyone did
this for charity. I told them: 'I'm just one man. I'm not Superman.' And the
people who helped me made my Memorial Day.  Because if we couldn't have put the
flag up, we would've had sadness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Boy Scouts during Memorial Day Parade (page A1)
map of New Jersey

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORKERS HONOR THEIR WAR DEAD

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS C. McGILL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


Early yesterday, William Tyler walked outside the balloon store he owns on
Metropolitan Avenue in Queens and tied American-flag balloons to some parking
meters, in honor of the Forest Hills Memorial Day Parade.

''I had a clothing store last year, and business nearly died,'' he said. ''So, I
went into the balloon business, and it has been great.  Only in America could
you do that.''

Blast and a Puff of Smoke

With a howitzer blast and a puff of smoke, the parade began. It was led by a
World War II veteran, Joseph Schaeffer, who was followed by politicians, the
Naval Reserve, marines, troop carriers, howitzers and a group of Boy Scouts
playing glockenspiels. In front of Mr.  Tyler's store, people stood and waved
flags, cheered, and shed tears.

Memorial Day celebrations were held yesterday across the country.  In Pearl
Harbor, a service was held for those killed there on Dec. 7, 1941. In St. Louis,
a Memorial Day riverboat race was held, and at Arlington National Cemetery in
Virginia, thousands of people attended the annual wreath-laying ceremony at the
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.

Among the parades in the metropolitan area were those in Manhattan; the Little
Neck-Douglaston area of Queens; the Bronx; Calverton, L.I., and Croton-on-Hudson
in Westchester.

On the deck of the aircraft carrier Intrepid, in the Hudson River, a memorial
service was held for Robert McNaugh, the marine killed last month in Beirut,
Lebanon.

The area's weather varied from overcast skies and light drizzle to scattered
thunderstorms that became heavy later in the day.  At Mr. Tyler's store, many
parade watchers knew those in the parade, as well as each other. Ivan Strickon,
for example, watched the parade with binoculars as it started far up on
Metropolitan Avenue.

''You can see Assemblyman Seminerio,'' Mr. Strickon reported to several friends.
''And there's Joe Devoy, president of the Forest Hills Community and Civic
Association, and there's the Congressional Medal of Honor winner who leads the
parade every year.''

One of Mr. Strickon's friends, John Dillon, stood behind his 2-year-old
daughter, Joanna, who watched the parade from a stroller decorated with an
American flag. ''Joanna's grandfather was a prisoner of war in Metz, France,
during World War II,'' Mr. Dillon said. ''We have him to thank.''

Anna Eckerle, standing on the curb across the street, waved and clapped often
during the parade. Her husband had fought in World War I.

''He's buried in Farmingdale, Long Island,'' Mrs. Eckerle said. ''I would have
visited him today, but I couldn't make it, so I prayed for him and came here.
It's about the best I can do. He deserves it, and the parade shows our respect
to our country, too.''

A parking meter away, Edward Wasniewski, a Vietnam veteran, sat on the curb with
his wife, Peggy, and his two sons, Andrew and Daniel.

'To Remember the Dead'

''The parade makes me feel good,'' Mr. Wasniewski said. ''It's good to see
people come out like this, to remember the dead. It makes me feel that everybody
is together in this community and in this country.''

His sons pointed and smiled when a 42-foot model of the battleship Missouri
rolled by, followed by a dozen or so antique cars and a Boy Scout band playing
''America the Beautiful.''

''One time, we were crossing a rice paddy,'' Mr. Wasniewski said, remembering
his tour in Vietnam. ''The Vietcong just opened fire on us, and we lost three
men. Today, I'm thinking about them, and about all the other kids who died.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Janet Blum

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 1, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BEE WASTE IS SUSPECTED AS 'YELLOW RAIN' SOURCE

BYLINE: BY PHILIP M. BOFFEY Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, May 31


One of the nation's leading experts on chemical and biological warfare presented
evidence today that the ''yellow rain,'' a substance that the United States
Government contends is being sprayed as a toxic weapon by Communist planes in
Southeast Asia, may be little more than bee excrement.

Dr. Matthew S. Meselson, a professor of biochemistry from Harvard University,
displayed photographs taken through light and electron microscopes that he said
showed samples of yellow rain collected in Laos and Thailand bearing a strong
resemblance to samples of bee excrement collected recently in Cambridge, Mass.

Dr. Meselson said he was advancing ''a strong hypothesis'' but not ''conclusive
proof'' that yellow rain was a natural part of the environment in Southeast
Asia. Although pollen has previously been found in at least nine samples of
yellow rain, Dr. Meselson said, this is the first time anyone had tied it to the
excrement of bees, which are ubiquitous in Southeast Asia. Dr. Meselson said the
new evidence ''opens up the realm of natural explanations for yellow rain in a
way not done previously.''

Pollen Grains Were Found

He said that a sample of yellow rain collected from Thailand by official
Canadian observers in February 1982 contained pollen grains that looked similar
under his light microscope to pollen grains found in bee excrement scraped from
a leaf in Cambridge.

And he said a sample of yellow rain collected from Laos in 1981 by unofficial
observers and ultimately presented to ABC News contained bee hairs and pollen
grains similar to those found in bee excrement scraped from a car in the Harvard
parking lot this month.

Dr. Meselson also distributed a statement, endorsed by four other scientists
with relevant expertise, that asserted, ''It is possible that yellow rain is bee
excrement.'' The four endorsers were Thomas D. Seeley, professor of biology at
Yale University, an expert on the bees of Southeast Asia; Peter S. Ashton,
director of the arboretum at Harvard; Joan W. Nowicke, an expert on pollen, a
key food of bees, at the Smithsonian Institution, and Julian Perry Robinson, an
expert on chemical and biological warfare at the University of Sussex in
England.

Dr. Meselson and Dr. Seeley spoke at a news conference and symposium today at
the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Contrasts With U.S. Position

The bee hypothesis stands in contrast to the official United States position
that yellow rain is a form of toxic warfare directed by the Soviet Union. Last
year President Reagan told the United Nations that there was ''conclusive
evidence'' that the Soviet Union had provided toxins for use by Communist forces
in Laos and Cambodia.  State Department officials had argued that yellow rain
was a man-made substance that almost certainly did not occur naturally in
Southeast Asia.

The officials had suggested the pollen found previously in some samples of
yellow rain might have been put there deliberately as a carrying agent to
disperse the mycotoxins, poisons produced by fungi, and allow them to be inhaled
by humans.

Dr. Meselson said that his sample of yellow rain from Thailand came from the
same batch of material the State Department cited as evidence of a yellow rain
attack and that his sample of yellow rain from Laos came from the same batch
that had been tested for ABC News and found to contain mycotoxins.

State Department officials said in Washington today they had not seen the
Meselson report and thus would have no immediate comment.  Dr. Seeley said the
honeybees found in Southeast Asia, three species of the genus apis, collect
pollen from a wide variety of flowering plants and bring it back to the nest,
where young bees consume it for protein and fat. As the pollen grains move
through the bees' digestive system, the inner core of nutrients is extracted and
a hard outer husk is left to accumulate near the bees' rectum, sometimes
accounting for a substantial fraction of the bees' weight.

Bees Take 'Cleansing Flight'

Every so often, the bees take a ''cleansing flight,'' he said, and drop the
excrement in roughly a 50-yard radius of their nest. A single tree will
typically contain 100,000 bees and an occasional tree can have more than a
million bees, Dr. Seeley said, providing plenty of bees to spray yellow spots on
the vegetation and ground nearby.

Dr. Meselson said the honeybees in Cambridge, a related species of the genus
apis, also left droppings around their hives, although few people noticed unless
their cars were badly stained. ''The stuff is everywhere,'' he said. It has a
wet acrid smell at first, then becomes waxy and eventually powdery, Dr. Meselson
added

Dr. Meselson expanded on his views in an interview. He acknowledged that the bee
theory did not explain why small amounts of mycotoxins have been found in
samples of yellow rain and in the blood, urine and tissues of villagers who said
they were sprayed with yellow rain. But he suggested the mycotoxins might well
be of natural origin, too.

One Possible Origin

One possibility, he suggested, was that spores from fungi found in Southeast
Asia might float through the air and land on the bee droppings, where they grew
and produced toxins. No one has studied that possibility, Dr. Meselson said, but
traces of fungus have been found in the spots associated with alleged yellow
rain attacks in Southeast Asia and in bee droppings in Cambridge, and the fungi
in Southeast Asia are known to produce toxins though not necessarily the
mycotoxins found in yellow rain.

Dr. Meselson said he was not saying there was ''no chemical warfare'' of any
kind being waged in Southeast Asia but simply that the evidence adduced so far
left the question open. If toxic chemicals were being dropped, he said, the
yellow spots might have nothing to do with it.

Dr. Meselson said that yellow rain spots had the same general appearance, size
and color as bee excrement, often accumulated over several days as do bee
droppings, and covered the same approximate area at the same approximate density
as bee droppings.

He said the pollen found in yellow rain spots came from a diversity of plant
families that were common in Southeast Asia and are visited by bees.

Dr. Meselson's views on toxic warfare generally command wide attention in
scientific and governmental circles. Over the years, he has been a consultant on
chemical and biological warfare to the White House, the Defense Department, the
State Department and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. He has also
published scientific papers on toxic warfare and headed an assessment of the
damage caused by chemical defoliants in Vietnam that was sponsored by the
Association for the Advancement of Science.

Dr. Meselson challenged the Government to allow outside scientists, as well as
its own investigators, to conduct further tests on yellow rain samples to
establish the truth or falsity of the bee hyothesis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of flowers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 1, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 955 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
EXILED IN PARADISE. German Refugee Artists and Intellectuals in America from the
1930's to the Present. By An- thony Heilbut. 506 pages. Viking. $20.

IT'S a highly complex story that Anthony Heilbut has undertaken to tell in his
ironically titled ''Exiled in Paradise,'' an account of the artists and writers
who fled to America because of the rise of Nazism. Mr. Heilbut's cast of
characters includes such disparate types as Thomas Mann, Lotte Lenya, Peter F.
Drucker, Billy Wilder, Fritz Perls and Hans Bethe, to name just a handful of the
dozens of people covered in this group portrait and social history.

And the experiences they lived through were equally various - not only exile
from the old world and adjustment to the new, but also World War II, the Bomb,
the birth of Israel, the cold war, McCarthyism, the Vietnam War and the shocks
and dislocations that they all provoked. The risk of incoherence and
superficiality in trying to cover so much material would seem to be high.

But as it turns out, Mr. Heilbut's subjects have more in common than they do to
separate them. The large majority came from Berlin and Frankfurt. They were
Jewish or married to Jews. They were writers, artists, teachers, scientists and
film makers. And the curve of their experience in America rose from shock and
disorientation to gratitude and celebration, and then descended to skepticism,
fear and, in a few cases, sufficient disenchantment either to make them uneasy
about America or to drive them back to Europe.

So with a little selectivity - a profile of Berlin in the 1920's to begin with;
a survey part way through of such Hollywood directors as Fritz Lang, Otto
Preminger, Billy Wilder, Douglas Sirk and Max Ophuls; and a concluding joke
about two refugees in the middle of the Atlantic, heading in opposite directions
and shouting at each other as they pass, ''Are you crazy?'' - Mr. Heilbut,
himself a teacher and the child of emigres from Berlin, has managed to put
together a coherent, insightful marrative instead of merely gathering statistics
and impressions.

More significantly, Mr. Heilbut's artists and intellectuals were almost all
profoundly defined by their state of exile and exceedingly articulate on the
subject. One among their number, the philosopher and writer Hannah Arendt, went
so far as to suggest that citizenship and language were the two of the most
precious attributes that human beings could possess.

So in order to distill the essence of what his subjects were about, Mr. Heilbut
needs only to describe their work - whether it is Theodor W. Adorno's critique
of America's mass culture as a potential device for totalitarian manipulation,
or Billy Wilder's film comedy on the postwar German economic revival, ''One,
Two, Three!'' For, having been exiled once, the emigres became obsessed,
understandably enough, with the conditions that might reproduce the experience.

Not that this distillation is always a simple matter, considering the variety
and complexity of the work in question. And in fact, when Mr. Heilbut tries to
cover a great deal of ground in a single chapter, his writing often sags under
the weight of too many facile transitions. But when the issues have scope and
are clearly defined - such as the contrast between the pragmatism of the New
School of Social Research on the one hand and the highly theoretical bent of Max
Horkheimer's Institute of Social Research (or so-called Frankfurt institute) on
the other; or the ideological warfare carried on over the years by Bertolt
Brecht against Thomas Mann - then Mr.  Heilbut's narrative is positively
exciting.

And when an individual is important enough to deserve a whole chapter to
himself, ''Exiled in Paradise'' is at its best. For it is here that the vast
accumulation of detail pays off and Mr. Heilbut can demonstrate in depth the
contributions of an Adorno, a Brecht, a Mann. It is in the chapter called '' 'I
Somehow Don't Fit': Hannah Arendt'' that he can dramatize in detail how the real
message of ''Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil'' got
distorted by the reaction of its critics. And it is in ''The Scientists and the
Bomb'' that he can underline the wisdom and moral courage of Albert Einstein.

The one thing I missed was an assessment of how deeply the German emigres really
touched America. This may seem like a silly point when every page of ''Exiled in
Paradise'' seems to offer evidence - when everything from best-selling books to
unforgettable films to the development of nuclear weapons can be credited, at
least in part, to the efforts of the exiled.

Yet there remain some observers -ranging from promoters of indigenous culture to
Tom Wolfe writing in his architectural critique ''From Bauhaus to Our House'' -
who have argued that what the German emigres offered was not deeply pertinent to
our society. Or to put the matter in its most nativist terms, New York and Los
Angeles are not the real America. Perhaps it's not that the question of
influence is too trivial, but rather that a separate book would be required to
attempt an answer.

Meanwhile, Mr. Heilbut has given us a valuable and stimulating overview. For
some readers, especially the children of generations of emigres, the book will
provide a background to their most basic intellectual assumptions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRADFORD NORTH: A SYMBOL OF LABOR PARTY ANIMOSITIES

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: BRADFORD, England, June 1


The Independent Labor Party was born 90 years ago in this old industrial city on
the Yorkshire moors, but in the last few years Bradford has become a vivid
symbol of the animosities that have shattered Labor's unity.

Nowhere has the fight between the party's left and right wings been more savage
than in the Bradford North constituency, where the most extreme element of the
left wing, known as the Militant Tendency, succeeded in installing as the
official Labor candidate a 49-year-old Trotskyite named Pat Wall. The right wing
and much of Fleet Street have pictured Mr. Wall as the hobgoblin of British
politics.

Incumbent Was Dumped

Ben Ford, who represented the district in Parliament for 19 years, was dumped to
make way for Mr. Wall -even though Michael Foot, the party leader, had described
the Militant Tendency as ''a pestilential nuisance'' and Roy Hattersly, another
Labor official, had said Mr.  Wall had no right to be the nominee. The Wall camp
took control of the local party committee, at least partly because the moderates
did not turn up for the long, tedious ward meetings at which the committee
members were selected, and the committee twice gave Mr.  Wall clear majorities
in the face of Mr. Foot's disapproval.

A poll of Labor Party voters in December by The Bradford Telegraph and Argus
showed they preferred Mr. Ford by a 5-to-1 majority. But the activists made the
choice, not the rank-and-file.

Mr. Ford, outraged, is running as an independent in the June 9 general election,
but he is given no chance of winning. ''There seems to be something of a
generation gap,'' the 58-year-old politician said at his campaign headquarters
in an old wool warehouse. ''I am not enough of a militant moderate, I guess, to
rally young voters.''

In the 1979 election, he took 51 percent of the votes, but his supporters seem
likely to split three ways this time: among himself, Mr. Wall and the candidate
of the Liberal-Social Democratic alliance, Peter Birkby, a 37-year-old teacher
who defected from the Labor Party and joined the Social Democrats after spending
most of the last decade fighting the left in the adjoining constituency of
Bradford West.

The split could well result in the election of Geoffrey Lawler, a 28-year-old
Conservative and public relations man, whose party often polls 35 to 40 percent
of the Bradford North vote - perhaps enough to win a four-way contest.

Asked how he would feel if his intervention helped to elect a Tory, Mr. Ford
betrayed the intensity of the feelings aroused by the long struggle. Anything,
he said, ''would be better than having an M.P.  with no respect for
parliamentary democracy like Pat Wall.''

Epithets Among the Old Guard

Arnold Hadwin, the editor of The Telegraph and Argus, said that members of the
Labor old guard like himself could not accept Mr.  Wall's militant Marxism.
Most, he added, ''don't make fine academic distinctions, and they tend to look
on Pat as a Communist.'' At the East Ward Labor Club, that was one of the
mildest epithets used by the men working their way through their pints of
strong, dark beer.

Nothing has done the Labor candidate more harm than a speech last year in which
he said that within ''a short period of time'' a Labor Government would have to
undertake ''the abolition of the monarchy, the House of Lords, the sacking of
the generals, the admirals, the air marshals, the senior civil servants, the
police chiefs and in particular the judges and people of that character,
unelected, unaccountable.''

Mr. Wall concedes that he made the speech - ''I am a republican,'' he said,
''and I don't believe in any form of hereditary privilege'' - but he says no one
has asked him about it in the campaign. In Bradford, he said, the issue is jobs,
with unemployment as high as 60 percent of the male residents in some public
housing projects.

''For 35 years, it didn't matter to big businessmen in this country whether
Labor or the Tories won,'' Mr. Wall said. ''Now there has been a radical change
in Labor, and that has created enormous fears among the establishment. And why
has that change taken place? Not because of speeches or organizing tactics, but
because of the economic conditions we face. Poverty is more and more a feature
of our national life.''

He rejected the idea that the left's insistence on a radical platform had hurt
his party nationally; the fault, he said, lay with Denis Healey and James
Callaghan and other right-wingers who had renounced the platform after it had
been agreed to.

''I support the basic theories of Marx and Engels, Lenin and Trotsky, because
they represent hope,'' Mr. Wall went on. ''I'm totally opposed to one-party
totalitarian states, to Russia and East Germany, China, Cuba, Vietnam. I think
the majority of people should rule in society, not a tiny number of rich people,
but that doesn't mean I'd put the rich in jail.''

'As a Human Being, He's O.K.'

A quiet-spoken man with 33 years of Labor Party experience behind him, Mr. Wall
does not come across as a fanatic.  (Even Mr. Ford says, ''as a human being,
he's O.K.'') That gives him an advantage in doorstep and factory-gate
campaigning, and he and his army of young volunteers have already spoken
personally to more than 30,000 voters.

Mr. Birkby, the alliance candidate, concedes the strength of Mr.  Wall's
organization but thinks he did badly in a recent television debate - a view
shared by others. He asserted that many Labor voters have ''concluded that Ford
is a lost cause and Wall is an alien force.'' His only task, he said, ''is to
convince them to support me and not the Conservative on June 9.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOK PORTRAYS KISSINGER AS A DOUBLE-DEALER IN '68

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1553 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 1


Henry A. Kissinger is described in a new book as so eager to have a high office
in Government in the late 1960's that he offered confidential advice to both the
Democrats and the Republicans in the 1968 Presidential campaign.

After the candidate for whom he worked, Nelson A. Rockefeller, lost in the
Republican convention that July to Richard M. Nixon, Mr.  Kissinger offered to
share the Rockefeller campaign's derogatory files on Mr. Nixon with Vice
President Hubert H. Humphrey, then the front-running Democratic candidate,
Seymour M. Hersh writes in his book, ''The Price of Power: Kissinger in the
Nixon White House.''

Mr. Hersh says the offer was made to Zbigniew Brzezinski, a Humphrey adviser who
was to become President Carter's national security adviser in 1977. Mr.
Kissinger was to become Mr. Nixon's national security adviser and, later, his
Secretary of State.

But in September, the book continues, after the Democratic convention had
nominated Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Nixon was the clear favorite in the polls, Mr.
Kissinger telephoned Richard V. Allen, Mr. Nixon's foreign policy adviser, and
offered to provide inside information through friends and associates in the
Johnson Administration on what was happening in the secret negotiations in Paris
on ending the Vietnam War.

Contacts Not Widely Known

Mr. Nixon has written in his memoirs that Mr. Kissinger provided him with
''information about the bombing halt'' ordered by President Johnson just before
the 1968 election and that this was a factor in his deciding to offer Mr.
Kissinger the job of national security adviser after the successful election.
But Mr. Kissinger's contacts with the Humphrey camp were not widely known.

Mr. Hersh quotes Ted Van Dyk, an aide to the late Mr. Humphrey, as saying that
in late October, at a time when Mr. Humphrey had started to rise in the polls
and Mr. Kissinger was aiding the Nixon camp, Mr. Kissinger wrote a letter to Mr.
Humphrey criticizing Mr. Nixon and offering his services.

The book quotes Mr. Van Dyk as saying that ''I remember Henry as being a
both-sides-of-the-street kind of guy.'' But when reached today at a conference
in Bonn, Mr. Van Dyk said that while he could confirm talking about the
Kissinger letter, he does not remember saying that about Mr. Kissinger.

When asked for his reaction to the book, Mr. Kissinger replied through his
office that he would have no comment because he had not seen it.

Names a C.I.A. Informer

The book as a whole provides an unflattering protrayal of Mr.  Kissinger and Mr.
Nixon in action in the first four years of the Nixon Administration. It draws on
previously published memoirs by both Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger, as well as
other books, and from 1,000 interviews that Mr. Hersh said he conducted over
four years.

Among other things, Mr. Hersh says in his book that Morarji R.  Desai, a
prominent political figure in India who became Prime Minister in 1977, was a
paid informer for the Central Intelligence Agency after his falling out with
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 1967. Mr. Hersh attributes this to ''former
American intelligence officials'' and quotes them as having ''recalled'' that
Mr. Desai was paid $20,000 yearly during the Johnson Administration and possibly
into the Nixon Administration.

Mr. Desai is described as the source for the Nixon Administration's assertion
that Mrs. Gandhi was planning to conquer West Pakistan in 1971 after
successfully defeating Pakistani troops in East Pakistan and creating the state
of Bangladesh, a war in which Washington sternly criticized the Indians.

On another topic, Mr. Hersh says that, in 1969, as part of an effort to force an
end to the Vietnam War, Mr. Nixon planned to threaten Hanoi with serious
military consequences unless it negotiated seriously by Nov. 1, the anniversary
of the Johnson decision to stop bombing North Vietnam.

This was previously divulged by Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger, but Mr. Hersh adds
the disclosure that among the contingencies discussed by Mr. Kissinger's staff
was the detonation of a nuclear device to block roads from China to North
Vietnam. He also says the Strategic Air Command was put on a 29-day combat alert
in October 1969, but that in the end nothing came of the planning. In his
memoirs, Mr.  Kissinger said Mr. Nixon ''never pursued the threat seriously.''

The book also refers to long-standing rumors that Mr. Nixon received millions of
dollars of support from the military junta that ran Greece in the late 1960's
and early 1970's. Mr. Hersh writes that the House Intelligence Committee
received sworn but unpublished evidence in 1976 from Henry A. Tasca, who had
been Ambassador to Greece, that Thomas A. Pappas, a Republican fund-raiser, had
''served as a conduit'' to the Nixon campaign from the Greek Government in 1968.

Although Mr. Hersh says there is no firsthand proof that the United States was
responsible for the coup that unseated Prince Norodom Sihanouk as Cambodia's
leader in 1970, he writes that Samuel R.  Thornton, a Navy intelligence
specialist in Saigon, said Americans had made contact earlier with Lon Nol, who
eventually led the coup, under the code name ''Sunshine Park.'' Mr. Hersh said
this is ''hard-to-ignore evidence that at least some officials in the American
Government were actively encouraging the overthrow of Sihanouk before 1970.''

Efforts to reach Mr. Thorton and Mr. Pappas by telephone were unavailing.  On
yet another topic, Mr. Hersh says the White House and labor unions agreed in
late 1971 to allow American grain to be shipped on foreign vessels after the
union leaders were told that such a deal was crucial to the success of the
negotiations on strategic arms limitation that culminated in 1972.

Discussion of Personal Strains

Mr. Hersh, a former reporter for The New York Times, won a Pulitzer Prize in
1970 for reports on the massacre of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai in 1968.

Much of his new book is taken up with discussion of the personal strains,
tensions and animosities within the Nixon Administration, including the
well-known efforts of Mr. Kissinger to undercut the effectiveness of both
Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird.
Mr. Hersh says, for example, that Mr. Rogers's Middle East peace-making efforts
in 1969-71 failed because of Mr. Kissinger's ''spite'' in refusing to cooperate.

The book gives only passing credit to the Nixon Administration for its opening
to China, the conclusion of strategic arms accords and the ending of the
American involvement in Vietnam.

Mr. Hersh said neither Mr. Nixon nor Mr. Kissinger would consent to his repeated
requests for interviews in preparing the book.  He says Mr. Kissinger, in
sharing confidential information with the Nixon camp, ''would have astonished
his friends in the Paris delegation who continued to trust him in the weeks
before the elections as part of the team seeking a settlement of the Vietnam
War.''

'Basic' Information

Mr. Hersh quotes John N. Mitchell, Mr. Nixon's campaign manager, as saying:
''Henry's information was basic. We were getting all our information from him.''

In his memoirs from that period, Mr. Kissinger said several Nixon emissaries
called him after he returned to Harvard, where he was a professor, after the
Republican convention of 1968. ''I took the position,'' Mr. Kissinger wrote,
''that I would answer specific questions on foreign policy, but that I would not
offer general advice or volunteer suggestions. This was the same response I made
to the Humphrey staff.''

He said the only question he was asked came from Mr. Mitchell, who wanted to
know if he thought the Johnson Administration would agree to a bombing halt
before the election. Mr. Kissinger said he replied that he thought one would be
worked out and therefore ''I advised against making an issue of it.''

He said Mr. Mitchell checked that opinion with him once or twice during the
campaign and gave him the telephone number of H.R.  Haldeman to call if he got
''hard''information. But, he said, ''I never used it.''

Mr. Hersh says that Mr. Allen received a phone call from Mr.  Kissinger 12 hours
before Mr. Johnson announced the bombing halt.  Mr. Kissinger ''excitedly
announced,'' Mr. Hersh says, that ''I've got important information,'' then went
on to decribe that an accord had been reached in Paris allowing the halt in the
bombing.

''My attitude was that it was inevitable that Kissinger would have to be part of
our administration,'' Mr. Allen told Mr. Hersh.  ''Kissinger had proven his
mettle by tipping us.''

Mr. Allen served as national security adviser to President Reagan for a year. In
a telephone interview today, he confirmed the accuracy of his quotations in the
Hersh book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Nixon, Nelson Rockefeller and Henry
Kissinger

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DOW ANNOUNCES PROGRAM TO ALLAY FEAR ON DIOXIN

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: MIDLAND, Mich., June 1


The Dow Chemical Company today announced a research and public relations
campaign to allay concern about dioxin contamination here.

Dow will spend $3 million in the effort, which will involve sampling soils in
and around the company's plant here, measuring dioxins in nearby streams, and
financing a state research program into reports, denied by Dow, of possible
links between dioxin contamination and apparently high rates of an unusual
cancer among women in the Midland area.

Paul F. Oreffice, the company president, said at a news conference here this
morning that the program would involve state and Federal officials, researchers
from the University of Michigan and other outside experts who will be invited to
cooperate in the research and to vouch for its conclusions.

Criticism on Several Fronts

Mr. Oreffice made it clear that Dow felt aggrieved by continuing charges that
dioxins from its plant had contaminated the Tittabawassee River and the soil
around Midland. Critics have also charged that Dow's responses on the issue of
dioxins have been at times evasive and incomplete.

Public worries about dioxins grew last winter with the evacuation of Times
Beach, Mo., when high concentrations of the toxins, contained in waste oil, had
been sprayed on town roads. Additional instances of dioxin contamination have
since been reported in Missouri.

''This effort will seek, through sound science, to reassure those with concerns
about dioxins,'' Mr. Oreffice said in a statement.  ''And it will aim at
providing that reassurance with a sense of urgency.''

Dioxins were a byproduct in the manufacture of certain herbicides produced here
by Dow until concerns about them led to a halt in the process about five years
ago. The Vietnam War defoliant Agent Orange, made by Dow at the Midland plant,
was one such herbicide.

Most Toxic Kind

Dioxins are a part of a family of 75 substances, chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins.
Most public concern has focused on a form known as 2,3,7,8-TCDD, the most toxic
of the dioxins and the kind found around Midland.

Although Dow says it no longer uses any processes known to produce dioxins,
state researchers have found concentrations of the substance in fish downstream
in the Tittabawassee River. The Federal Environmental Protection Agency is suing
the company to obtain information about its internal waste streams, but the
company maintains that this information is confidential.

Mr. Oreffice said the program would involve these elements:

- A quarter-million-dollar grant to the Michigan Department of Public Health to
investigate the reports of unusually high rates of soft-tissue cancers among
white women in Midland. The state had said earlier that it wanted to do such a
study but lacked the money.

- A review of existing research into dioxins' effects on human health ''to
answer this question: Do trace amounts of dioxin in the environment pose a
health hazard to humans?'' The review is to be conducted by ''an independent and
prestigious national scientific organization'' that could not be named, Dow
officials said, because it had not yet agreed to participate.

- An invitation to the state of Michigan and the Federal Government to work with
the company in sampling soil inside the Dow plant, in the surrounding community,
and elsewhere for traces of dioxins.

- A heightened search for any unknown sources of dioxin contamination inside the
Dow plant by the company and on its property. This would be conducted by Dow
with outside monitoring.

- An upgrading of Dow's own research programs into dioxins, including the
development of techniques to detect the substance at levels as low as parts per
quadrillion.

Results to Be Released

All of the research results will be made public, Mr. Oreffice said.  The Dow
officials said they expected the studies to confirm their own long-held view
that exposure to dioxins at the levels found around the Midland plant are
harmless to humans.

''The main thing that we hope to learn is that all of our science is correct and
that there is no danger at these levels,'' Mr.  Oreffice said.

Cathy Brown, a spokesman for the E.P.A. office in Chicago, said her agency had
not yet seen Dow's invitation to participate in the soil sampling and would not
comment until it had.

John Cook, a spokesman for the Michigan Department of Health, said his
department would probably need legislative approval to accept Dow's offer of
funds for the cancer study but that preparations for such a study were already
under way.

The Health Department released the results of a mortality study last month
confirming that the death rates from soft-tissue cancers among white Midland
women were above national norms in the county during the years 1960-78. But the
study cautioned that not all of the victims had lived in the county a long time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR LESSON FIT FOR THE SALVADOR SCENE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 544 words


To the Editor:

In his May 22 Op-Ed article, ''Salvador Isn't Vietnam,'' Ronald Steel makes some
patently fallacious contentions that should not go unanswered.  Mr. Steel
dismisses democracy as irrelevant to the Salvadoran conflict, saying that to
install democracy was not our purpose in coming to the aid of the government
there. But even if that may not have been our motivation, it is still relevant,
because it relieves, or at least should relieve, American qualms over the
morality of supporting that government. We should not have to apologize,
therefore, for supporting the side we do support.

Also, he blithely predicts that democracy will not flourish in El Salvador,
whichever side prevails. He ignores a significant precedent that refutes his
assumption: the Dominican Republic, where the U.S. intervened in a civil war in
1965 and which is now a democracy. He also ignores the Salvadoran elections last
year and the land reform program.

* Concerning Vietnam, Mr. Steel admits that today it is run by ''a vicious,
nasty dictatorship'' but then asserts that that ''is also irrelevant.''

Wrong again: That fact undercuts the vociferous argument made by those who
asserted during the war that the U.S. should not have been engaged in it because
our side and our efforts were immoral. Even if our purpose in engaging in that
war was more complex, the horrors perpetrated by the other side after the war
negate the central argument of those who urged us to step aside.

* Mr. Steel says he cannot find any American interest over who wins the contest
in El Salvador. But he himself, in effect, identifies that interest: ''El
Salvador is just down the road from Mexico.'' It has geopolitical proximity.

What Steel is ignoring is the intangible, conceptual, psychological factor, that
very important element of morale and the ''wave of the future'' syndrome. In
this regard, El Salvador is in a geo-temporal continuum running from Vietnam
through Iran and Nicaragua toward us.  So Kahn, Kissinger, Brzezinski, Scalapino
and Beloff see it.

* Mr. Steel says: ''American security was not much affected by who ruled
Vietnam. It is not today. There was no serious interest, let alone a vital
one.'' But he is mistaken here, too.

There was a very major interest involved - simply that the United States not
lose, as it did, after engaging in that conflict in such a major way. Again, the
reasons are the intangible factors mentioned earlier, at home and in the rest of
the world.

The full results of that debacle are yet to be seen. But the residual
demoralization in our own country today is witnessed in the inability to do what
is minimally necessary for El Salvador, in the factious debate over arms
control, here and abroad, and in the national frustration that was evident
during the Iranian hostage crisis.  ROLAND PAUL Westport, Conn., May 23, 1983
The writer was counsel to the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on security
commitments in 1969-70.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GORES, FATHER AND SON, A TRADITION OF ACTIVISM

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 31


More than a dozen years ago, when he was fighting the antiballistic missile and
questioning the Vietnam War, Senator Albert Gore paused to reflect on how he
approached the business of Capitol Hill. ''You can't fight every one of these
things,'' he said. ''I allow myself just three major issues a year, but on those
three I try to count for something.''

Senator Gore was defeated for re-election in 1970 and since has all but
disappeared from the Washington scene. But the name Albert Gore, and the uncanny
ability to count for something on the issues of the day, have endured on Capitol
Hill. The lessons of the father have been passed unto the son.

Today it is Albert Gore Jr. -''Young Albert,'' he is called, even by those who
never knew the older, somewhat more iconoclastic version - who is talking on
television about nuclear arms, is involved in the struggle over toxic chemical
dumps and is leading the battle on nutrition and safety standards for infant
formulas.

''There's a lot of the father in the son,'' said Senator Edward M.  Kennedy, the
Massachusetts Democrat who has worked closely with both men. ''They have the
same skill of analyzing complex and important issues. But there are also shared
values that come up in political families like that.''

Roots in Middle Tennessee

Their forebears crossed the Appalachians shortly after the American Revolution
and the two Gores trace their roots to middle Tennessee, the politically rich
corner of the world that spawned Andrew Jackson, Sam Houston and Cordell Hull.
And yet the two emerged from substantially different milieus.

The father attended a one-room school in Possom Hollow, worked his way through
Middle Tennessee State Teachers College and night law classes at the Nashville Y
and played the fiddle as he campaigned for Congress. The son, born in
Washington, is a child of Capitol Hill, reared with a gaggle of other
Congressional children and educated at Harvard and Vanderbilt Law School.

''If anything, the son is a little more sensitive to the subtleties of a
situation,'' said Senator Jim Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee. ''Young Albert is
more sensitive to the nuances, but he's also much better educated. Old Albert
was sort of 'up by the bootstraps,' but Young Albert had the advantages that a
Senator can give his son.''

Even so, the two Gores share similar styles. Senator Gore, for many years a
teetotaler, was hardworking, humorless and almost stuffy, but nonetheless
something of a Populist. His son, serious and businesslike, has some of the same
Populist instincts. In six years has held 1,100 town meetings both in the major
population centers of his district and in smaller communities like New Deal,
Gum, Almaville and a tiny crossroads called Difficult.

Similar Political Impulses

Their political impulses run along strikingly similar lines as well. Senator
Gore, a Southern moderate, described American involvement in Southeast Asia as a
''morass'' and, with great aplomb, once filled the cavernous Senate Caucus Room
with huge charts designed to show that in the late 1960's the United States had
such an advantage in deliverable nuclear warheads that the nation need not fear
a Soviet first strike.

Now, at the age of 35, the son, a former newspaper reporter, is at the center of
this decade's debate over military issues. He has tackled the nuclear arms
question, proposing to emphasize singlewarhead weapons over multiple-warhead
ones and arguing that these smaller weapons would add stability to the nuclear
balance of terror. His idea has become so widely respected that it was embraced
by a Presidential commission that examined the MX and other strategic questions.

Capitol Hill experts and nuclear arms specialists, in fact, note with some irony
that the plan former Secretary of State Henry A.  Kissinger put forward with
great fanfare this spring bore a striking resemblance to the proposal
Representative Gore put forth last year.

The younger Mr. Gore, who is all but certain to run for the Senate seat being
vacated in 1984 by the Senate majority leader, Howard H.  Baker Jr., came by his
interest in the esoterica of military issues almost by accident. About three
years ago, making his rounds of town meetings, he began hearing a lot of
questions about nuclear weapons.

'There Was Enormous Fear'

''I was kind of surprised by it,'' said Mr. Gore. ''I gave the kind of stock
answers you can get away with in this business, but then I asked a group of
students how many of them thought there would be a major nuclear war in their
lifetimes. About 85 percent raised their hands. I started hearing more and more
about it. It wasn't just that people were talking about it. There was an
enormous fear, enormous hopelessness.''

Since then, he has devoted considerable study to the issue and has become one of
the most outspoken figures in the House on the issue.  But even though he does
not have the advantage of chairing a major committee, he has made his mark in
other areas as well. He led the first Congressional hearing on the dangers of
toxic wastes, examining the situation in a small community in West Tennessee and
in a small neighborhood in Niagara Falls, N.Y., now known to the world as Love
Canal. He is the chairman of the Congressional Clearinghouse on the Future, a
Capitol Hill group that examines questions involving technology and life styles.
He led a Congressional inquiry into influence-peddling in the contact lens
industry.

''There aren't many guys who can shine around here without a committee
chairmanship,'' said Representative James M. Shannon, Democrat of Massachusetts.
''He has one of the most imaginative and aggressive minds around here.''

Speculation on the 1990's

That aggressiveness, the stock in trade of the political Gores, has earned him
several skeptical glances on Capitol Hill, however. ''If it's in the news,'' one
Congressional aide said this week as Mr.  Gore was being interviewed on a Cable
News Network show on human organ donors, ''then Young Albert will be there, on
television.''

Now, as Representative Gore is girding for a Senate race, his first statewide
campaign, some of his House colleagues openly speculate that if he wins that
race he may emerge as one of the Democrats' leading figures in the 1990's.

''He's very good at spotting issues and then working on them,'' said
Representative Norman D. Dicks, a Washington Democrat who has worked with him on
military issues. ''It's almost like he has an instinct for knowing what's going
to come down the road.''

Meanwhile, former Senator Gore, at 75 the chairman of the board of the Island
Creek Coal Company of Lexington, Ky., is venturing no predictions. ''Cordell
Hull once told me that six months could change a lifetime in politics,'' he
said. ''I'm hopeful for him, but I recognize that the flux of events, times and
issues makes for a hazardous journey.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Albert Gore Sr.and Jr.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER SAYS ASSERTIONS OF DOUBLE-DEALING ARE 'SLIMY LIES'

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 370 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


Henry A. Kissinger denied today that he had offered his services to both sides
in the Presidential campaign of 1968.

A new book by Seymour M. Hersh describes the former Secretary of State as
offering to share derogatory files about the Republican, Richard M. Nixon, with
the camp of the Democrat, Hubert H. Humphrey, and offering later by letter to
work for Mr. Humphrey at the same time he was giving the Nixon camp information
on the Vietnam negotiations being conducted by the Administration of Lyndon B.
Johnson.

''There were no derogatory files,'' Mr. Kissinger said in a telephone interview,
''only a compilation of Nixon speeches.'' ''There was no offer on such a file,''
he added. ''There was no letter to Humphrey. These are slimy lies. No one will
be able to produce any evidence to the contrary. Let them produce the letter.
They will not be able to produce such a letter.''

However, the book's assertion concerning the derogatory files was confirmed
today by Zbigniew Brzezinski, a Humphrey campaign aide who later became
President Carter's national security adviser.

In the telephone interview Mr. Kissinger also said he had ''absolutely no reason
to believe'' that an Indian politician, Morarji R. Desai, was a paid informant
for the Central Intelligence Agency, as Mr. Hersh says in his book.

----

Desai Calls It a 'Sheer Mad Story'

NEW DELHI, June 2 (UPI) - Mr. Desai said today that Mr. Hersh's allegation that
he was on the C.I.A. payroll while a member of the Indian Cabinet in the 1960's
was a ''sheer mad story.''

Asked what could be the basis of the charge, Mr. Desai, a former Prime Minister
who is now 87 years old, told reporters, ''Madness is the basis, what else? Can
I be bought? Has anyone tried to do so earlier? Do you believe the story? Why
did he not write it during Johnson's time?''

Mr. Hersh quotes former American intelligence officials as saying Mr. Desai
''was a star performer who was paid $20,000 a year'' beginning in the
Administration of Lyndon B. Johnson and continuing into the Nixon years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi to Hand Over More American Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 2


Vietnam will turn over to the United States on Friday ''a number of remains'' of
United States servicemen listed as missing in action during the war in Southeast
Asia, a Vietnamese Embassy spokesman said today.

The spokesman said the remains would be handed over after a threeday meeting in
Hanoi between United States and Vietnamese officials.

----

MANILA, June 2 (Reuters) - A spokesman at Clark Air Base said today that the
remains of 12 Americans missing since the war in Indochina would be brought home
from Hanoi soon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY LINKS DIOXIN TO IMMUNE FAILURE

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


A confidential study by a British scientist indicates that the toxic chemical
dioxin causes a long-term breakdown in the human body's immune system, a
Congressman who released the study and an Environmental Protection Agency
scientist said today.

They said this could be the key to understanding how dioxin, including that
contained in Agent Orange, a defoliant used by American forces in Vietnam, might
cause a wide variety of health problems, including soft-tissue cancers and birth
defects.

Representative Thomas A. Daschle of South Dakota said in releasing the study at
a news conference here that the Dow Chemical Company, one of the manufacturers
of Agent Orange, had known about the study at least since 1980 but never made it
public. Mr. Daschle, a Democrat, is seeking legislation to compensate Vietnam
veterans who contend that their exposure to Agent Orange had caused them to
suffer various disorders and caused birth defects in their children.

In Michigan, Dow responded by calling Mr. Daschle's announcement ''a textbook
case of news manipulation'' that was riddled with errors. A Dow spokesman said
the company had provided a copy of the British study, which Dow had no part in
originating, to the environmental agency in public hearings in 1980 about the
use of 2,4,5-T, a herbicide contained in Agent Orange that was once widely used
in the United States to control weeds.

'No Long-Term Health Effects'

''Dow doesn't think very much of the quality of the study and would place very
little credence in it,'' said Rich Long, a spokesman for Dow. The company also
said, as it has in the past, ''Dow's 30-year manufacturing experience with
dioxins has shown no long-term health effects resulting from dioxin exposure.''

Mr. Daschle said the study by the British researcher, Dr. A.  Milford Ward of
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in Sheffield, ''documents a long-term immune
system breakdown in humans exposed to dioxin some 10 years prior to their
examination.''

But Dr. Ward, reached by The Associated Press in Sheffield, said the Congressman
was reading too much into his findings. The researcher said he found that
workers exposed to large doses of dioxin in a chemical plant explosion about 14
years ago suffered depression of their immune systems that ''leaves them open to
minor infections,'' such as the common cold, but added that there was no
evidence ''of any increased incidence of more serious diseases.''

Dr. Joseph K. Prince, a toxicologist with the environmental agency's regional
office in Chicago, said Dr. Ward's study corroborated his own findings last year
in a study of railroad workers who had been exposed to dioxin in a 1979 tanker
car accident.

White Blood Cells Impaired

He said both studies showed that small amounts of dioxin could impair the
functioning of white blood cells, leading to a ''highly increased risk of either
infectious or chronically malignant disease.''

Dr. Prince, who is also a research associate with the University of Illinois
Medical Center, appeared with Mr. Daschle at the news conference.

Mr. Daschle said Dr. Ward's study had been prepared on a confidential basis in
1978 for an unidentified industrial company. He said he had obtained it ''within
the last five days,'' apparently without Dr. Ward's consent, from a woman who
''has asked that her name not be given out.''

The Congressman said Dr. Ward's study ''comes as close to a smoking gun as I
think we're going to find'' in pointing to dioxin as the cause of a wide variety
of illnesses.

Study Is Termed 'Irrelevant'

But Mr. Long, the Dow spokesman, said the study involved such large doses of
dioxin that it was ''irrelevant to the Agent Orange controversy.''

Dow announced Wednesday that it was undertaking a $3 million research and public
relations campaign to allay concern about dioxin contamination around Midland,
Mich., the company's headquarters.

Dr. Ward's study states that a significant percentage of several dozen English
workers exposed to TCDD, a type of dioxin, more than 10 years before they were
tested showed impaired functioning of lymphocytes, white blood cells that play a
key role in the immune system's defenses against diseases.

But the nine pages of the study that were released by Mr. Daschle do not specify
what levels of dioxin the workers had been exposed to, nor do they state exactly
how many workers were studied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

2D PLANT CALLED A POSSIBLE SITE OF JERSEY DIOXIN

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words


New Jersey officials yesterday identified a second site that may be contaminated
with dioxin and said nine chemical plants now in operation would also be
investigated for the toxic compound.

The Commissioner of the State Department of Environmental Protection, Robert E.
Hughey, said guards and the police had closed off the abandoned two-acre area in
the Middlesex County community of Edison Township, which was the site of the
former Insecticide Corporation. He said tests would begin next Tuesday.

The announcement, at a news conference in Governor Kean's office in Trenton,
came as inspectors from the Federal Environmental Protection Agency searched a
Newark neighborhood where high levels of dioxin were found in soil samples at
the closed Diamond Alkali Company chemical plant.

Sites Known Since 1980

Officials acknowledged that some of the sites of potential dioxin contamination
in New Jersey had been known since 1980. They said, however, that the cleanup of
other substances had been given priority, and that the testing for dioxin had
been accelerated only in recent days, after a routine sampling turned up the
unexpectedly high contamination in Newark's industrial Ironbound section.

The Edison Township site was made the next focus, Mr. Hughey said, because its
manufacturing history indicated that it was most likely to be contaminated with
dioxin.

Richard Dewling, the top E.P.A. official at the Newark site, said most of the 10
suspected New Jersey dioxin sites had been listed as potential hazards by the
Federal and New Jersey authorities as far back as 1980.

He said, however, that ''we had to make a decision to prioritize the risks to
public health.'' He also said the equipment available in 1980 was able to detect
toxins only at the level of parts per million, not parts per billion.
Concentrations of up to 1,200 parts per billion were found at the Newark site.

Mr. Hughey said the nine operating sites whose histories suggested possible
dioxin contamination would be checked and company records reviewed to see
whether further action was warranted.

He identified those sites as Amchem, American Cyanimid and GAF in Linden,
Eastern/Guardian Chemical in Pequannock, Givaudan in Clifton, Merck (Calgon) in
Hawthorne, Millmaster Onyx in Berkeley Heights, Rhone Poulenc in New Brunswick
and White Chemical in Bayonne.

Mr. Hughey said the nine companies were cooperating in the review.  The dioxin
findings of 500 parts per billion in several samplings at the Newark site are
more than 500 times a safe concentration and about the same level as that found
recently in Times Beach, Mo., where the Federal Government has offered to buy
out the houses of 2,500 homeowners.

Yesterday, Mr. Dewling, the E.P.A. official, said one sampling in Newark had
shown a level of 1,200 parts per billion.  Dioxin, said to be the most toxic
compound made by man, is suspected of causing kidney and liver malfuntions, skin
lesions and possibly cancer. But in the short term, since the residents of Times
Beach and other areas are known to have been exposed to dioxin, no ailment
besides chloracne, a severe form of acne, has been indisputably linked to the
chemical.

The Love Canal site in Niagara Falls, N.Y., and another former Hooker Chemical
Company dump nearby, known as Bloody Run, have also been found to be major
dioxin burial sites, but tests have not demonstrated any clear health effect.
And some of the Love Canal findings of health damage at Love Canal were later
challenged by scientists.

In Newark, Mayor Kenneth A. Gibson said there was no reason to believe that
anyone had suffered any health problems as a result of dioxin exposure at the
Diamond Alkali plant, and he said some of the concern might have been
overstated.

''If it was as dangerous as we are led to believe, we would have had health
problems,'' the Mayor told a sidewalk news conference after meeting with state
and Federal environmental and health officials at a housing project near the
plant site.

Several of the residents then shouted that they were sick.  ''They look
healthy,'' Mr. Gibson said.  ''Looks are deceiving,'' said one of the residents,
Denise Ross, 18 years old. She said she suffered from asthma and bronchitis,
which she attributed to chemically contaminated air.

On Thursday, Mr. Kean ordered the closing of a food distribution market near the
Newark site and offered to have the state pay the lodging cost at the city
Y.M.C.A. for up to 100 nearby residents. As of yesterday, no one had apparently
moved into the Y.M.C.A.

Food regularly brought into the market was ordered diverted to an alternate
location in Port Newark. But after it was found that refrigeration facilities
were lacking there, the Governor permitted existing perishables to be sold at
the original location. New deliveries were barred, however, and starting today
freezer trucks will be brought into the Port Newark center, and all perishables
will be shifted there, the Governor's office said.

Links to Agent Orange

The dioxin being sought in New Jersey has been linked in most cases to the
manufacture of the Vietnam War defoliant Agent Orange, which was a combination
of the herbicides 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D. Dioxin is a byproduct of the manufacturing
process.

A spokesman for the Diamond Shamrock Corporation of Dallas, which was formed in
1967 in a merger of Diamond Alkali and the Shamrock Oil and Gas Company, said
yesterday that Diamond Alkali operated the site since 1951 and made Agent Orange
there under Government specifications from 1966 to 1968.

The spokesman, Ginger Sherburn, said the company closed the plant in 1969 and
sold it in 1971 to another company, Chemicaland.  Federal and state officials at
the site said that it had apparently not been operated since Diamond Shamrock
left, and that no material had been deposited there by any other company.

A request to Diamond Shamrock for more information on the source of the dioxin
contamination and details on what Mr. Hughey said were two explosions at the
plant in the 1950's and 1960's brought no response.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Estelle and R.J. Trechel outside home in Newark
photo of health inspectors in Ironbound section of Newark

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
Hanoi Leaving I.L.O.  For an Indefinite Time

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 292 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, June 3


Vietnam notified the International Labor Organization today that it was
''temporarily'' leaving the United Nations agency for an indefinite period.

Among the reasons given by Hanoi was a dissatisfaction with unspecified actions
by the group that were said to be incompatible with the ''superior and
legitimate interests of socialist and developing countries, including Vietnam.''

Vietnam is the second Communist country to announce a boycott of the I.L.O. this
week, on the eve of Wednesday's opening here of the annual assembly of the
agency's 150 member nations. Poland said it would not send a delegation.
Poland's reason was an inquiry the agency is to make into Warsaw's treatment of
labor unionists.

Kidnapped Economist Slain in Guatemala

GUATEMALA, June 3 (AP) - A kidnapped economist and two of his abductors were
shot and killed after security forces surrounded the guerrilla hideout where the
economist was being held, the army announced today.

The statement said the rebels, members of the outlawed Guatemalan Labor Party,
apparently shot their captive, Carlos Humberto Rosales Chavez, 42 years old, in
the head when they realized they were surrounded in a building in Lomas de
Cotio, nine miles west of the capital.

Two guerrillas were killed when they tried to escape and one soldier was wounded
slightly, the army said. It did not say if any of the rebels escaped or were
captured.

Mr. Rosales Chavez, who was an investor in a bank being organized in the
capital, was kidnapped in May. Relatives who asked not to be identified said the
kidnappers demanded a ransom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

POP SINGER: ELLIOT MURPHY

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


Elliot Murphy, the talented folk-oriented singer and songwriter from Long
Island, is still trying to live down the ''new Bob Dylan'' label that was pinned
on him by some overzealous rock critics in the mid-1970's. A suburban social
commentator whose songs blend rock lore and literary mythology, Mr. Murphy was
recorded and abandoned by three record companies before his talent had a chance
to blossom.

At Folk City, where he appeared Thursday with two musicians and a drum machine,
Mr. Murphy performed new material that found him moving out from under Mr.
Dylan's shadow. In songs like ''Dr. Calabash,'' Mr. Murphy smoothly incorporates
Caribbean rhythms and cool jazz harmonies. His most ambitious new song, ''The
Fall of Saigon,'' brutally compares America's pulling out of Vietnam with the
ending of a personal relationship.

Mr. Murphy's songs still try to pack too many literary images in too short a
space, and this can give his diction an uncomfortable self-consciousness. But
for a serious writer working in a pop idiom, a little pretentiousness is only to
be expected. Mr. Murphy is still a pop talent worth following.  Stephen Holden

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KEAN TOURS AREA NEAR DIOXIN SITE

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS C. McGILL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, June 4


Governor Kean toured the city's Ironbound section today and sought to assure
residents that there was no evidence that dioxin contamination had spread beyond
an abandoned chemical plant.

The Governor was generally well-received by the area's homeowners as he walked
door to door in the blue-collar neighborhood near the Passaic River. On
Thursday, Mr. Kean ordered the closing of a food distribution center and offered
to pay to lodge as many as 100 residents at a Y.M.C.A. So far, no one has made
the move.

Eugene Foltzer, who owns an Exxon station a few blocks from the plant, spoke
with the Governor at the entrance to the old Diamond Alkali Company plant, at 80
Lister Avenue, where the high levels of dioxin, a toxic chemical, were
identified this week.

''This plant has been here for years,'' Mr. Foltzer told the Governor. ''Why are
you doing this now, all of a sudden?'' ''Until recently,'' the Governor replied,
''we didn't have the scientific tests necessary to detect these dangerous levels
of dioxin. These tests look for parts per billion of dioxin. That's like looking
for one second in 34 years.''

Governor Kean emphasized in his meetings with residents that evidence so far
indicated that high dioxin concentrations were probably confined to the site of
the plant, which has been closed for a decade. But this will not be definitely
known, he added, until tests done on dust samples taken from nearby homes are
completed Tuesday.

This week, an investigation by the New Jersey Environmental Protection Agency
showed that dioxin levels in soil samples taken at the chemical plant were in
the area of 500 parts per billion. One sample showed a dioxin level of 1,200
parts per billion. The Environmental Protection Agency classifies a level of 1
part per billion as dangerous to health.

Dioxin is a chemical byproduct of the manufacture of several pesticides and
Agent Orange, a defoliant made by the Diamond Alkali Company and used by the
United States in the Vietnam War. Dioxin has been shown to be highly toxic in
animal tests, and is thought to be a possible cause of birth defects,
miscarriages and cancer in humans.

At Times Beach, Mo., where dioxin contamination caused the Federal Government to
allocate $33 million to buy the area's homes and businesses, soil samples under
the macadam roads reached as high as 300 parts per billion and exposed shoulders
of the roads contained up to 100 parts per billion of dioxin.

'Lived in Dioxin'

''Those people at Times Beach were contaminated with dioxin,'' Mr.  Kean said.
''They lived in dioxin. Their houses were on dioxin. We don't believe that's the
case here. We believe it's confined to an abandoned industrial site and we've
sealed off the site.''

The Governor was accompanied by Mayor Kenneth A. Gibson, the New Jersey Health
Commissioner, J. Richard Goldstein, and a number of aides.

''Hello, Governor,'' said Richard J. Trechel, who lives at 53 Esther Street, a
few blocks from the plant.  ''You know, this has created an awful mess,'' Mr.
Trechel said, speaking over a chain-link fence from his front yard. ''My wife
doesn't want to come out. She's beat. At 3 o'clock the other day, our doorbell
began ringing like crazy. It was a television team. 'Do you know anything about
dioxin poisoning in the neighborhood?' It was a shock to hear it from a
television crew, instead of somebody else.''

''Of course it was a shock,'' Mr. Kean said.

Concerned About Businesses

At the Newark Farmers Market, several hundred yards from the chemical plant,
Governor Kean spoke with men who were deeply concerned about the future of their
businesses. The distribution center, which sells produce and has the largest
seafood market in New Jersey, supplies fresh and frozen goods to stores in New
Jersey, New York and Connecticut.

Last Thursday, the market was told that it would have to move to an alternative
site, in the Port of Newark several miles away, until tests were conducted to
determine whether there were dioxin particles in the air that could settle on
the fresh produce.

The Farmers Market was closed today but about a dozen workers were there to
greet Governor Kean on the corner. Their talk started with warm words, and then
quickly got serious.

''So, what's happening here? You're ruining us,'' said John Francavilla, the
market manager.  ''Hey, listen,'' the Governor started to reply.

Threat of Bankruptcy

''It's very, very serious,'' Mr. Francavilla continued. ''It's not as easy as
everybody seems to make it. I've got about 40 merchants here, and the outcome of
it all is, unless something is done in the next day or two, I think 20 or 25 of
them will go bankrupt.''

''Bankrupt!'' echoed a couple of voices from the crowd behind Mr.  Francavilla.

In response to the workers' concerns, Governor Kean ordered that a meeting take
place this afternoon between Department of Health Officials, market workers and
members of his office. He promised to help persuade New Jersey Bell to transfer
telephone lines to the alternate site for the market quickly.

''We will get it taken care of,'' Mr. Kean said. ''You are businessmen, and we
want you to stay businessmen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the Newark Farmer's Market, closed photo of
Gov. Kean, Eleanor Podlus, Mayor Gibson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRYING NEW TACTICS IN SEARCH OF SALVADORAN MILITARY GAINS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


Indications that the Administration intends to follow a tougher military and
political line against the guerrillas in El Salvador have raised the prospect of
greater use of special counterinsurgency tactics. The Pentagon last week
announced it would be sending 100 Green Berets from its Special Forces to train
the Salvadoran military and that counterinsurgency would be emphasized.

The Americans will also train a rapid reaction battalion of 1,100 men for the
Salvadoran army. Three such battalions already exist, but their effectiveness
has been limited by the guerrillas' superb intelligence network. With the help
of peasants, they are able to receive news of the army's approach in time to
fade away.

Washington also announced that four Salvadoran light-infantry units, each with
350 men, would be trained in Honduras. They will be taught to maneuver and fight
with a minimum of heavy weapons to improve their chances of catching up with the
guerrillas.

However, many American officers with experience in Central America feel that
regular troops should be augmented by small but hard-hitting special
counterinsurgency units. They would be trained to attack deep inside territory
where the guerrillas are active, using new communications equipment, sensors and
advanced weaponry. The object would be to destroy the guerrillas' command and
communications structure while organizing resistance to them among the peasants.

Training these units and implementing the program will not be easy, a senior
American officer conceded. The new Salvadoran Defense Minister, Gen. Carlos
Eugenio Vides Casanova, has been on the job only a few weeks. One of his main
tasks is to shake up his own command structure so that the new tactics can be
used effectively.  Also, to obtain vital cooperation in the countryside, the
military must overcome resentment and fear engendered by memories of thousands
of dead civilians and the continuing killings by right-wing death squads.

This month, the army plans to try to seize the initiative by attacking guerrilla
camps in the rich agricultural provinces of Usulutan and San Vicente and
following up with civic action to help win over the peasants. At the moment, one
officer pointed out, many civilians are disillusioned with the guerrillas in
regions they have held for a time. The guerrillas customarily burn buses and
trucks, destroy coffee and cotton crops and wreck farm machinery. Salvadoran and
American officers believe they can build on such civilian resentment.

Special counterinsurgency forces require extensive training in the use of
advanced communications and electronic tracking devices. With only 55
instructors in El Salvador, it could have taken years to train effective
counterinsurgency units, but the 100 Green Berets who are to be added in
Honduras have improved the outlook for relatively early results. However, some
officers believe as many as 500 advisers are needed.
Let 'Em Eat Snake

In addition, the Salvadoran officers who regularly attend the United States
armed forces schools in Panama are exposed to a curriculum that includes classic
counterinsurgency tactics such as small-group operations, including ambush;
long-range patrols, and the demolition and sabotage of enemy equipment. The
schools also teach individuals and small groups how to live off the jungle and
to know, for example, which snakes are edible and how they should be cooked.

But to be effective, American officers point out, these operations should be
accompanied by programs to improve the daily life and increase the political
freedom of civilians caught up in the rebellion. American advisers emphasize
that their students must abide by the Geneva Conventions on treatment of
prisoners and must respect human rights in their operations.

These instructions, if followed, would rule out following the example of
Guatemalan counterinsurgency forces, which have scored real albeit bloody
victories. Left-wing insurgents, who last year held most of the Guatemalan
northwest, have been dispersed. Many have fled to Mexico. About 100,000
Guatemalans armed with machetes, pistols and rifles have been enlisted in a
civil defense force to protect villages and farms.

Small patrols of counterinsurgency troops, well trained and armed, have
penetrated guerrilla lines in successful but brutal operations.  Civilians
suspected of sympathizing with the guerrillas have been shot out of hand.
Guatemalan refugees reaching Mexico report that whole villages have been wiped
out and women and children butchered.  The Pentagon and the Administration
clearly could not be associated with such tactics, United States officers
declare.

Over all, the history of counterinsurgency has been uneven. The British used the
methods successfully in Malaya against the Chinese Communists and their Malayan
allies, and they have had limited successes in Northern Ireland. In Vietnam,
results varied from place to place; successes tended to evaporate when the
Americans directing counterinsurgency operations returned to the United States.

Success in El Salvador is likely to hinge on the American advisers' ability to
overcome longstanding conservatism and inexperience in the Salvadoran military,
notably by forcing substantial changes in the command structure - no easy task.
But in the present stalemate, counterinsurgency forces, once trained, may be the
only way to achieve solid military gains.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
Question of Excitement

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 104 words


Roy P. Benavidez got the Medal of Honor for heroism in Vietnam, but he can no
longer get Social Security payments for the disabilities he incurred in earning
the medal. Mr. Benavidez's checks were cut off recently under Social Security
reforms that were accelerated by the Reagan Administration. He said last week
that White House aides had told him President Reagan, who had taken a personal
interest in his case, was seeking to have private groups come to his assistance.
But that wasn't exactly what the 47-year-old war hero had in mind. ''I don't
want charity,'' he said. ''I want what I'm entitled to.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roy P. Benavidez

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
New Threats From Dioxin

BYLINE: By Wayne Biddle and Margot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 420 words


Dioxin, which has quickly taken a seat next to radiation in the gallery of
insidious threats, emerged again last week as a debating issue and as a backyard
reality. Dow Chemical Company launched a $3 million campaign to assure the
public there was nothing to fear, only to face a Congressman's revelation of
scientific evidence to the contrary. Meanwhile, the city of Newark took steps to
isolate an industrial site that was contaminated with dangerous levels of the
substance. Other New Jersey sites were also being investigated.

Dow's effort ''will seek, through sound science, to reassure those with concerns
about dioxins,'' said Paul F. Oreffice, the company president. Among other
initiatives, Dow will expand its work to determine the health effects of dioxin
pollution around its Midland, Mich., plant. The Michigan Department of Health
recently released a study confirming that death rates from rare soft-tissue
cancers were above national norms among white women in Midland.

In Washington, Representative Thomas A. Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota,
released a confidential 1978 study by a British scientist indicating that dioxin
causes long-term damage to the body's immune system. The study ''comes as close
to a smoking gun as I think we're going to find'' in linking dioxin to a variety
of illnesses, he said. Dr.Joseph K. Prince, an Environmental Protection Agency
toxicologist who appeared with Mr. Daschle, said the study corroborated his own
research on railroad workers exposed to dioxin in a 1979 accident.  But
Dr.A.Milford Ward of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in Sheffield, England, said
that though his work had shown exposure leaves victims open to minor infections,
there was no evidence of increased incidence of serious disease.

The Newark contamination was found at the site of a company that once
manufactured Agent Orange, the dioxin-laden herbicide sprayed extensively by
American forces in Vietnam. Governor Kean ordered a nearby food distribution
center closed and offered shelter for 100 local residents. ''I wish to emphasize
that all our steps are precautionary and that there is no solid evidence to
indicate the dioxin contamination has spread,'' said Mr. Kean, who toured the
area yesterday. Preliminary soil tests found dioxin levels as high as 1,200
parts per billion, far above the Centers for Disease Control's suggested limit
of 1 part per billion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of police in Newark

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PRACTICAL WAY TO ARMS CONTROL

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb; Leslie H. Gelb is the Times's national-security
correspondent

SECTION: Section 6; Page 33, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5692 words


Arms control is neither sin nor salvation. It is a way -along with diplomacy and
military decisions - of managing Soviet-American competition. Without such
negotiated mutual restraint, the competition would be far less controllable and
both sides could acquire capabilities that just might make nuclear war more
thinkable. It is not a way of solving our security problem. It is a way of
preserving the Soviet-American ''peace'' that, with great good luck, has
survived the last 40 years of tension and waste. To ask much more of a
bargaining process between two powerful countries so mistrustful of each other
is to condemn it to failure.

Our inability to appreciate arms control as a practical matter has contributed
to flip-flops in American attitudes toward negotiating reductions in the
superpowers' nuclear arsenals. And it has added to the clamor for arms control
that has blown up into a political crisis for the Reagan Administration, a
divisive problem for the Western alliance and a painful moral issue for many
Americans.

On June 18, 1979, amid the archaic splendors of Vienna, President Carter signed
a strategic arms limitation treaty with the Soviet Union, the second such accord
between the superpowers, a compact it had taken seven years and three
Administrations to negotiate. Back in Washington, there were few cheers. The
Russians had been making political inroads in Angola and the Horn of Africa,
their military buildup had made them our equals in nuclear weaponry, and public
opinion in the United States had been swayed by the right-wing view of arms
control as something that would hold us back while the Soviet Union exploited
its momentum. The treaty - SALT II - was never to be ratified. Subsequently, to
the Reagan Administration, arms control became almost synonymous with sin.

This Wednesday, in the businesslike setting of Geneva, Soviet and American
delegations will resume negotiations on strategic arms that have been stalled
for four years. And in Washington and around the country, political leaders,
foreign-policy experts and wide sections of the public are extolling the virtues
of arms control and demanding movement toward sweeping accords.

Congress makes its funding of President Reagan's defense programs dependent on
his conduct of the nuclear talks. During the SALT II debate, legislators would
not accept arms control without more arms; now they will not agree to more arms
- such as the new, extrapowerful MX missile that was recently approved - without
arms control. The country's Roman Catholic bishops, in an extraordinary pastoral
letter, make nuclear deterrence - our traditional safeguard against the danger
of Soviet attack - morally acceptable only as a stopgap during an active search
for broad disarmament and political agreements. The governments of Western
Europe make their acceptance of American medium-range missiles on their soil
dependent on goodfaith efforts in the current Soviet-American talks in that
area.  Arms control, so denigrated such a short time ago, has suddenly been
transformed into a symbol of salvation.

There has been no change in Soviet behavior in the last four years to account
for this reversal of attitudes; if anything, Moscow's readiness to use its
muscle has been made even plainer in Afghanistan and in Poland. There has been
no change in the comparative power of the Soviet and American nuclear arsenals;
the Reagan Administration has increased the strategic budget, but the
deployments are yet to come. The change has been in the public mood. Frightened
by the nuclear buildup and by Administration rhetoric about fighting and winning
nuclear wars, and played upon by Soviet propaganda, public opinion has swung
back to support of arms talks. The reversal has had its effect on elected
officials. Arms control has become good politics again.

In fact, the prospect of an open-ended arms race, with attendant divisions in
Western societies - witness the nuclear-freeze movements on both sides of the
Atlantic and the mass upsurge in Western Europe against the planned installation
of American Pershing 2 and cruise missiles in that theater - has set off a kind
of pro-arms-control panic. Yet plunging ahead toward ambitious new goals,
without considering the reasons that brought the whole process to such a
grinding halt four years ago, will be to risk a repetition of failure. If we
want to do better in this new phase of arms control than we did in the past, we
should, it seems to me, adopt a new negotiating strategy.

Most of the reasons for the comparatively lean accomplishments of 20 years of
arms negotiations are built into the structure of Soviet-American competition.
Because of the lack of trust, neither side is about to make large concessions or
take large risks. The adversaries' forces are asymmetrical, with the Russians
dependent mostly on landbased missiles and the Americans preferring a more
balanced structure that emphasizes the additional elements of long-range bombers
and submarines. Finding major areas of compromise has often been like trading
apples and oranges, particularly when it comes to controlling the scramble for
technological innovation.

And, to be sure, Moscow has made its share of unreasonable demands, though
seemingly ready at every point to settle for modest accords. Soviet leaders,
while concerned with reducing the risks of nuclear conflict, appear less
interested in arms control per se than in creating a climate more conducive to
acquiring Western technology, causing problems between the United States and its
allies, and being fully accepted by Washington as ''the other superpower.''

But aside from these built-in difficulties, and exceeding them in its effect,
there has been the peculiarly American tendency to sharp swings between seeing
little good in arms control and asking too much of it too soon. The main
drawback to the agreements of the last decade was not that they did so little
but that they took so long to do it. By taking many years to achieve marginal
results, the accords became a convenient target for political forces in the
United States with unreasonable expectations of arms control. What we need is a
simplified process inoculated to a greater degree from political ressures. The
idea is to try to take a small step, instead of a large stride - and, having
done that, to take the next small step, and the next. However, to have a clearer
appreciation of how doing less, rather than more, is apt to take us further in
the long run, it would be helpful to go over the record. What are the facts
about arms control? What is the case against it? What have past agreements
accomplished? Specifically, is there a way out of the present Soviet-American
deadlock on medium-range missiles and a hope of starting on a reduction of our
overgrown forces of intercontinental reach?  ROM THE BEGINNING, ARMS control has
been crushed in the embrace of political extremists on both the left and the
right, and of those simply playing politics. Adlai E. Stevenson, running for the
White House in 1956, charged that President Eisenhower had permitted the
Russians to open up a ''bomber gap''; the gap, it soon became clear, was in our
favor. John F. Kennedy ran in 1960 on the need to close the ''missile gap''; he
learned after taking office that we had 2,000 missiles and the Russians 200, at
most. Mr. Reagan and his Defense Secretary, Caspar W. Weinberger, speak of
Soviet superiority, but when Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, was asked a year ago whether he would trade strategic positions
with his Soviet counterpart, he answered: ''Not on your life.''

At the beginning of the Reagan Administration, many officials of conservative
and far-right views were eager to abandon arms control.  To them, it only served
to lull the American people into a false sense of security, and thus stood in
the way of a necessary arms buildup. Now, they insist that they were
misunderstood - that they are pursuing ''real'' arms control. In private,
however, many of them admit that they are really engaging in theater -much as
the Russians are - to mollify Western public opinion, and that their overriding
goal remains one of expedited rearmament when arms control is seen to have
failed.

Only two years ago, Mr. Reagan called SALT II ''fatally flawed'' because it did
not close the ''window of vulnerability'' - Moscow's theoretical ability to take
out our land-based Minuteman missiles in a first strike. Two months ago, a
bipartisan commission appointed by Mr. Reagan concluded that, as a practical
matter, there was no such vulnerability. Without so much as a farewell to the
window through which he had climbed into the White House, Mr. Reagan applauded
the commission's findings.

The very SALT II treaty that the President and his senior advisers had labeled
as practically treasonous they themselves are now observing. In fact, only
recently, they were ready to accuse Moscow publicly of violating the unratified
pact. The Joint Chiefs of Staff persuaded them not to, saying that a breakdown
of treaty constraints would leave the Russians in a much better position to
resume the race, and Mr. Reagan made his points quietly, through diplomatic
channels, as provided for in the document.

The President, however, has not been alone in suiting his reasoning to his aims.
The liberals who have been scoffing at the vulnerability argument for years,
calling it overstated, adopted it themselves as a way of trying to block the
deployment of the MX missile. When Mr. Reagan sought to install the MX in
existing Minuteman silos, many of these same liberals said no - because the MX
would be vulnerable.

At bottom, however, arms control fell victim to something bigger than factional
struggle over a single new weapon or disagreement over the requirements of the
American defense posture. From the early 1970's on, arms control suffered from
the collapse of the political middle ground, the traditional home of the
pro-arms-control camp. The middle was sacked first by the political left, over
the Vietnam War, and then by the right, because of disillusionment with detente.

Centrism, bipartisanship and pragmatism no longer dominated the politics of
American foreign policy. The New Left and the far more powerful coalition of
conservatives and the New Right began to hold sway. Legislators with rigid
ideological convictions began to people Congress in greater numbers. To those
who thought they knew the answers, facts were irrelevant. Arguments devoid of
evidence turned into gospel. Polarization spread.

The New Left beat the bushes not for arms control but for disarmament. Yet there
was no evidence that Moscow was any more willing than Washington to make any
large-scale reductions in nuclear arms, let alone to disarm completely. And in
its belief that nuclear deterrence could be dispensed with, the New Left largely
disregarded the superiority of Soviet conventional forces and the obvious role
of nuclear weapons in preserving superpower peace since World War II.  The New
Right regarded efforts at arms control as either hopeless (since the Soviet
Union was not likely to give up its supposed nuclear superiority) or worse
(since any treaty Moscow might agree to would lock the United States into its
allegedly inferior position).  In the rightists' view, the only way to bargain
with Moscow and deter it from attacking us was by acquiring additional arms -
even superiority.

The dominance of these extreme views in the last decade had a strong effect on
the pattern for arms-control negotiations: extravagant demands for highly
disproportionate cuts and restrictions on Soviet forces, followed by years of
stalemate at the bargaining table, followed by mounting political pressure to
compromise for fear of failure. It also determined the outcome of the talks. The
treaties that accomplished most were completed between 1963 and 1972. Of the
treaties completed after 1972, only SALT II was of comparable importance, and
none were ratified by the Senate.

Thus, a number of agreements reached when the middle ground was still dominant
in American politics headed off competition in certain areas. A treaty concluded
in 1963 banned nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water,
bringing about immediate and tangible benefits in safeguarding people from
fallout and radiation. A 1967 agreement banned the use of outer space for any
military purposes whatever. Treaties in 1959 and 1971 internationalized and
demilitarized the Antarctic region and prohibited the placing of nuclear weapons
on the ocean floor. A 1972 convention barred the development, production and
stockpiling of biological weapons, though some questions of Soviet violations
arose several years ago.

In the same period, the superpowers reached two agreements on avoiding war by
miscalculation - a 1963 accord setting up a ''hot line'' between Washington and
Moscow, and a 1971 compact requiring each side to notify the other of missile
tests beyond its national territory. In 1972, SALT I froze
intercontinental-range missile launchers at existing levels. A companion treaty
imposed a virtual ban on anti-ballistic missile defenses (ABM's) - thus, in
theory, lifting from each side the fear that the other might launch a first
strike in the belief that it could defend itself against a counterblow. The
acceptance of mutual vulnerability solemnized the doctrine of mutual deterrence,
on which our security was seen to rest.

That was the high point of progress. Then the process soured.  Liberals lauded
the ABM agreement but faulted SALT I for not stopping the development of
multiple independently targetable warheads (MIRV's). The New Right joined with
more traditional conservatives in attacking the treaty for doing nothing to curb
what they saw as Russia's growing capacity to destroy American missiles in their
silos. And they were clearly uncomfortable with the commitment to no defense - a
reservation that surfaced conspicuously in Mr.  Reagan's recent ''Star Wars''
speech visualizing an eventual spacebased shield against nuclear attack.

Since then, efforts to expand the partial test ban have languished. A 1974
treaty limiting underground explosions to the equivalent of 150,000 tons of TNT
remains unratified. More than six years of talks to outlaw nuclear explosions
altogether have been getting nowhere.  Talks on placing limits on antisatellite
systems, chemical weapons and the like drag on.

The SALT II treaty of 1979 placed only marginal restrictions on current nuclear
forces and programs. And by that time, political opposition to arms control was
sharply on the rise. Conservatives noted that, while the treaty would reduce the
number of Soviet missiles and bombers by about 500 and - for the first time -
would limit the remaining missile force to a specific number of warheads, it
would still permit the Soviet Union to continue MIRV-ing up to the agreed
warhead total. They argued that the treaty did nothing about Russia's superheavy
land-based missiles while barring the United States from building similar
weapons (though the American military had no desire whatsoever to do so). They
took exception to the fact that the treaty prevented the United States from
deployment schemes to solve the problem of missile vulnerability (the problem
that Mr.  Reagan's special commission has now banished into the political
limbo.)

Whatever the merits of the charges that blocked the treaty's ratification until
Afghanistan made Mr. Carter withdraw it from Senate consideration, the
controversy was symptomatic of a cresting reaction against constraining arms
compacts with an increasingly dangerous adversary. It was increasingly difficult
to gain political support for agreements, let alone negotiate them. The case
against arms control had reached its apogee in American politics. Before
considering where we go from here, this case should be examined in more detail.
The liberals had two objections: The treaties we had signed had been used to
justify new arms commitments, and they had not resulted in any savings in
military spending. In fact, many liberals had come to see arms control as a
sham, a device to codify the arms race.

Undeniably, the need for Congressional backing for negotiating initiatives gave
pro-armament groups considerable leverage on Capitol Hill. Furthermore,
bargaining with Moscow put a premium on developing new weapons that could be
used as ''bargaining chips'' - chips that seemed always to end up being deployed
rather than cashed in. And Administrations did ask for more arms after each
treaty signing.

But it is far from clear that these weapons would not have been deployed anyway.
Technology marches on, and Moscow did not show much greater inclination than
Washington to call the march to a halt. As for savings, there were't any. But it
is often forgotten that strategic forces account for only about 15 percent of
the Pentagon budget, and opportunities for savings are limited.

In the end, whatever their objections, liberals went along with the treaties as
the lesser evil. Conservatives, however, dug in their heels. Their main
arguments may be stated, and answered, as follows:

1. The Russians cheat on arms control pacts and gain important advantages.  A
panel of conservative and liberal experts who studied the field of
strategic-arms and test-ban treaties under the auspices of the Carnegie
Endowment for InternationalPeace concluded in its report last April that the
record ''does not support this claim.'' Nor has any Administration, including
the present one, ever formally charged Moscow with violations.

Mr. Reagan, as we have noted, did raise some questions recently about Soviet
compliance with a SALT II provision and with the 1974 limitation on underground
tests, but was persuaded to leave these issues to the Soviet-American Security
Consultative Commission, established to consider complaints by either side. The
record over an 11-year period shows that the Russians have on occasion taken
advantage of ambiguities in the treaty text, and have acted in disregard of
unilateral American interpretations of the text that they never accepted. Yet
every question brought before the commission by the United States has been
satisfactorily resolved. Moscow either accepted the American complaint and
altered its behavior or showed sufficient grounds for its own position. Soviet
complaints against American actions have also been satisfactorily resolved.
Even those who have charged Moscow with consistent cheating have rarely
maintained that Soviet violations could not be caught.  Virtually every top
American official who has been involved with the matter during the last decade
has expressed confidence publicly in the ability of our intelligence satellites,
radar and listening posts to detect violations in time to prevent us from being
placed at a significant disadvantage.

The most serious compliance issues have revolved around evidence of the last few
years that the Russians may have used chemical weapons in Afghanistan and
Southeast Asia, and may have developed biological weapons. (The evidence is not
conclusive, but Moscow has not lived up to its treaty obligation to cooperate in
clearing up the charges.) In the nuclear field, the small size and easy mobility
of some of the newest nuclear weapons, as well as the difficulty in verifying
lowlevel underground nuclear tests, will necessitate more direct means of
verification, such as on-site inspection, and Moscow has indicated willingness
to move in that direction.  2. Arms-control treaties have not prevented Moscow
from vastly increasing its nuclear forces, nor caused it to moderate its
behavior.

Neither SALT I nor SALT II did much, if anything, to curtail the growth of the
Soviet arsenal. American intelligence estimates were that the projected growth
of Soviet forces would be greater without the treaties than under the treaty
limits; conservative critics, on the other hand, charged that the limits were
consistent with Moscow's plans. Neither estimate can be proven. But, by the same
token - and provable on the record - the United States did not give up any of
its own projected nuclear military growth.

As for the complaint that arms treaties have not inhibited Soviet behavior in
the world, anyone who expected that result was guilty of star-gazing. The
superpowers have deep conflicts of interest, which can have an impact on
progress or deadlock in arms control and can be exacerbated by the development
of new arms systems on either side, but which persist as policy objectives even
when arms treaties are signed. Arms-control measures reflect far more than they
shape the state of political relations. Arms treaties will have to be judged by
how they help manage Soviet-American arms competition, not by expectations of
political miracles.

3. Arms-control agreements have caused us to let down our guard and have brought
about unilateral American disarmament. Spending on conventional arms and the
attendant military manpower declined somewhat after SALT I, and leveled off for
several years thereafter, even as Moscow maintained its steady buildup in all
categories. But this had little if anything to do with arms control. The primary
reasons were the decreasing scale of American involvement in Vietnam and the
demands of neglected domestic priorities, as the Nixon Administration stated at
the time. Moreover, intended real increases were wiped out by runaway inflation,
brought on principally by rising oil prices. As for outlays on strategic nuclear
forces, these stayed pretty much constant - even allowing for inflation - and
began rising, along with the entire defense budget, after 1976.

From Richard Nixon to Gerald Ford to Jimmy Carter, every Administration carried
forward every new strategic program on the drawing boards. The only exception
was when Mr. Carter canceled the B-1 bomber, deciding it was redundant in view
of the development of air-launched cruise missiles, and rejecting advice that he
use it as a bargaining chip. Mr. Reagan has reinstated the B-1.

Other systems - the Trident submarine, the Trident II missile, the Stealth
long-range bomber, the MX, a variety of cruise missiles, improvements in warhead
yield and accuracy, and an upgrading of command-and-control capabilities - have
all gone ahead as rapidly as technical problems could be solved.

Perhaps the best answer to the overstated arguments of liberal and conservative
critics is implicit in the attitude of the military throughout the two decades
of arms-control negotiations. After dragging its heels, the American defense
establishment came out in favor of every treaty in question. As planners
responsible for America's security, our top military officers want to be in a
position to define and contain the possible threats. The more uncertainties, the
more they have to worry about.  As we enter a new phase of strategic-arms talks,
our general approach seems to be subject to the same dreams of grand solutions
that led to stalemate and disenchantment in the 1970's.

Many on the left - and some of a more centrist and even conservative bent -would
be satisfied with nothing less than a nuclear freeze. Yet their view of the
present situation seems to ignore certain realities. One is that a freeze on the
development, testing and deployment of new weapons would take every bit as long
to negotiate as the more complex schemes they disdain, and that a freeze on
production cannot be verified. Another is that further deployments of Trident
submarines with Trident I missiles help to stabilize the strategic balance,
since the submarines give us an invulnerable deterrent against a Soviet first
strike and the missiles are not accurate enough to threaten the Soviet Union's
own deterrent. A third reality is that Soviet leaders are impressed by whether
the Congress is prepared to back the President in the deployment of the MX. This
remains true even if we bargain the MX away in the end.

As for the Administration's negotiating position, it continues that quest for
''deep cuts'' - shared curiously in the past by the left as well as the right -
that has always lacked a realistic appreciation of Moscow's problems and its
ability to resist our pressures. Mr.  Reagan's strategic-arms proposal for the
last year and a half would have the Russians destroy two-thirds of their
missiles, including two-thirds of their heaviest land-based missiles, while the
United States would have to reduce its missile force by only 50 percent and
could continue with Trident II missiles (which, unlike the existing Trident I
missiles, would threaten Russia's weapons silos), cruise missiles and the MX. In
the medium-range missile negotiations, Mr.  Reagan would have the Russians scrap
some 600 of their missiles in the European theater, including all their new
SS-20's, while the United States would forgo deployment of some of the 572
missiles earmarked for the NATO countries.

Under the pressures of the freeze movement, the pronouncements of the Roman
Catholic bishops and Congressional demands for cutting back on military
spending, some of Mr. Reagan's advisers have joined hands with a band of
liberals to create a new approach. Instead of reducing the number of
intercontinental-range missile launchers, they would add some 1,000 new
land-based missiles, the Midgetman, with only one warhead apiece, while phasing
out a good number of missiles with multiple warheads. In the end, they reason,
each side would have a lower ratio of warheads to missiles - thus making the
weapons less inviting as targets and creating a safer situation for all.

The idea, as it now stands, seems to offer little incentive to Moscow, which,
with its far greater reliance on land-based missiles, would have to restructure
its forces to a far greater degree than the United States. The proposition would
become doubly difficult for Moscow because the Reagan Administration would still
intend to go ahead with the MX. Meanwhile, both sides are developing a whole new
generation of weapons capable of hitting military targets with far greater
accuracy. With each step, both sides draw closer to the Faustian illusion of
being able to fight, limit, control and - yes - perhaps even prevail in a
nuclear war.

There must be a better way. And it can only be in the direction of more modest
treaties, which do not take so long to complete that they become vulnerable to
political shifts at home - of small steps, taken one at a time, with an agreed
common purpose.

The process would have to begin with agreement on long-term objectives. The key
ones would be these: restrictions on each side's ability to launch surprise
attacks; an equal capability to maintain a survivable deterrent against any such
attack; a phasing out of nuclear weapons that present attractive targets to the
adversary; gradual reductions in the number of intercontinental and mediumrange
nuclear warheads and bombs; widening cooperation, including onsite inspection,
to verify compliance. In effect, each stage, which would last for two or three
years, would be aimed not at obtaining all possible advantage for your side but
at assuring the other side the same degree of security you seek for yourself.

The first stage would deal with the medium-range forces in Europe, as both sides
now more or less agree. It could begin with a two-year agreement requiring
Moscow to dismantle its older SS-4's and SS-5's, while Washington began
deployments only of ground-launched cruise missiles. The Soviet Union did not
hesitate to upgrade its capabilities substantially with the deployment of more
than 450 SS-20's, and it is absolutely unreasonable for Moscow to reject some
modernization of American missiles in Europe. The future integrity of NATO
depends on some deployments, and Moscow knows this.

Moscow would also be required to freeze its SS-20 total at its present level in
both the European and Asian portions of the Soviet Union. In return, Washington
would temporarily forgo the right to deploy the Pershing 2 ballistic missiles,
which, unlike the relatively slow cruise missiles, could reach Soviet territory
from European bases in about 12 minutes, and which, therefore, are of particular
concern to the Soviet leaders. And each side would be limited to 300
medium-range bombers.

In stage two, the talks on medium-range weapons would merge with negotiations on
intercontinental-range missiles and bombers, and the two sides would agree to
reduce their overall store of warheads and bombs -about 11,000 apiece - by about
25 percent. Each side would be free to decide where to put its permitted total.
Thus, if the United States wanted more medium-range missiles in Europe, it would
have to cut the number of its intercontinental weapons.

But we cannot expect the Russians to reduce their SS-20's so long as there is no
formula for taking British and French nuclear forces into account. Such a
formula might involve abandoning the deployment of Pershing 2's altogether. At
the same time, there would have to be some accommodation of the Soviet view that
Chinese and American nuclear forces in Asia must be taken into account, an
objective that might require separate tripartite talks with China. By the same
token, Moscow cannot expect us to count in our totals third-country forces we do
not control.  This stage would be a good time for several confidence-building
measures - no testing of submarine-launched missiles that, unlike ballistic
missiles, stay within the atmosphere and thus can reach their targets more
quickly in a first strike; no antisubmarine warfare exercises in certain
regions, thus helping maintain the invulnerability of submarines; no testing of
new missiles with multiple warheads, to prevent further improvements in
accuracy.

Initial steps could be taken to reduce the number of giant landbased missiles.
Since this is the Russians' strongest suit by far, they will part with it only
reluctantly and slowly. The Administration has a choice of retaining the MX and
allowing the Russians to keep their heavy missiles, or cashing in the MX for
reductions in Soviet heavies.

The most difficult problems would be left for stage three. The superpowers would
seek agreement on a restructuring of their forces, retreating from the mutual
threat of multiple warheads and leaving single-warhead missiles as the
centerpiece for both. They would try to impose controls on ground- and
sea-launched cruise missiles. They would move toward a prohibition on
development and testing of all new missiles.

Not before this last stage could one contemplate saving money or improving the
overall political relationship between the superpowers. Until then, and even
afterward, the main purpose would be to manage the competition in nuclear
weapons. But, step by step, this kind of arms control would mean a progressive
reduction of the risks of nuclear war.

This approach is not without its own serious obstacles. We would have to learn
to live for at least the next decade with Soviet advantages in land-based
missiles, and to be satisfied with our superiority in submarine and bomber
forces. After that, the expectation is that the two sides would develop more
comparable arsenals across the board; but that is not easy to insure. The
approach would also necessitate greater patience with arms control, and an
American political leadership courageous enough to stand up to extremist
demands.

But the alternative - inflated proposals with minimal chances of success that
play into the hands of those who want to prove that ''arms control does not
work'' - is likely to lead to an open-ended arms race. If that happens, if
international restraints, such as they are, are allowed to erode, can we count
on holding war at bay very much longer? Because deterrence has worked until now,
can we be sure it will work in the future? While it stretches rationality to
imagine a conscious decision to begin a nuclear conflict, we have every reason
not to trust ourselves, let alone others.

Arms control is not the answer to the perilous competition between the United
States and the Soviet Union and the security problems posed for both. But
without it, there are no answers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a ground-launched cruise missile photo of the
MX missile photo of a Soviet ICBM in its silo photo of a naval officer on a
nuclear-powered submarine photo of F-111 fighter bombers photo of the Pershing
II missile

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Northwestern Journal;
HOW BUD CLARK GOT ANGRY AND SWITCHED DRAFT BEERS AT HIS GOOSE HOLLOW INN

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., May 31


The Goose Hollow Inn is the unlikely lair of a rabid activist, a man so
committed to civic integrity that he would end two decades of business
association over a little thing like misrepresentation in a political
advertisement broadcast in another state.

Nor does Bud Clark, in his German walking shorts, with a full beard, fit that
role as he moves around his small tavern. The Goose Hollow Inn is on the edge of
the business district where the young professional people who make up his
clientele work.

He even shies away for a moment from giving his proper name. ''They all call me
Bud,'' he said, seeming to fear the loss of that warm, friendly, unthreatening
nickname, which fits him so well. No one would ever call Mr. Clark Bronco.

Finally, he disclosed the truth: ''My legal name is John. Initial C.'' In
December Mr. Clark did something that surprised even him. After 21 years of
drawing Budweiser as his house draft beer, he wrote to the distributor, saying:
''The King of Beers has become a tyrant. At the urging of my wife and friends,
the Goose Hollow Inn Inc. ceases purchasing as of the above date.''

He had been offended by an action of the Budweiser distributor serving his
section of Portland, Columbia Distributing. The distributor had lent its
employees to perform in commercials used in California to help defeat a
voter-initiated referendum that would have created a law requiring deposits on
beverage bottles and cans.

The employees were not identified as workers for a beer distributor but were
presented in the commercials as disinterested Oregon residents who just happened
to oppose Oregon's deposit law. The law, adopted in the early 1970's, has been
well received by the majority in the state, and Mr. Clark holds it to be one of
the best works of the late Gov. Tom McCall, a man he admired. The California
proposal had been modeled after the Oregon law.

''I guess I bought 30,000 kegs of Bud over the years, and somebody calculated I
was buying $100,000 worth of beer from them a year,'' Mr. Clark said. ''It
didn't cost me anything. I just made Blitz Weinhard the house tap beer.'' Blitz
Weinhard is a beer brewed in Portland.

Mr. Clark looked into the main barroom of the small tavern where people were
gathering on an unseasonally warm afternoon.  ''Pretty soon we'll start buying
from them,'' he said. ''I can't give anybody a bad time for very long.''

Rolla J. Crick had been a reporter for The Oregon Journal in Portland for 35
years when one Sunday last August he was called to a meeting by the editors. He
was told the evening newspaper would close within a month but that Newhouse
Newspapers would provide jobs on The Oregonian, its morning paper in Portland,
for him and his 104 colleagues.

''I was concerned,'' he said. ''But I tend to take a positive view of things,
and I decided it was an opportunity for all of us to do something new. But the
ways it's worked out, I'm not so sure of myself as I used to be on The
Journal.''

Donald J. Sterling Jr., the paper's editor since Jan. 1, 1972, had been a
Journal man for 30 years, but in another way he was a lifer: his father was The
Journal's editor from 1909 to 1952.

Hanging on his office wall are two montages of photographs. On the left are
photos of The Journal's newsroom employees when Donald Sterling Sr. retired in
1952; on the right are photos of those working there the day the paper closed.

William A. Hilliard, who joined The Oregonian as an office boy and was one of
its first black employees three decades ago, had been made executive editor a
few months before the owner's decision to close The Journal. He continues as the
chief editor of The Oregonian, where news space has been expanded along with the
staff.

Mr. Sterling became assistant to Fred A. Stickel, The Oregonian's president and
publisher.  Peter Thompson, The Journal's managing editor, has held that job at
The Oregonian since the retirement in March of Albert J. McCready, The
Oregonian's managing editor.

The first jointly produced paper was for Sept. 6, 1982. The expanded staff
crowded into The Oregonian's newsroom to greet it.  Recently the newsroom
shifted to new quarters, which seemed to ease the transition for some Journal
people.

Mayor Frank Ivancie of Portland spoke of The Journal's ''different style.'' He
said, ''It was more adventuresome. You miss that.'' Mr. Crick said, ''I used to
enjoy the competition. I miss that.'' The Oregonian's circulation, 242,000 at
the time The Journal was closed, is now 300,000. Since The Journal had a
circulation of about 100,000, it means 40,000 fewer papers are sold in town.

Across the Columbia River in Vancouver, Wash., Gary Tanous has been undergoing
an experience unlike any previously. He said, ''It's really turned my life
around.''

Since September he has been overseeing the Americanization of his 15-year-old
daughter, Jean Marie, who came from Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, formerly Saigon.
She is his daughter by a marriage to a Vietnamese woman. They married while he
was a civilian radio station operator in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968.

The mother left the girl with a woman her father called an ''adopted
grandmother,'' who was simply an older friend. The girl wrote a letter to her
father, smuggled out in 1980, in which she said she wanted to join him in the
United States.

''It took me two years, but I got her out,'' Mr. Tanous said in a telephone
interview. He has been doing all the cooking, cleaning and shopping while trying
to help his daughter through her difficult adjustment to American life.

''I tell everybody she's adjusting fine,'' he said. ''I'm the one having
trouble.'' He said he believed it was his efforts to get his daughter that began
the migration from Vietnam in recent months of hundreds of children of American
fathers and Vietnamese mothers.

'They Never Let You Forget'

There have been problems. ''I think in the beginning the emotional problems came
from her big sugar intake, which we didn't understand,'' Mr. Tanous said. ''But
even beyond that it has been tough.

''One moment she's a woman, the next she's a child,'' he said.  ''And her moods.
She will be sweet. She will be a holy terror. And then she had never been around
men.

''And now here she is living with a big old dummy like me. You know how kids
are, too. One mistake and they never let you forget you were wrong.''

As an eighth grade student, she has had success in typing but had trouble
expressing herself. She tended to leave out words in her sentences, her father
said. But things have been looking up.

''People are amazed at how well she speaks English now,'' Mr.  Tanous said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Gary Tanous

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PLANS TO EASE DISABILITY CRITERIA IN SOCIAL SECURITY

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


The Reagan Administration plans to liberalize the criteria for paying Social
Security disability benefits to people with physical or mental handicaps,
Administration officials said today.

The announcement, they said, is to be made this week by Margaret M. Heckler, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services. It comes in response to criticism by
members of Congress of both major political parties, who denounced the
termination of benefits for people with obvious disabilities.

The steps contemplated by the Administration, described by one Health and Human
Services official as a ''capitulation'' to the critics, would restore some of
the policies that prevailed before President Reagan took office. But it appears
that the rules would still be stricter than in the Carter Administration. The
new measures would not alter the 1980 law under which disability beneficiaries
must be re-examined at least once every three years. The Social Security
Administration began conducting those reviews in March 1981, after Mr. Reagan
took office.

Benefits for 350,000 Terminated

Since then, the Social Security Administration has terminated disability
benefits for more than 350,000 people, mainly on the ground that the Government
reviews had found they were able to work.  The Government pays monthly cash
benefits to 3.9 million people who remain on the rolls. That number is down from
a high of 4.9 million in 1978.

An Administration aide said White House officials had directed Mrs. Heckler to
correct problems in the $18 billion-a-year disability program after reading
reports that her department had stopped benefit payments for Roy P. Benavidez, a
Vietnam War veteran who had been awarded a Medal of Honor by President Reagan.

The changes to liberalize the rules can be made administratively, without action
by Congress. They are apparently designed to head off even more sweeping
legislative changes proposed by Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania,
and others.

Legal aid lawyers and groups representing the elderly and the handicapped
reacted with skepticism to preliminary reports of the proposed changes,
suggesting that they were designed to reduce support for Senator Heinz's
proposals.

The Reagan initiative includes these measures, according to Administration
officials who were involved in its preparation: People with ''functional
psychotic disorders,'' such as paranoid schizophrenia, would be exempted from
the periodic eligibility reviews required of most other beneficiaries. The
definition of ''permanent disability'' would be expanded to include more medical
and psychiatric conditions.

Vulnerability on 'Fairness'

Under another measure supported by Mrs. Heckler, disability benefits could not
be cut off unless the beneficiary's medical condition had improved or there was
some change in medical technology allowing the person to overcome his handicap
and return to work. In the past, Social Security officials have resisted such a
change. But in the last few months, as the disability program emerged as a
symbol of the Administration's political vulnerability on the socalled
''fairness'' issue, Social Security officials have tried to make the program
more humane.

Mrs. Heckler also plans to adopt a more flexible standard for determining
whether a person has a severe enough disability to qualify for benefits. A
''severe'' impairment significantly limits physical or mental ability to perform
basic work-related functions.  If an individual's impairment is not considered
severe, the claim must be denied.

A steadily growing percentage of disability claims has been denied because
officials found that the claimant had a ''nonsevere impairment.'' Mrs. Heckler
intends to reduce the use of this criterion, which has been challenged in court,
the officials said.

Move to Random Reviews

The officials also reported that the Social Security Administration would revise
its medical criteria for determining disability and would try to improve its
standards for assessing ''residual functional capacity,'' which is used as a
gauge of basic work skills in people who do not meet the medical criteria.

In addition, they said, the agency will select cases for review on a more nearly
random basis. At present, the agency uses profiles designed to identify the
beneficiaries least likely to be disabled.  Critics have said these profiles
picked out an abnormally large number of people with mental disabilities.

Also, the officials said, the Social Security Administration would conduct more
training courses for disability examiners and others who adjudicate claims.

Dr. Robert J. Rubin, an Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services, said,
''Mrs. Heckler has been concerned about these problems in the disability program
and asked the Social Security Administration to redouble its efforts to come up
with a solution.''

The steps to be taken by the Reagan Administration stop short of a moratorium on
reviews for all mental disability cases. Senator Heinz has proposed such a
moratorium. The Administration would exempt people with psychotic disorders, but
would continue the periodic reviews for people who were mentally retarded or
suffered from such nonpsychotic disorders as an addictive dependence on alcohol
or drugs.

Proposals Follow Criticisms

Eileen P. Sweeney, a lawyer with the National Senior Citizens Law Center, a
nonprofit group, said the announcement was ''an effort to assure that Heinz's
bill doesn't pass this week.'' The Senator, who is chairman of the Senate
Special Committee on Aging, plans to propose the moratorium as an amendment to a
House-passed bill that would repeal the withholding of taxes from dividends and
interest payments.

The Reagan Administration's initiative comes less than two weeks after a
breakdown in cooperation between Social Security officials and mental health
groups advising the Government on the disability insurance program.

Dr. Melvin Sabshin, medical director of the American Psychiatric Association;
Myrl Weinberg, assistant director of the Association for Retarded Citizens of
the United States, and Wymene Valand, vice president of the National Mental
Health Association, have all sent strongly worded letters to Mrs. Heckler saying
Social Security officials have failed to live up to commitments.

Senators William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, and Carl Levin, Democrat of
Michigan, plan to hold a hearing Wednesday to investigate whether the Social
Security Administration is improperly putting pressure on administrative law
judges to reject disability claims.  The judges review appeals by people whose
benefits have been cut off.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DOCTOR IN JERSEY CITED AILMENTS AT DIOXIN PLANT

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 778 words


A New Jersey dermatologist said yesterday that an associate had told public
health officials as far back as 20 years ago that many workers at a former
Newark chemical plant where dioxin contamination was recently discovered were
suffering from skin disorders and other problems.

The dermatologist, Dr. Roger Brodkin, director of the division of dermatology at
the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, said that he and his
late associate, Dr. Jacob Bleiberg, had treated about 50 of the former workers
since 1962 and that he was still treating about 10 of them.

At its peak the plant employed 50 to 75 workers, according to its former owner,
the Diamond Shamrock Corporation of Dallas.  A former public health official,
Dr. Donald J. Birmingham, then a dermatologist with the United States Public
Health Service, visited the plant with Dr. Brodkin in 1964. The visit came after
Dr. Brodkin and Dr. Bleiberg brought the workers' problems to Dr. Birmingham's
attention as well as to the attention of other health officials.

Dioxin Was Not Suspected

Dr. Birmingham said that New Jersey health officials, who also visited the
plant, knew of the complaints. He said he did not have any regulatory authority
to enforce any action against the company.

The ailments, Dr. Brodkin said, included chloracne, which is a severe form of
acne, blackening of the skin, unwanted hair growth, and porphyria, a metabolic
disorder characterized by a darkening of the urine.

Now retired in Michigan, Dr. Birmingham said in a telephone interview that the
most striking finding was the porphyria, but that at the time no one was aware
of dioxin.

While Dr. Brodkin said he did not know for sure if there was any connection
between the ailments and the toxic chemical dioxin, he said the outbreaks should
have alerted officials earlier to the potential danger. Those treated were all
plant workers or supervisors. There is no indication that nearby residents were
affected.

Charles Yokum, a spokesman for Diamond Shamrock, which closed the plant in 1969,
said the company had known of the skin disorders since the 1950's and had
arranged for Dr. Bleiberg to look for the cause.  Mr. Yokum said he did not know
when the possible connection to dioxin was made, but that it could not have been
until many years later.

Dr. Brodkin said in an interview that he became aware of the disorders in 1962,
several years after the problem was first studied by Dr. Bleiberg. Without
naming the plant, Dr. Bleiberg wrote up his findings in the Archives of
Dermatology in June 1964.

Iris Blumenau, a registered nurse who served both doctors, said that in the
beginning the company sent workers to see Dr. Bleiberg.  But when so many
workers required time off to travel to his office, the company asked the doctor
to come to the plant once a week. Dr.  Brodkin said his treatment usually
consisted of skin surgery and drainage, and sometimes vitamin shots and vaccine.


Plant Made Agent Orange

For at least several years in the 1960's, the plant had a Federal contract to
manufacture Agent Orange, a Vietnam War herbicide in which dioxin frequently
appears as a contaminant. Last week, officials of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
reported finding dioxin contamination in the soil around the closed plant, in
the industrial Ironbound section of Newark.

Several samples, they said, showed dioxin levels of up to 500 parts per billion,
and in one spot the level reached 1,200 parts per billion. Experts say that one
part per billion is hazardous to human health.

So far there has been no evidence that any dioxin spread beyond the plant site.
Inspectors have been taking dust samples in the homes of nearby residents.
Officials said some results should be ready by Wednesday.

There has been no official explanation of how the dioxin got onto the plant
grounds. Mr. Yokum of Diamond Shamrock said that there had been two explosions
at the plant - one on Feb. 20, 1960, in which one worker was killed, and the
other sometime in 1955 and for which he said he had no details.

Asked what happened to the presumably large quantities of dioxin produced at the
plant as a byproduct in the manufacture of Agent Orange, Mr. Yokum said: ''We
don't know. It closed 15 years ago.  We're trying to find the records. It's been
a question that everybody has been asking.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dr. Roger Brodkin

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: '1984 REVISITED'

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


IT has always been unclear whether George Orwell thought of ''1984'' as a
warning, prophecy or satire, or even, as the writer Anthony Burgess says he did,
as ''a kind of game, a horrible game.'' On the other hand, it may not matter.
Orwell's novel resonates in the popular culture, anyway. The title is a synonym
for the death of privacy, the end of freedom. Orwellian, as an adjective, means
dehumanizing and bureaucratic. How close are we now to an Orwellian world?
Walter Cronkite looks for an answer in ''1984 Revisited,'' on CBS-TV at 8
o'clock tonight.

Mr. Cronkite is an inspired choice for this. For years he has been a familiar
presence, sharing and interpreting for us the great events of our time.
Moreover, he has been a reassuring, trustworthy presence. If Mr. Cronkite has
looked worried, we have worried. If he has seemed pleased, we have been pleased.
In a benign way, he has been very much like Orwell's Big Brother, a constant
electronic visitor, with perhaps the most recognized face in the country.

Therefore, viewers will note that Mr. Cronkite seems concerned, but not overly
worried, that Orwell's nightmare vision of dictatorship will soon overtake us.
Judging by the evidence on ''1984 Revisited,'' Mr. Cronkite's reaction is
probably correct. The technology for dictatorship may exist in America; the will
to apply the technology hasn't yet surfaced. Vigilance, Mr. Cronkite suggests,
will protect our future.

Other nations are not so fortunate. Orwell's Oceania used torture to enforce
policy. A spokesman for Amnesty International says in an interview that his
organization has acted on cases of torture in 60 countries. Oceania, meanwhile,
rewrote history, creating unpersons. A slogan of Big Brother's party said: ''Who
controls the past controls the future. Who controls the present controls the
past.''

Similarly, the Soviet Union has rewritten its history, making unpersons, for
example, of Trotsky and Lavrenti Beria. Revisionism goes on in democratic
countries, too. Japanese high-school textbooks, Mr. Cronkite notes, omit the
1937 massacre known as the ''Rape of Nanking'' and dismiss the invasion of
Manchuria as an ''incident.''

In the United States, the author Frances Fitzgerald says in an interview,
textbooks have tried to ignore the Vietnam War. This isn't pursued on ''1984
Revisited,'' however, presumably because there is a great gap between the
systematic, enforced rewriting of history and the half-hearted rewriting of
publishers who pander to the whims of school boards. Indeed, much of ''1984
Revisited'' deals not so much with the threat to our civil liberties as the
appearance of the threat, not so much with what is as what could be.

Certainly it is true, as ''1984 Revisited'' says, that electronic surveillance
grows, that computers run large parts of our society, and that chemicals can
alter our minds in frightening ways. These are potential threats to our
liberties, although the larger threat may lie in how easily they have been
allowed to enter our lives. One wishes that ''1984 Revisited'' had examined the
complaisance, the eagerness even, with which we embrace the new technologies.

Orwell, in his frequent paeans to the common sense of the ordinary British
citizen, admired a kind of crankiness that would not have tolerated these
intrusions. Whatever happened to the crankiness? In a telling aside, Mr.
Cronkite points to eight boxes, shoebox sized, and says they hold all of
Orwell's personal papers - letters, memos, a checkbook, a press card. Orwell was
not a man to leave his private life lying about. But if he were living in
America today, as Mr.  Cronkite notes, the computer printouts on his life, from
Government and private sources, would fill a room.

''And such printouts,'' Mr. Cronkite says, ''put us a lot closer to Orwell's
vision of a world without privacy.'' They do indeed; they also contribute to a
kind of homogenization of America, the submerging of personal identities - the
essence of Orwell's Oceania. Television, with its enormous power to both define
and promulgate the culture, helps in the homogenization, too. ''1984 Revisited''
is serious and responsible in its exploration of an Orwellian world. One might
wish it had pushed its exploration further.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of George Orwell

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 8, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Senator Warns of Risk Of a Wider Latin War

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


Senator Nancy L. Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, says the similarities between
the El Salvador conflict and the Vietnam War are increasingly evident, and there
is a ''real risk'' that war could engulf other countries in Central America.

''The comparison to Vietnam has been used many times, and I have never felt
comfortable with it,'' Mrs. Kassebaum said Monday. ''But the parallels seem to
grow more striking as time goes on.''

Mrs. Kassebaum, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee who led the
United States delegation to oversee El Salvador's elections last year, raised
the possibility that Salvadoran guerrillas might be modeling their efforts on
the successful guerrilla war in Vietnam.

''Is it not possible that by gradually increasing our involvement we are
responding in exactly the ways the guerrillas want?'' she asked in a speech to
the Overseas Education Fund, a private volunteer development group associated
with the League of Women Voters.

The Senator called for a broad new debate on the long-term future of Central
America, possibly using the Organization of American States as a forum. But she
warned that the discussion could be neither initiated nor dominated by the
United States.

''If our vision of the future is clouded, then our choices each day will be made
in a fog,'' she said. ''We will continue as we are right now - attempting to
muddle through in El Salvador, much as we attempted to muddle through in
Vietnam. I cannot overstate the danger of such a course.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 8, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

House Authorizes Job Funds To Train Vietnam-Era Veterans

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 154 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


The House passed legislation today that would authorize $325 million for
temporary emergency job training for unemployed Vietnam war era veterans.

The House passed the bill by a vote of 407 to 10 and sent it to the Senate. The
Administration opposes the bill.  The measure would authorize $25 million for
the program in the fiscal year 1983 and $150 million in each of fiscal years
1984 and 1985.

Most of the training would be done by private employers, who would be reimbursed
for as much as 50 percent of each veteran's starting salary in order to defray
the employer's job training costs.

All assistance would be limited to Vietnam era veterans who have been unemployed
for at least 15 of the last 20 weeks at the time they apply. They could enroll
until Oct. 1, 1984. The programs would terminate Oct. 1, 1985.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 8, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Head of Agent Orange Unit

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


John Svahn, Under Secretary of Health and Human Services, was named Monday to
head the Government's working group on Agent Orange. The group, part of the
Cabinet Council on Human Resources, coordinates Federal research on long-term
health effects of exposure to herbicides, principally Agent Orange, used in the
Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 8, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Careers;
Graduates Face Job Scarcity

BYLINE: By Elizabeth M. Fowler

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


EVERY college generation faces hurdles - and graduates in the 1980's are no
exception. In the Depression years 1930-37, there was a bleak job outlook.
During the war years of the 1940's many career paths were interrupted.

Vietnam alienated many in the 1960's, and jobs associated with business were in
disfavor. Although in the the 1970's, there was a renewed interest in business
and professional training, many students found that the management gaps created
by the disaffection of the preceding decade were being filled by M.B.A.'s and
other senior degree holders.

In the 1980's the problem involves overcrowding in management positions. There
are not that many top management, or even good middle management jobs, available
for the 500,000 new Bachelor of Arts or Science graduates each year, and the
55,000 recipients of Master of Business Administration degrees.

The recession has made jobs harder to find. Furthermore, companies, forced by
declining profits to cut staffs, have learned to operate with fewer middle
managers. And advances in technology have eliminated many support-type jobs in
the $20,000-to-$50,000 range.

There is also the maturing baby boom generation - children born in early 1950's
- who now hold middle management jobs and who are moving steadily toward the few
top jobs.

Some will make it; some will clog the entry, holding back those who will
graduate in coming years.

The New York Stock Exchange lists 1,528 companies; the American Stock Exchange
lists 900, and there probably are another 2,000 large unlisted companies. In big
companies the number of managers earning $100,000 and more probably totals about
100 per company; in small companies the list runs much shorter, possibly a
dozen. Even allowing for an average of 80 high-paid officials in each of 4,500
companies, it means a top managerial group of only 360,000 people nationwide. In
fact, the Internal Revenue Service says only 538,499 tax returns for 1981
indicated salaries of $100,000 or more, and that includes joint filings.

Even an M.B.A. degree from a top school no longer guarantees a fast rise. Some
companies have become disenchanted with M.B.A.'s.  Personnel managers find it
hard to justify paying a new M.B.A.  $40,000 a year when older middle managers
with more experience earn about that.

What can be done?  Well, students might do well to prepare for alternate
careers, perhaps by taking a double major or by getting a graduate degree in a
field other than their undegraduate major: for example, English and accounting;
economics and geology; history and computer science.  Colleges might upgrade
liberal arts programs, and turn out graduates with wide interests.

Companies might also use cross placement to open more jobs at upper levels.
Suppose a $50,000-a-year department manager, aged 55, cannot expect further
promotion. He could be moved sideways to a special post, according to James
E.Challenger, of the Challenger, Gray & Christmas Inc. outplacement firm.

''Those who have reached a plateau also appreciate recognition for length of
service,'' said Andrew Sherwood of the Goodrich & Sherwood Company, an
outplacement and management recruiting firm.

Retraining of managers would help their self-esteem, even if no promotion is
involved, according to Howard V. Knicely, vice president, human relations, of
TRW Inc.

''Middle management will be squeezed in terms of opportunities, which means we
will have to figure out ways to motivate them,'' he said. ''The rate of salary
progress is slowing down, not because of inflation, not because of recession,
but because of the need to improve productivity.''

Mr. Knicely added: ''We have got to upgrade and retrain people and have the
latitude to redeploy them.'' He also noted that moving sideways should no longer
involve a stigma.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEATH BY HANDGUN

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


To the Editor:

This month we mark the 15th anniversary of the assassination of Senator Robert
F. Kennedy. His tragic death, and that of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. just weeks
earlier, prompted Congress to pass the 1968 Gun Control Act, which placed
minimal restrictions on the sale and possession of handguns. §ince Senator
Kennedy died, at least 327,970 Americans have been killed with handguns, almost
six times the number of soldiers killed in Vietnam. Millions of others have been
wounded, assaulted or threatened with handguns. Clearly, the 1968 law is not
enough. But Congress, cowering before the power of the National Rifle
Association, refuses to act. Many are heeding N.R.A. cries to repeal the very
law passed after the deaths of Senator Kennedy and Dr. King. Even President
Reagan has given these efforts his seal of approval.

We register automobiles and license drivers. Certainly handguns require similar
precautions. We must work together to stop the N.R.A.'s agenda of madness and
seek passage of the laws this country so desperately needs.  CHARLES J. ORASIN
Executive Vice President Handgun Control, Inc.  Washington, June 2, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
HENRY AND SY

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 853 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


I used to marvel at the way Seymour Hersh, the ace investigative reporter, used
his telephone to break through the stonewalling of potential sources.

A decade ago, he would get some grim C.I.A. type on the phone at home and
proceed to interrogate him, trading snarl for snarl, threatening to expose the
spook as a danger to democracy. Furious, the interviewee would slam down the
phone.

Sy would grin, wait two minutes and dial the number again. ''I respect you for
having the courage to hang up on me,'' he would begin soothingly, and go on to
sympathize with the source about being surrounded by bureaucratic enemies. In no
time, the rattled-andreassured ex-stonewaller was spilling his guts.

That was why I was dismayed, four years ago, when my colleague decided to
forsake journalism to write a book about Henry Kissinger.  With present
wrongdoing aching to be investigated, why go digging in the past?

No, Sy was convinced that nothing he could cover today or tomorrow was as
important as that story of yesterday. The man who won his Pulitzer for exposing
the My Lai massacre of 1968 would go after the higher-ups who, he felt
passionately, prolonged the war; since Richard Nixon had already been punished
by Watergate, Sy was obsessed with getting The Man Who Got Away.

What is it about Henry Kissinger that turns him into a white whale and
transforms an investigative reporter into a monomaniacal Ahab?  How has this
man, out of office, been able to stay in power? Why is he still cynosure,
confidant and cutting edge?

Those questions surely occurred to the guests at Henry's 60th birthday party a
few weeks ago. I was seated between Mrs. William Simon and Mrs. Isaac Stern, a
few yards from the sprightly Mrs.  Lyndon Johnson and the dolorous Empress of
Iran. Around the room were Marvin Kalb, Joseph Kraft and Helmut Sonnenfeldt, all
of whom had been wiretapped in Henry's heyday. (I no longer bear a grudge for my
wiretap, although whenever I hear clicking on my line, I automatically sing out
''Hi, Henry! Hi, Al!'' Old habits die hard.)

The answers are in Sy's book, though not in the way the author intended. ''The
Price of Power'' is a geopolitical geshrei, a polemic that does for hatchet jobs
what Henry Kissinger's memoirs did for memoirs. To Sy, the subject is Evil
Incarnate, impure and simple, and not the complex man who forces us to confront
our own ambivalence about the Nixon era.

The Hersh attack is a work of vengeance and self-justification, as Ahab's was.
Sy is saying: Stop all this revisionism about Vietnam.  Remember and revere the
purity of our frustration in the 60's and early 70's, the rightness of our
self-flagellation and the wrongness of our nation's cause. None of this sober
second thought about the bloodbath that followed the victory of those who waved
the ''stop the killing'' signs; the demonstrators of the 60's were the good
guys, in this journalistic jihad, and the hawks were our corrupters.

To Sy Hersh and to doves who saw our attempt to save Vietnam as one huge My Lai,
Henry Kissinger's continued eminence is the reminder that they did not wholly
succeed in purging the United States of the inclination to use its power. That
is why his reputation must be annually re-blackened.

To hawks and right-wing human rights enthusiasts, Henry Kissinger's continued
eminence is awkward because he erred on detente and sold out the Kurds; but the
power of his mind as revealed in his memoirs teaches us that much of our Vietnam
policy was sound and that in many respects the nation was well served by its
leaders. That is why his reputation must be selectively defended.

An author who deplores abuse of power should not airily endanger third parties,
as Sy does by charging an Indian politician with being a C.I.A. asset; nor
should a reporter criticizing a subject for selfpromotion leave the impression
that he broke an important part of the 1973 wiretap story without crediting the
first, major break to a Times colleague, John Crewdson.

''I think what I'm doing is saving the honor of the press,'' asserted Sy, who
deplores Henry's hubris, to an interviewer, Daniel Schorr, on Cable News
Network. ''I resent the press falling all over and lying on its back and saying
'Scratch my stomach, Mr. Kissinger.' I resent the fact that some of the
questions I'm raising weren't raised 10 years ago. ...''

While you were beating up on those spooks over the phone, Sy, a few of us were
indeed raising questions about some of Henry's methods and policies. And while
you've been vending the detta, we've been manning the ramparts. Contemporaneous
polemics can have some effect, and retrospective analysis, without an ax to
grind, can be useful, too; but slanting history to prove a point is recognized
as an ideological late hit.

Come ye back to present-day muckraking, Ahab! Today's whales are more
harpoonable than Moby Dick.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ARMY CHIEF OPPOSES SENDING COMBAT FORCES TO AID EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


Gen.  Edward C. Meyer, the Army's Chief of Staff, said today that he would
oppose sending United States combat forces to El Salvador because Americans
would not support them and Salvadorans were not fully committed to defeating
leftist insurgents there.

The general, in response to a series of questions during a breakfast meeting
with reporters, said the United States might have to consider intervention with
troops if there was turmoil after the elections in El Salvador later this year.

But he said that option should be considered only if there was a clear
identification of political purposes, statement of military objectives, and
public understanding of the costs in military manpower, weapons, money and time.

The general said his views reflected those of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
military advisers to the President. His comments were the most forthright public
expression so far of the reasons senior military officers have opposed sending
combat forces to Central America.

Reaction to Vietnam Recalled

Drawing on the lessons of Vietnam, General Meyer said it would be wrong to have
''soldiers at the end of the string without having the support of the American
people.'' He said that support does not exist now, and that he would protest to
the President if he saw a move toward sending troops to Central America.

General Meyer told reporters the United States could not defeat an insurgency
where ''that nation isn't fully committed to the resolution of its internal
problem.'' That commitment has not been evident in Salvador, he said.

The Reagan Administration has said American troops would not be sent to Central
America except as trainers and advisers. But members of Congress and others have
expressed fears that the United States would edge into Central America as it did
into Vietnam 20 years ago.

General Meyer, who will step down on June 21 after four years as the Army's top
officer, said that he would recommend sending troops if he thought that would
solve the guerrilla problem, but that economic assistance was more important
now.

The general, who fought in the wars in Korea and Vietnam, said: ''If I thought
the 82d Airborne going there would be a solution to the problem, I would
probably recommend that right now. I don't think it would be.''

He said that having been in a guerrilla war in Vietnam, ''I realize that unless
you have the commitment of the people, of the indigenous forces, you're not
going to solve a guerrilla war.''

General Meyer said publicly what other military officers have said privately
that ''there has been a crying need to pull together the economic, political, as
well as the military arms of government so that we're applying to Central
America coherent programs.''

He said the President ''is headed in that direction'' with the naming of a
special envoy for Central America and other shuffling within the Administration.
The overall approach, the general said, was to wean Nicaragua from Havana and
Moscow; to assist Honduras, Costa Rica and Panama to ward off leftist
incursions, and to assist El Salvador through political, military and economic
aid.

Economic Aid 'Very Critical'

He said that economic assistance ''is very critical because guerrilla war is
based on the legitimate concerns of the people.'' He said that ''the better the
nations in that area are able to respond to those legitimate needs,'' the better
they would be able to prevent insurgency.

Referring to the reluctance of Congress to approve more economic aid for Central
America, General Meyer said he thought that was equally or more important than
military aid. ''That's why I worry about the inability to get the economic
package through that will provide support to countries in that region,'' he
said.

General Meyer contended that limiting the number of United States military
advisers in El Salvador, as they are limited now to 55, was a mistake. ''I don't
believe that there should be a stated ceiling on how many military go down
there,'' he said. ''That provides everybody with a fixed view of exactly how
you're going to handle the problem.''

He added that if the military needed ''sufficient advisers to do a specific job,
you ought to put in that number of advisers.'' He said that the military should
be able to ''surge to a larger number when you needed to perform a specific
training mission.''

Consensus Called Vital

Questioned closely on the issue of sending combat forces to El Salvador, General
Meyer said, ''There should be no uncertainty in the minds of those involved that
whatever is necessary, if that poses a threat to us, we are willing to do.''

But he said ''there will have to be a consensus within the United States
populace that what we are doing is sufficiently important that American soldiers
go to war.'' He added: ''You can't send soldiers off to war without having the
support of the American people.''

He said that if the military services are not permitted to employ sufficient
forces, ''then we should stand up and say we can't do that with the forces
involved.''

''We didn't do that in Vietnam,'' General Meyer said. ''We inched our way in.
Then all of a sudden we were there.'' The general, who served twice as a field
officer in Vietnam, said, ''I was a bit confused as to why I was over there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AND THAILAND CONFER AND EASE STRAIN

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 9


Vietnam and Thailand said today, after a meeting of their foreign ministers,
that they were committed to discussions despite differences over the military
occupation of Cambodia by Vietnamese forces.

Echoing a conciliatory theme that has grown in Southeast Asia since the close of
Vietnam's recent dry season offensive against Cambodian insurgents along the
Thai border, the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, described his
90-minute talk here with Thailand's Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, as
''friendly'' and ''successful.''

''We will have dialogue and not confrontation,'' he remarked at a news
conference in the Vietnamese Embassy this afternoon.  Thailand's Foreign
Ministry said similarly that the Foreign Minister had agreed in principle to
accept Mr. Thach's invitation to visit Hanoi in the interest of ''peaceful
co-existence.''

Neither side disclosed just what had been discussed. A topic high on Thailand's
agenda was a proposal that Vietnam withdraw its troops 20 miles from the Thai
frontier.

A Foreign Ministry spokesman said after the meeting that Mr. Thach had agreed,
for the first time, that Cambodia should be ''independent,'' ''nonaligned'' and
''neutral.''

Vietnam Sees Threat From China

The reported terms of agreement caused considerable interest here.  Vietnam's
critics abroad and many Cambodian insurgent leaders contend that a neutralized
Cambodia would answer Vietnam's fears of being threatened, through Cambodia, by
China - the main backer of the Pol Pot regime that the Vietnamese overthrew in
early 1979, and the insurgents' main backer today.

A ''neutral'' Cambodia could, in theory, make it possible for Vietnam to
withdraw its troops.  But it remained unclear whether Mr. Thach had really
departed from Vietnam's past insistence that ''solidarity'' between Vietnam and
the Vietnamese-backed regime in Cambodia was essential to Cambodia's future, and
that both countries have a ''special relationship'' with the Soviet Union.

Questioned about the Thai Foreign Ministry's version, Mr. Thach confined his
characterization of the ideal Cambodia to ''independent and nonaligned.'' He
said nothing of a ''neutral'' Cambodia and added specifically that Vietnam's
position had not changed.

A Western diplomat said the reported change of phrase might have little
significance. ''Unlike the Soviets and Chinese, the Vietnamese do not measure
each word,'' he commented.

Some Troops Are Withdrawn

Mr. Thach arrived here Wednesday for a two-day visit after three days in the
Philippines, which sides with Thailand in opposing Hanoi's policy toward
Cambodia. The visits follow Vietnam's highly publicized withdrawal early last
month of several thousand troops from Cambodia.

Mr. Thach also sounded a conciliatory note toward China, with which Vietnam
traded artillery fire upon the close of Cambodia's latest season of fighting.
Such clashes with China, Mr. Thach said, could lead to peace now as easily as to
escalation. He described China and Vietnam, despite hostilities, as ''born to
co-exist.''

Thailand, which in April responded to a Vietnamese border crossing with
artillery and napalm, has moderted its anti-Vietnamese language over the last
six weeks. Deputy Prime Minister Bhichai Rattakul, for example, has called for a
resumption of Thai-Vietnamese trade. A Foreign Ministry statement yesterday said
Mr. Thach's talks today might signal a ''favorable new beginning.''

A perception has grown here that China, Vietnam's chief adversary, wants to
improve its relations with the Soviet Union, Vietnam's main supporter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOW AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER GUIDED BURNING JETLINER TO SAFE LANDING

BYLINE: By RICHARD WITKIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


''Where's the airport?'' came the radio call from the burning Air Canada
jetliner as smoke churned into the cockpit and chances of emergency landing
seemed increasingly fragile.

According to transcripts made public today of radio exchanges between the crew
of the DC-9 and the controller on the ground as Flight 797 approached Cincinnati
June 2, the controller, a former infantry lieutenant in the Vietnam War, crisply
replied that the field was eight miles straight ahead.

''O.K., we're trying and locate it,'' said one of the two pilots.  ''Advise
people on the ground we're gonna need fire trucks.'' ''The trucks are standing
by for you, Air Canada, can you give me number of people and amount of fuel?''
radioed the 36-year-old controller, Gregory Karam.

''We don't have time; it's getting worse here,'' came the pilot's response.
''Understand, sir,'' Mr. Karam answered. ''Turn left now, and you're just a half
a mile north of final approach course.'' Because electrical failures had knocked
out critical navigation instruments, the pilots were dependent on guidance from
the controller in making the descent and finding the airport.

Twenty seconds later, the cockpit reported the field was in sight.  And in
another two and a half minutes, the pilots, Capt. Donald Cameron and the
co-pilot, First Officer Claude Ouimet, landed their crippled two-engine craft.
Only 23 of the 46 people on board were able to escape as fire erupted from both
ends of the cabin. The five crew members were among the survivors.

The accident, on what was to have been a nonstop flight from Dallas-Fort Worth
to Toronto, has caused an upsurge in a 20-year-old controversy over
survivability of aircraft cabins in case of fire in flight or after a crash
landing.

The day after the accident, a Congressman who heads a key House panel,
Representative Elliott H. Levitas, assailed Federal standards on fireproofing
cabin interiors, saying, ''Regulations are far behind the state of the art.'' A
Public Works and Transportation subcommittee led by the Georgia Democrat will
hold hearings on the issue in mid-July. They were planned long before the fiery
Cincinnati landing.

The Federal Aviation Administration insists that ''considerable progress'' has
been made in programs both to reduce the toxicity of burning interior materials
and to minimize the extent to which they help spread flames.

Another Congressman, Representative Mario Biaggi, Bronx-Queens Democrat,
introduced a bill today that would require airliners to install smoke detectors
and automatic fire extinguishers in lavatories.

It was in the lavatory area that the fire aboard the Air Canada jet apparently
got its start. The lavatory, in the rear of the passenger cabin, did have an
extinguisher in the waste bin, and investigators of the National Transportation
Safety Board found its contents had been discharged. There was no smoke
detector, nor do regulations require it.

The inquiry has been focusing on the possibility that an electrical malfunction
started the fire, rather than a carelessness occupant who had thrown away a
match or cigarette. This is because, about the time the smoke was first noticed,
three fuselike circuit breakers for lavatory equipment popped out in the
cockpit.

This was not unusual. But Captain Cameron was unsuccessful in trying to re-set
them, and the smoke became so ominous that he asked permission from the control
system to make an emergency landing at Greater Cincinnati Airport, which is in
Covington, Ky.

The next 12 minutes were a race against the spread of the fire.  The electrical
damage knocked out all navigation aids that the crew needed to determine their
position over the ground. Also, it knocked out the transponder that
automatically had been registering the plane's altitude next to its blip on
radar scopes.

Mr. Karam, who has a law degree obtained at night school and insisted that any
of a dozen of his colleagues could have guided in the plane just as capably,
elaborated on the emergency at a news conference today. He said that initially
he had figured on bringing the plane in on the northbound runway from its
position 25 miles to the southwest. But, he continued, the plane, which had been
cruising at 33,000 feet, had too much altitude, so he guided it first to the
east and then toward the westbound runway to allow for the descent.

At 7:11 P.M, with nine minutes to go, the cockpit radioed: ''Airplane is filling
up with smoke.'' Three minutes later, Mr. Karam asked a colleague to turn the
approach and runway lights to maximum intensity.

With four minutes to go, the crew were told they were cleared to land. The
cockpit acknowledged but added: ''We don't see the runway.'' And then a minute
later came the calm-voiced but disconcerting question from the plane: ''Where's
the airport?''

Finally, it came into view, just where Mr. Karam said it would be.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gregory Karam photo of Donald Cameron and
Claude Ouimet

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WALESA, IN SMUGGLED SPEECH TEXT, TELLS HARVARD'S GARDUATES OF HOPE

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass, June 9


In the text of a speech smuggled out of Poland, Lech Walesa, the Polish labor
leader, told Harvard University graduates today that the trade union Solidarity
had made it possible for Poles to begin communicating with one another.

He had accepted an invitation to speak at the commencement but declined out of
fear that he would not be allowed to return to Poland.  His text expressed hope
for the future and ''the new consciousness evident in the young generation of
Poles.'' Mr. Walesa termed that consciousness ''the greatest capital of the 16
hot months after the strike at the Gdansk shipyard.''

After the 1980 uprising in Gdansk, he wrote in the speech, ''People began
expressing loudly and publicly their genuine thoughts, what was tormenting their
minds and souls and not what they should be saying in accordance with official
instructions.''

Harvard's president, Derek Bok, read extensive excerpts from the text, which
arrived Wednesday from the State Department. Mr. Bok said a copy had been
delivered to the United States Embassy in Warsaw.

Carlos Fuentes, the Mexican novelist, delivered the main address, praising Mr.
Walesa on behalf of Latin Americans ''who have practiced solidarity with
Solidarity.''

Mr. Fuentes, a former Ambassador to France and the author of 10 novels,
criticized the ''ignorance'' and ''arrogance'' of United States policies in
Central America. He said this country must negotiate with all parties in Central
America or risk alienating the whole region.

He also assailed the Reagan Administration's policy in Nicaragua, asking why the
United States was so ''impatient with four years of'' the present Government
''when it was so tolerant of 45 years'' of the previous Government.

Mr. Fuentes also urged resuming normal relations with Cuba. By ''refusing to
talk to Cuba on Cuba,'' he said, the United States ''weakens Cuba and the United
States, but strengthens the Soviet Union.''

Warning against creating a ''Vietnam'' in Central America, he said a ''political
settlement'' must be reached quickly in El Salvador to stop the killing by the
army and rebels.

In his speech, Mr. Bok discussed the challenges of reforming the country's
public schools.  Harvard graduated nearly 5,000 students this morning, in a
ceremony attended by 25,000 people. Many undergraduates carried colorful
balloons reading, ''Harvard Out of South Africa'' and ''Divest Now.''

Harvard awarded the these honorary degrees: KATHARINE GRAHAM, chairman of the
board of The Washington Post, doctor of laws for her ''courage, intelligence,
tenacity'' in helping ''keep a vast public in close touch with its government.''
EDGAR BRIGHT WILSON, Harvard's Theodore William Richards professor of chemistry
emeritus, doctor of science; his award said he had ''marvelously enlarged our
knowledge of molecular structure and behavior.'' ROBERT WINTHROP, honorary
chairman of the New York investment banking and brokerage firm Wood, Struthers &
Winthrop, doctor of laws; a ''generous son whose vision and conviction have
enlarged the scope of Harvard's usefulness to the world of scholarship.'' MEYER
SCHAPIRO, art critic, doctor of arts, for bringing ''fresh clarity and deepened
insight'' to understanding the masters of art. VICTOR FREDERICK WEISSKOPF, a
nuclear physicist, doctor of science; the award said he was ''justly called the
conscience of the American physics community.'' CARLOS FUENTES, writer, doctor
of laws; he ''displays a sharp but friendly concern for the future of this
hemisphere and for the plight of mankind.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A FESTIVAL OF FESTIVALS, INDOORS AND OUT

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1652 words


THIS weekend, with warm weather at last more than a rumor, the metropolitan area
heads determinedly into the festival season. Not that all festivals are
outdoors; they just seem to germinate best in fine weather. So from clowns in
Chelsea to dance on an East River pier, from a marathon of comedy to a marathon
by women of jazz, from folk music in Middletown, N.J., to barbershop-quartet
music in Armonk, N.Y., from Lincoln Center to Snug Harbor, there is a festival
for almost every taste.

Possibly the biggest extravaganza of all is the first New York Clown-Theater
Festival, which takes place at the Theater Guinevere, 15 West 28th Street.
Designed to emulate the Europeans in establishing clowning as a serious art
form, the festival will present six very different clowns and companies. Tonight
at 8, Jan Greenfield and John Towsen will present ''Conflict, No Resolution,''
which they describe as a neo-Brechtian, semistructuralist investigation into the
angst of modern man. The Hanlon-Lees Action Theater moves in at 11 with ''Etched
in Stone,'' a clown cabaret set in a turn-of-the-century Paris salon, which will
be repeated tomorrow night at 11.

Tomorrow at 3 P.M., Klauniada will present ''Vrch,'' a play for two clowns and
500 pounds of coal, inspired by Czechoslovakia's Circus Alfred. Avner the
Eccentric, a tall, thin, sober-faced clown who has worked with the Flying
Karamazov Brothers, has dazzled a number of theater critics with his
wire-walking, juggling and mime. He'll perform at 8 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday. On
Sunday at 3, the bill will be shared by Karen McCormick in ''Ciao Frivola,''
which she describes as a Chaplinesque odyssey, and Stanley Allan Sherman in an
''innocent, enjoyable perversion'' called the ''Aero Show.'' Tickets are $6. The
number for reservations and information on the festival's special events, forums
and workshops is 964-7240.

A darker side of life will be examined in the Veterans Ensemble Theater
Company's second Spring Festival of One-Act Plays, which runs Tuesdays through
Sundays at 8 P.M. through June 26 at Theater Row's Raft Theater, 432 West 42d
Street. The company is a group of Vietnam veterans and other actors founded by
Tom Bird in 1978 to explore war and its effects on society. Plays by Harry Guy,
James Inman and Martin Zurla range from a comic look at a telephone call to the
front lines from President Lyndon B. Johnson to a portrait of bereavement in a
Dublin home after an assassination. Tickets are $6 (Theater Development Fund
vouchers accepted). Reservations: 664-0086.

Two performances in the American Institute of Guitar's first International
Guitar Festival will take place this weekend. Tonight at 8 at Cami Hall, 165
West 57th Street, John Feeley, a young Irish guitarist, will perform a program
of music that includes his settings of traditional Irish folk music for
classical guitar. Tickets are $5. Reservations: 757-3255. Don Witter, whom the
institute describes as a classical guitarist ''with a popular touch,'' will
perform on Sunday at 3 P.M. at the institute, 204 West 55th Street. Tickets are
$3 and are available first come, first served.

Dance on Pier 11

The first week of the free Downtown Dance Festival, which runs through June 17
at three downtown areas, comes to a close this afternoon with performances by
the daredevil David Woodberry Running and Rolling Company and Janet Smith and
Dancers, a London-based modern-dance group. They'll perform at noon at Pier 11
on the East River, just south of Wall Street.

Danceteria is the place to go this weekend for a rhythm and arts festival, a
wide-ranging selection of top avant-garde entertainment, all in one continuous
bash on Sunday. Works by Keith Haring, Elizabeth Murray and Nancy Spero, among
many other visual artists, will be on view in an installation that opens at 8
P.M. ''Americas in Transition,'' a documentary film that won an Academy Award
nomination in 1981, will be screened at 8:30. And a six-hour performance begins
at 9 P.M., with such groups as the power Samba band Pe de Boi, Women of the
Calabash, the Red Mole theater troupe and the choreographer Karole Armitage.
Tickets are $8, with the proceeds to go to art equipment and books for
Nicaraguans in the arts. Danceteria is at 30 West 21st Street. Information:
864-5806.

Several generations of comedians, including Irwin Corey, Nancy Parker and the
First Amendment Improv, are expected to turn up for a 10-hour marathon beginning
at 4 P.M. on Sunday at Sweep's Comedy Club, Broome and Mercer Streets. Admission
is $5, with the proceeds to go to the Association of Comedy Artists, an East
Coast-West Coast organization devoted to furthering the art of comedy.
Reservations: 677-1409 or 925-5099.

The Stuff of Dreams

Then there are the places in the city that are festivals in themselves. Lincoln
Center is one, Snug Harbor in Staten Island another. On any pleasant day, the
crowds passing through the Lincoln Center Plaza are the stuff of dreams for
committed people watchers.  This weekend, however, there will be official
entertainment to while away the hours. The McDonald's world invitational
double-dutch championship will begin at 11 A.M. tomorrow and go on for five
hours, at the plaza fountain.

This annual event was begun in 1974 by two New York policemen. It may be just
''A, my name is Anna'' to the uninitiated, but doubledutchers take jump rope
seriously, practicing every day and working out with coaches. And its dazzling
tricks of rhythm and gymnastics are thought of as an important form of urban
street dancing by the cognoscenti.

Sunday will see a jazz marathon at Lincoln Center's Damrosch Park, starting at 1
P.M. and continuing to 8 P.M. Like the double-dutch extravaganza, it's free. The
marathon opens the Universal Jazz Coalition's eight-day New York Women's Jazz
Festival. Among the musicians are Ellen Seeling/Jean Fineberg's Deuce, Nydia
Liberty Mata and Harvie Swartz. (Jazz information: 924-5026.)

Snug in Snug Harbor

A good way to spend an afternoon any time of the year is to walk through Snug
Harbor's handsome, atmospheric Greek Revival buildings, the home of ''aged,
decrepit and worn-out sailors,'' as its founder put it, from 1833 through 1972.
The grounds are open from 10 A.M. to dusk, and there are 80 acres of meadows and
woods from which to choose a picnic spot. In addition, Snug Harbor is sponsoring
a flea market and sale of antiques and collectibles from its Art Lab on the East
Lawn, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. tomorrow (rain date is Sunday).  Admission is $1;
those younger than 12, free.

''Moore - The New Work,'' a show of late graphic works by Henry Moore, opens on
Sunday at Snug Harbor's Newhouse Gallery, where it will be exhibited through
July 3. Mark Teatum's color landscapes and black-and-white portraits will be on
view in ''Photographic Antonyms'' at Gallery III, starting on Sunday. Gallery
hours are 1 to 5 P.M. Admission is free. Guided tours of Snug Harbor, also free,
take place Sundays at 2 and 4 P.M. And food is available.  Information:
448-2500.

Outdoor craft festivals are a special feature of summer weekends.  The grandaddy
of them all this weekend is the 16th Middletown Folk Festival at Bodman Park in
Middletown, N.J., starting tonight at 7:30 and running from 11 A.M. through
midnight tomorrow. A must for folkarts enthusiasts, the festival will feature
traditional American and Irish music and dance in performances tonight and
tomorrow at 7:30. Admission: $4.25. A wide variety of crafts will be on sale.
And for those who like to do it themselves, there will be such activities as
square dancing and crafts workshops, with a number of events geared to children.

Admission to the daytime festival is $2.50; $1.50 for the elderly; 50 cents for
those younger than 12. The grounds are an hour south of New York City by car.
The best route is by the Garden State Parkway to Exit 114. In case of rain, the
festival will be held at Middletown Township High School South on Nut Swamp Road
in Middletown.  Information: (201) 291-9200.

East New York Fair

Another big summer festival is the 11th East New York Street Fair.  The fair is
on tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., on Van
Siclen Avenue between Linden Boulevard and Wortman Avenue in the East New York
section of Brooklyn. There will be jazz and traditional Irish, country, black
and Latin music, as well as international folk dancing, with arts and crafts for
sale, and rides and games to keep youngsters happy. Information, 649-7979 or
783-3077 (before 5 P.M. today).

Festivalgoers may take a trip back in time at the ninth Armonk Lions Country
Fair and Fol-de-Rol, which runs tomorrow from 10 A.M.  to 6 P.M. and Sunday from
noon to 6 P.M. at the seven-acre Wampus Brook Town Park in Armonk, N.Y. Among
the activities will be an oldfashioned country auction, a firemen's competition,
bicycle obstacle races, a balloon ride on a fixed tether and children's
hayrides.

Strollers past the park's gazebo may catch some Dixieland or barbershop-quartet
music, and there will be everything from wine and cheese to the Lions' famous
sausage-and-pepper wedges. Raffle tickets will be on sale in lieu of admission
charges, with the proceeds to go to community charities. By car, the fairgrounds
are just north on Route 22, a half-mile west of Exit 3 on Interstate 684.
Parking is free. Information: (914) 273-3385 or (914) 273-8769.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of craftsman working on leather (page C26) photo
of Avner the Eccentric photo of the Battery Dance Company photo of the First
Amendment Improv

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

4,500 SALVADORAN TROOPS PREPARE FOR MAJOR FIGHT

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: SAN VICENTE, El Salvador, June 10


More than 4,500 Salvadoran troops have gathered in this rich agricultural
province for the start of a major military and political offensive that one
American adviser called ''El Salvador's last chance.''

The action, known as the National Plan, was developed at the behest of American
military advisers and diplomats. It will entail a major military sweep to rid
San Vicente and the neighboring province of Usulutan of their many guerrilla
camps.

It is to be followed by a redevelopment effort, financed primarily by the State
Department's Agency for International Development, to reopen 105 schools,
rebuild roads and improve other social services.

An American military officer said it was the first time the Government troops
were not ''on the defensive, reacting to the guerrillas.'' He said: ''If the
plan goes, great. It is the only reason for optimism that I have.''

Lieut. Col. Rinaldo Golcher, who was the head of intelligence for the Salvadoran
military, will be commander for the operation, according to the high command's
press office. The 43-year-old colonel, who served in Washington from 1979 to
1982, is considered a favorite of the American advisers.

The bulletin announcing his appointment said the objective of the operation was
to ''defend, pacify and develop'' the province.

Critical Agricultural Area

San Vicente is in the middle of El Salvador, and Usulutan is on its eastern
frontier. The provinces are considered critical to the country's economy because
of the foreign exchange earnings from their coffee, cotton and sugar crops.

In theory, once San Vicente and Usulutan are secure, which is expected to take
more than three months, the same strategy can be used for the rest of the
country.

As the Coordinated Regional Development Strategy did in Vietnam, the National
Plan will try to separate the insurgents from the civilians and show the
peasants that the military is ''part of the solution and not the problem,'' one
military adviser said.

Usually there are about 1,500 troops in San Vicente, but in the last week 3,000
have arrived, military sources said.  In the week, armored vehicles cruised
along the dusty Pan American Highway, which cuts through the upper half of the
province, to protect convoys of trucks loaded with ammunition and potatoes.

The seven American advisers in San Vicente have trained one small battalion and
will begin training another 350-man battalion soon. In addition, three advisers
work with the command staff.

Copters Drop Leaflets

On Thursday helicopters flew over the province dropping leaflets advertising a
new amnesty law and urging guerrillas to turn themselves in. Peasants in the
province, which is a patchwork of fields that recent rains have turned a rich
green, said a small plane flew ahead of the helicopter playing loud music,
presumably to draw attention.

Col. Jose Dionisio Hernandez, the commander of the Fifth Brigade in San Vicente,
said in an interview that there were about 2,000 armed guerrillas in the
province. American advisers have estimated the number at about 600.

Colonel Hernandez said all five of the guerrilla groups had forces in the
region.  In recent years many fields have been left unplanted, either because
they were under guerrilla control or because they were in areas of constant
fighting.

After the military completes the sweep of San Vicente, it will move on to
Usulutan. Under the plan, the army will train new civil defense forces to
protect the towns after it leaves. Colonel Hernandez acknowledged that some of
the towns in San Vicente did not have civil defense forces, but he said training
would begin soon.

Critics of the plan point out that the civil defense forces had been easily
overrun by the insurgents in the past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of El Salvador

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BLACKOUT TIED TO SMALL ANIMAL

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 315 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex., June 10


A small animal may have set off a chain of events that knocked out electrical
power for half a million people in Austin and its suburbs, officials said today.

The blackout began at 7:26 P.M. Thursday. It spread throughout Travis County and
parts of four nearby counties in central Texas.  About 95 percent of the power
was restored by 10 P.M.

H.L. Peterson, the deputy electric director, said the problem began when an
electrical arc, possibly caused by a small animal, formed at a power plant on
the city's north side.

Mr. Peterson speculated that it had started because ''a snake or a bird building
a nest'' caused crossed wires.

Backup System Fails

The arc should have been routed out of the system, Mr. Peterson went on.
However, a protective device at another power plant failed, causing the entire
municipal system and three rural systems to close down.

The power failure affected about 500,000 people in a 400-squaremile area around
the capital city. Airport traffic was disrupted and traffic lights knocked out.

''So far as I know we didn't even have a major collision during the blackout,''
said Anthony Lamm, a police seargeant. ''People drove very, very civilly.''

The blackout was blamed for a butane leak and fire that destroyed a mobile home.
Games at the Texas state high school baseball tournament were disrupted. Some
people were stranded in elevators.

Operaation by Flashlight

Dr. Gerald Baugh, a thoracic surgeon, was just starting an operation to adjust a
77-year-old patient's pacemaker when the lights went out. He completed the
procedure with a flashlight and a handoperated life support system. Dr. Baugh
said he had performed more difficult procedures under worse conditions as a
field surgeon in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
THE MONSTER WE CREATED

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


At least with nuclear power plants you know where they are, so if you're worried
about them you can focus your worries geographically.  With toxic chemical
wastes, which this country keeps generating in ever-larger amounts, no one has
solid data on where it's all being generated or on where it's being dumped -
and, more crucial, no one appears to know how to get a handle on this nationwide
poison problem.

We seem to have created a monster in the post-World War II chemical revolution
that we hailed as a boon to economic development and to modern, leisure living.
We love weed-killers and synthetic fabrics and plastic everything, but now we're
getting scared about their byproducts and aftereffects.

The latest scare involves deposits found in New Jersey of dioxin, that highly
toxic component of Agent Orange (the herbicide sprayed by American forces as a
defoliant in Vietnam, now the subject of continuing legal battles in which the
chemical companies are spending millions trying to deny any liability for
illnesses suffered by veterans who came in contact with it there).

Before that, the scare was in Times Beach, Mo., where dioxin contamination
caused the Federal Government to allocate $33 million to buy the area's homes
and businesses and relocate the residents.  And before that, it was toxic
chemicals dumped in the Love Canal section of Niagara Falls, N.Y.

A recent two-part series on toxic wastes in this newspaper - by Ralph Blumenthal
and Ben Franklin - laid out in stark detail the clear threat to public health
and the complexity of trying to contain the problem.

For example, the series showed that criminal elements now play a major role in
the illegal dumping of hazardous wastes. These carting companies connected to
organized crime, who are paid healthy sums by industry to dispose of wastes
properly at special, sometimes distant facilities licensed by the state, dump
them instead - at little cost and therefore great profit -in nearby garbage
landfills, waterways, roadside ditches, sewers and sometimes even into wells.
And there are companies with no criminal ties who have been doing the same - for
the same profit motive.

The greed quotient is high. And, ironically, as government rules have tightened,
raising the cost of safe disposal, the financial incentive for criminal behavior
has thereby been heightened - and even more of our toxic substances are thus
being illegally dumped.

Paradox seems to rule the situation. The Federal Environmental Protection Agency
says that 2.3 million tons of hazardous wastes are produced every year in New
York alone - and a recent Congressional study says it could be five times
higher. Yet the licensed facilities for neutralizing or burying these materials
- many of them carcinogenic - can handle at best only one million tons of it.

So even if we had stringent enforcement, which we don't, there simply aren't
enough proper places to put this poisonous stuff and protect the public from it.

More bizarre still, there are reports that some of the licensed disposal plants
do not get enough business to operate at full capacity - apparently because so
much of the waste is being disposed of outside the law.

Conservative estimates put the amount of new waste generated each year
throughout the country at 250 million tons. That's more than a ton for every
person here - which, without suggesting a need to panic, is pretty toxic.

Federal regulations are full of loopholes and omissions.  Combustible liquid
wastes can be, and are, burned as boiler fuel in factory and apartment-house
furnaces - whose temperatures are not high enough for complete combustion of
these materials. The result is that toxic byproducts are sent into the air; and
no one is assessing the threat of this to public health.

Moreover, the present fines for illegal dumping are modest and are thus viewed
by the flourishing illegal dumpers as merely a cost of doing business.

These gaps in enforcement are compounded by Washington's flagging financial
support for local anti-pollution programs. And the local commitment itself is
less than stunning.

Every time government tries to build a treatment plant somewhere, residents of
the area rise up to demand that it be put somewhere else. And since these voices
are more numerous than those of the people in the periodic ''scare'' areas, they
usually get their way with the elected officials who depend on their votes.

All told, latest estimates show, private industry and government at all levels
are spending between $4 billion and $5 billion a year to control hazardous
wastes - which is but a fraction of what's needed to make us confident that the
population is not at risk.

At some point, we're going to have to decide whether we want to foot the real
bill for keeping this monster we created in our castle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Hero Faces Death

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif., June 9


Larry Webster, a Vietnam War hero who turned to alcohol and drugs, has been
sentenced to die in the gas chamber for murder. Judge Sheldon Grossfeld of
Superior Court imposed the death penalty Thursday on the 34-year-old Mr. Webster
after a jury found him guilty of the robbery and murder of Charles Burke and
voted the death penalty. A second man, Joseph Madrigal, 26, was sentenced to
life in prison without the possibility of parole. Three others were sentenced to
long prison terms in the case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: A U.S. DOCTOR TELLS OF EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 581 words


The best witness is a disinterested witness, testifying without embroidery or
interpretation, addressing himself only to what he knows really happened. Dr.
Charles Clements, an American physician who spent a year ministering to
insurgents in El Salvador, appears to be this kind of witness. If he has a
hidden agenda, it is not obvious. If he is speaking from hearsay, it is not
apparent. He is interviewed on the ''David Susskind Show'' on Channel 5 tomorrow
night at 11:30.

Actually, Dr. Clements, who has been interviewed before, does not add much to
what a reasonably well-informed viewer already knows, or at least suspects,
about El Salvador. Moreover, Mr. Susskind does not always ask questions that
would allow Dr. Clements to talk about what he is presumably best informed on -
life with the insurgents.  Mr. Susskind, sighing, shaking his head, is most
interested in building a case against American involvement in El Salvador. He
approaches the topic with almost religious zeal.

The method, however, has merit. Dr. Clements, a former Air Force officer who
flew 50 missions in Vietnam, is an unlikely hero for the peace movement. He
seems to be almost nonpartisan. Half facetiously, but also, one suspects,
because Mr. Susskind knows that his audience is wondering about it too, Mr.
Susskind asks Dr. Clements if he is a Communist, if he takes drugs, if he is a
homosexual if, in short, he is what some might regard as any kind of nut. Dr.
Clements says no.  He was discharged from the Air Force after being treated by
psychiatrists, but this apparently was because he declined to fly more combat
missions. Dr. Clements seems to be a straight arrow.

Therefore, he is credible. Mr. Susskind says the Administration asserts it has
sent no napalm to El Salvador. He asks Dr. Clements if this is true. Dr.
Clements says he simply doesn't know because burns from white phosphorous are
similar to napalm burns, and that while he knows he has treated phosphorous
burns, he is unsure about the napalm. In his caution, there is the ring of
truth.

Dr. Clements also says that Government troops may be as young as 14 years old,
and that sometimes they are dragooned off the streets into the army. He casts
doubt on the propriety of the El Salvador elections, saying that in the
precincts he knew of, ballots were numbered, allowing the Government to
determine how the votes were cast. He also says that when Government troops
enter a province they burn crops, kill livestock and murder civilians.

Is there anything good he can say about the Government, Mr.  Susskind asks. Dr.
Clements says it had ''some good people,'' but that they've all dropped out.
Death squads, he says, still operate with impunity; terror is pervasive; torture
is an instrument of policy. He draws a picture of a murderous cockpit, made more
terrifying by American intervention.

In his passion, Mr. Susskind weakens his case by never asking Dr.  Clements if
there are murderous insurgents, too. In a civil war, with both sides drawn from
the same culture, one assumes there are. Dr.  Clements, however, does describe
the insurgent movement as ''pluralistic.'' He also says that President Reagan is
''an honorable man,'' as does Mr. Susskind, but that he is sure the President is
''misinformed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPANISH CAUTIONS U.S. ON LATIN WAR

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: MADRID, June 11


Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez said this week that a war in Central America
could have ''unforeseeable consequences'' and he called on the United States and
the countries of the region to ''avoid at all costs the triggering of a general
conflict.''

The 41-year-old Spanish Socialist, who returned here Monday from a five-nation
tour of Latin America and is to visit President Reagan in two weeks, threw his
support behind a Central American peace initiative undertaken by four Latin
American countries.

He called the initiative, by Panama, Colombia, Venezuela and Mexico, ''one of
the last possible efforts for a peaceful solution.'' While emphasizing, ''I
wouldn't dare to give any advice,'' he suggested that direct talks between the
United States and Cuba would be a great step in easing tensions. He said that 20
years of isolation of Havana by Washington had produced nothing positive and
that Cuba ''as a country needs to have a regional status.''

Offers Wide Range of Views

In an interview Thursday in his office in the Parliament building, Mr. Gonzalez
offered his views on a wide range of subjects, from diplomatic recognition of
Israel by Spain, which he tied to an overall Middle East peace settlement, to
terrorism by Basque separatists, which he predicted would be gradually overcome.

But the primary theme was Central America, which is certain to figure in his
talks with President Reagan on June 21. He repeated, in general terms, his
criticisms of Washington's policy in the region, contending that peace was the
indispensable condition for establishing democracy and justice in Central
America.

''I would like to tell the United States that objectively, because it is the
leading country in the Western world, that leadership should be exercised more
positively and less negatively,'' he said.  ''I don't know if this implies a
harsh criticism or not - let others judge that.''

''I understand the reasons of security of the United States - for example, in
the Canal Zone - and I have said so often. But I believe one must also
understand that those reasons of security cannot allow the people of the region
to endure situations of injustice.''

Central America is not Vietnam, he said, but it contains the seeds of a wider
conflagration.

Repercussions of Possible War

''Let us imagine that there is a war, as is sometimes feared, between Nicaragua
and Honduras,'' he said. ''What would the outcome be? Would it spread from
Nicaragua and Honduras to El Salvador, Guatemala and, who knows, even to Costa
Rica? How will Panama be affected? What repercussions would it have in Mexico?''

''I believe that the road to a possible armed confrontation has at this moment
unforeseeable consequences from the political and historical points of view.
Therefore I believe that the interests of the peoples in the region and of the
United States is to avoid at all costs the triggering of a general conflict.''

Mr. Gonzalez spoke of South America as a continent of challenging opportunites
as well as political risks. He predicted it would undergo profound and
fundamental changes by the year 2000, and said it was necessary to channel its
tremendous growth ''within the limits of moderation and democratic pluralism.''

''The popular trends that demand a better distribution of wealth must find a
reply from what I would call the moderate left and moderate right, excluding the
temptations for an authoritarianism of the left or of the right,'' he said.

In response to a question about Puerto Rico, the Prime Minister said he recalled
years ago writing a letter to someone - he believed it was President Carter - on
behalf of Puerto Rican prisoners in the United States. He stopped short of
saying he sympathized with the Puerto Rican independence movement, saying only:
''Like any people with a personality of their own, they have a right to decide
on their own fate. I'm not the right person to say what that fate should be.''

On other issues, Mr. Gonzalez said he had a ''sincere and cordial relationship''
with Thomas O. Enders, the newly named United States Ambassador to Madrid,
''considering that he's in the opposite camp.'' He repeated a pledge to hold a
public referendum on Spain's membership in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization by 1986.

He also acknowledged that the American use of military bases in Spain was often
unpopular in the cities near the bases but said the Government would not give in
to local pressures for their removal or relocation. Any such changes would be
determined only by national security needs, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Australian Premier In Washington for Talks

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


Prime Minister Bob Hawke of Australia arrived today on an official visit that
could be marred by disagreement over his Government's plan to resume aid to
Vietnam.

The issue of economic aid to Vietnam is certain to be the most sensitive topic
in discussions Mr. Hawke will have with President Reagan and other top
Administation officials during his four-day stay.

A State Department official made clear to reporters on the eve of the visit that
the United States viewed Mr. Hawke's proposal to resume aid to Hanoi before
Vietnamese forces are withdrawn from Cambodia as ''very unhelpful.''

Mr. Hawke's Labor Party, which won Australia's general elections in March, is
pledged to resume aid to Vietnam that was suspended when Vietnam took control of
much of Cambodia in January 1979.

The State Department official said that during the talks U.S.  officials would
''note that the U.S. opposes sending aid to Vietnam'' as long as Vietnamese
forces remain in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK OFFERS TO STEP DOWN AS PRESIDENT IN EXILE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 660 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 11


Prince Norodom Sihanouk has offered to resign the presidency of Cambodia's
government in exile if his coalition partners do not like his talk of resolving
the Cambodian conflict through political means, a representative of the Prince
said today.

The reports of the Prince's offer to quit came from Peking and were confirmed
here today by the representative, Lah Tol.  The offer to quit, which was made in
a cable June 3 to the coalition's Vice President, Khieu Samphan, came in
response to criticism that the Prince was beginning to sound as if he wanted to
reach an accommodation with Vietnam, whose troops have occupied Cambodia since
early 1979.

The three-sided coaliton links Prince Sihanouk and former Prime Minister Son
Sann with Cambodia's deposed Communist ruler, Pol Pot.  The coalition has said
since its formation a year ago that the Vietnamese Army and the Camboidan
Government it supports in Phnom Penh should be opposed both militarily and
through international diplomatic pressure, but not through compromise with
Hanoi. The United Nations recognizes Prince Sihanouk's group as Cambodia's
legitimate Government.

Sihanouk's Proposal

Mr. Sihanouk, however, is reportedly worried that time is on Vietnam's side.
Recently he proposed that the coalition invite Phnom Penh's Cambodian rulers to
join it and hold free elections.

Mr. Khieu Samphan, one of Pol Pot's longtime lieutenants, criticized the idea in
a letter to Prince Sihanouk on June 2. The Prince's reply said in part, ''I wish
to offer my resignation, and I will be happy if you would accept it now without
harming too much the interests of Democratic Kampuchea.'' Democratic Kampuchea
is the name the coalition inherited from the Pol Pot Government.

The current issue of the Far Eastern Economic Review, a weekly published in Hong
Kong, quotes the Prince as saying in an interview in Peking that Mr. Khieu
Samphan had virtually accused him of being an agent for Vietnam.

Diplomats here have not taken the resignation threat at face value. They say
that Prince Sihanouk lends the coalition any prestige it possesses.

''Sihanouk is reminding people that he matters,'' a Western diplomat said today
of the resignation threat.

Thais Respond Quietly

The Thai Government, which helped persuade the coalition's partners to put aside
their deep distrust in the interest of keeping alive an alternative to Cambodia
under Vietnamese control, has greeted the resignation threat quietly. Thailand's
Prime Minister, Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, said Friday that a resignation would be
bad news.

The representative of Prince said the cable meant he would ''prefer to resign''
rather than let his declarations damage the coalition. The spokesman declined to
elaborate.

Prince Sihanouk has threatened twice this month to step down. He summoned
reporters in Peking on June 1 to say he would quit if Son Sann did not stop
attacking him for his proposal to include Phnom Penh's pro-Vietnamese leaders in
an expanded coalition.

The Far Eastern Economic Revioew quoted the 60-year-old Prince as disagreeing
with China, his coalition's most powerful backer, as well as with his partners
on how best to attract world sympathy and persuade the Vietnamese to leave
Cambodia. He also condemned Pol Pot's faction, saying that it had changed only
superficially since the days of its harsh rule.

Last month Mr. Sihanouk went to one of Pol Pot's guerrilla camps along the
Thai-Cambodian border to receive the credentials of five foreign ambassadors.
Before the ceremony, he embraced Khieu Samphan and other Pol Pot lieutenants
despite his frequent comments to journalists that Pol Pot's followers murdered
several of his children and grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

30 SITES ARE ADDED TO DIOXIN INQUIRY

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 43, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words


Prompted by findings of dioxin contamination in Newark, officials have begun
investigating at least 30 other long-known manufacturing sites in five Eastern
states where Government records say the toxic impurity may have been produced.

According to Federal and state officials, dioxin may still be present in
dangerous concentrations at the sites, which are in New Jersey, New York State
outside New York City, Pennsylvania, Maryland and West Virginia.

The officials said extensive further review of company records and completed
tests at the sites would be needed before the presence of dioxin could be
confirmed.

''We are not in a crash-crisis mode, we're in a precautionary mode,'' said
Richard T. Dewling, deputy New York regional administrator of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency.

More Testing Is Ahead

Mr. Dewling said in an interview that although no evidence of widespread
contamination was found outside the quarantined Diamond Shamrock Corporation
plant in Newark, extensive testing lay ahead there and elsewhere.

Further testing was also set for the site of a demolished plant, the former
Chemical Insecticide Corporation, in Edison Township.  Officials said the
companies in the Northeast were contacted because they, along with Diamond
Shamrock and Chemical Insecticide, had been listed in a November 1980 E.P.A.
report as producers of pesticides and organic chemicals linked to ''potential
dioxin contamination.''

In all, the report listed 91 companies around the country, including the 30 now
under study in the East, that the E.P.A. said produced various chemicals linked
to dioxin contamination. Inquiries had begun into some of the plants and sites
around the country after the disclosure of dioxin contamination in Times Beach,
Mo., and other places.

State and U.S. Inquiries Begin

The investigations into the other sites in the Northeast began last week with
letters and telephone calls to the chemical companies from the New York and
Philadelphia regional officers of the E.P.A., the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.

The inquiries asked whether the plants had used any of about 80 chemical
processes linked to dioxin contamination; what chemicals were produced as
wastes; who had transported wastes from the sites, and where wastes had been
deposited. In some cases, companies were asked about employee health.

New York and New Jersey officials said the companies have cooperated.  Officials
said they were trying to find out what had happened to what were believed to be
large amounts of of dioxin-contaminated waste that some of the processes
produced.

Companies Protest Being Listed

Some of the chemical companies in the New York area said they did not belong on
the list.  Jan Anthony, president of R.S.A. Corporation, a small research and
development company with 12 employees in Ardsley, N.Y., said a check of records
going back to the 1930's showed that his company had never handled the cited
chemicals in the E.P.A. report.

Donald Horowitz, vice president of Aceto Chemical Company with offices in
Flushing, Queens, and a plant in New Jersey, said he had no idea why his company
was on the list. ''I don't deal in dioxin,'' he said, declining to discuss it
further.

Thomas Whiteside, an author who has written two books and numerous magazine
articles about dioxin, including the aftermath of the explosion at Seveso,
Italy, in 1976, said his extrapolations have shown that more than a ton of TCDD,
about 2,200 pounds of dioxin, is contained in the approximately 7 million pounds
of trichlorophenol waste in Niagara Falls landfills used by Hooker Chemical
Corporation, whose parent company, Occidental Petroleum Corporation, is on the
latest list.

'It's an Inexorable Process'

''It's there,'' said Mr. Whiteside. ''It hasn't evaporated. It hasn't been
removed. It will leach out. It's an inexorable process.'' Asked about the
three-year lag between when the report was made and when the investigations were
begun, Mr. Dewling of the E.P.A. said that there had been more urgent tasks.
Also he said that in 1980 there was only one laboratory equipped for such dioxin
testing and that it was frequently ''backlogged six to eight months,'' and that
''there was no standard testing protocol.''

However, Ellen Silbergeld, the chief toxics scientist of the Environmental
Defense Fund, said that dioxin-testing technology was widely available and that
E.P.A. officials had held back because of a dispute with Vietnam veterans over
asserted injuries linked to Agent Orange, a herbicide often found contaminated
with dioxin.

Dioxin is actually a family of compounds produced as an often unavoidable
impurity in certain chemical and industrial processes, including the making of
the herbicide 2,4,5-T, a component of Agent Orange.

This is a list of the companies contacted by officials in connection with
possible dioxin contamination: New York - Olin, Rochester; R.S.A., Ardsley;
Guardian, Hauppauge; Eastman Kodak, Rochester; B.A.S.F. Wyandotte, Rensselaer;
Occidental, Niagara Falls; F.M.C., Middleport; Aceto, Flushing.  New Jersey -
Chemical Insecticide, Edison; Amchem, Linden; American Cyanamid, Linden; Eastern
Guardian, Pequannock; G.A.F., Linden; Givaudan, Clifton; Calgon, Hawthorne;
Millmaster Onyx, Berkeley Heights; Rhone-Poulenc, New Brunswick; White Chemical,
Bayonne.  Pennsylvania - Amchem, Ambler; American Color and Chemical, Lock
Haven; Rohm & Haas, Philadelphia; Alco Standard, Valley Forge.  Maryland -
Chemical Services, Baltimore; Miller Chemical, Whiteford; Dynasurf Chemical,
Baltimore; F.M.C., Baltimore.  West Virginia - Roberts, Nitro; Monsanto, Nitro;
Union Carbide, Institute and South Charleston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

            June 12, 1983, Sunday, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

The World in Summary;
General Sounds Cautionary Vote On El Salvador

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 259 words


A lot of people fear that the errors of Vietnam could be repeated in Central
America. It may matter that one of them is Gen. Edward C.  Meyer, the Army Chief
of Staff. The general said last week it would be wrong to send combat troops
''without the support of the American people'' to a country - El Salvador -
which ''isn't fully committed to the resolution of its internal problem.''

He told reporters that his views reflected those of the other members of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. General Meyer, who is retiring next week, described ''a
crying need'' for coherent programs in Central America and said economic aid,
bottled up in Congress, is ''critical because guerrilla war is based on the
legitimate concerns of the people.''

A long-heralded campaign to meet those concerns in El Salvador as well as to
bring the guerrillas to heel was launched last week by some 4,500 Government
troops in the major provinces of San Vicente and Usulutan. The military sweep is
to be followed by a program to build schools, repair roads and improve other
social services.

On Honduras, General Meyer said the Pentagon had construction of six new
airfields under consideration. And the Honduran military chief, Gen. Gustavo
Alvarez Martinez, told The New York Times that a ''minimum'' of $400 million in
military aid would be needed over three years to deter ''direct aggression by
Nicaragua'' and ''the possibility of internal subversion,'' also sponsored by
Managua. The Administration had requested $37 million in security aid for
Honduras this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A Soldierly Warning on Salvador

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


In a salutary interview, Gen. Edward Meyer spelled out some home truths about
military involvement in El Salvador. The Army's Chief of Staff opposes sending
American forces because the home front is reluctant and because Salvadorans are
not properly committed to defeating the leftist guerrillas. Besides, he adds,
the option could be considered only if there were clearer political and military
objectives and public understanding of the costs in money, arms and men.

The only thing wrong with that wholesome analysis was its source.  It is the
kind of clarity and candor that Americans should be hearing from their
President. Mr. Reagan's main speech to Congress was neither so clear nor candid.
He proclaimed that American credibility and interests were vitally at stake in
Central America but that he had no thought of sending American troops. A
cheering Congress was left to ponder just what he meant by ''no thought'' and,
given the stakes, why not.

Evidently the Joint Chiefs have been pondering, too. When General Meyer says
there is a ''crying need'' to pull together economic, political and military
efforts, he is speaking to a policy void. And when he pleads for an American
consensus for whatever might be done, he addresses a political void.

''We didn't do that in Vietnam,'' said General Meyer, who is due to step down
this month. ''We inched our way in. Then all of a sudden we were there.''
Reflecting on his two Vietnam tours as a field commander, he said, ''I was a bit
confused as to why I was over there.''

If the White House will not speak in these plain terms, we can at least hope
that it is listening.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS FOR VACATION READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 10940 words


The following list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas
Issue of December 1982. Such a list can only suggest the high points in the main
fields of reader interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject
headings. Quoted comments are from The Book Review.

Autobiography & Biography

AFTER LONG SILENCE. By Michael Straight. (Norton. $17.50.) An account of a
privileged trans-Atlantic life in which the author, a prominent fixture on the
liberal American scene and longtime editor of The New Republic, publicly reveals
his undergraduate connection with the British Communist Party, particularly with
Guy Burgess and Anthony Blunt.

ALEXANDER OF RUSSIA. Napoleon's Conqueror. By Henri Troyat.  (Dutton. $17.95.)
Mr. Troyat approaches history ''in the manner of the old-fashioned omniscient
observer, distilling ... from the rich memoirs of the era morsels of dialogue
and vignettes of life in the court and around the battlefield.''

ALFRED STIEGLITZ: PHOTOGRAPHY & WRITINGS. By Sarah Greenough and Juan Hamilton.
(Callaway Editions/National Gallery of Art. $75.) The organizers of the
traveling exhibition of the work of the American photographer have assembled
''unquestionably the most beautiful book devoted to his work.''

ANNA PAVLOVA. Her Life and Art. By Keith Money. (Knopf. $55.) A lushly
illustrated volume that shows that the great dancer's life ''was her art.''

BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. The Wizard of Tuskegee, 1901-1915. By Louis R. Harlan.
(Oxford. $30.) This concluding volume of the life of the black educator avoids
''the pitfalls of white guilt and black rage and the temptation to judge the
past by standards of the present. (A) remarkable achievement.''

CONFESSIONS OF AN ACTOR. By Laurence Olivier. (Simon & Schuster.  $16.95.) In
which the ''fascinated reader not only meets Olivier playing Hamlet and Macbeth
and Heathcliff ... he meets the actor playing the part of an author.''

COURT OF MEMORY. By James McConkey. (Dutton. $14.95.) An affecting ''assemblage
of 21 autobiographical meditations by a novelist and short-story writer who
teaches English at Cornell (that) never ducks and runs.''

CUSTOMS AND CHARACTERS. Contemporary Portaits. By Peter Quennell.  (Little,
Brown. $16.50.) A new volume of autobiographical reminiscences from one of the
last and most graceful of the British writers who came of age in the 20's.

THE DARK SIDE OF GENIUS. The Life of Alfred Hitchcock. By Donald Spoto. (Little,
Brown. $20.) ''For those who consider Hitchcock a dark genius Mr. Spoto's book
is absolutely compulsory reading.'' Aspects of the director's life are as
chilling and spellbinding as his films, including a strong sense of persecution,
a streak of sadism and a profound belief in original sin.

DE GAULLE. By Bernard Ledwidge. (St. Martin's. $17.95.) A former Minister of the
British Embassy in Paris who ''clearly admires de Gaulle the statesman and de
Gaulle the artist'' offers ''a fine summary of a great record ... an explanation
of, and a contribution to, a great legend.''

DESCENT FROM GLORY. Four Generations of the John Adams Family. By Paul Nagel.
(Oxford. $25.) The troubled and sometimes disastrous lives of the later members
of one of the great founding families of the nation seem to prove that
''disappointment is entirely, ruthlessly democratic.''

THE DIARY OF BEATRICE WEBB. Volume One, 1873-1892. ''Glitter Around and Darkness
Within.'' Edited by Norman and Jeanne MacKenzie.  (Harvard. $25.) The prominent
British socialist's early diaries are the story of how an ''elegant swan turned
herself into an ugly duckling. ... To read them is to meet a glamorous George
Eliot.''

DIFFICULT WOMEN. A Memoir of Three. By David Plante. (Atheneum.  $9.95.) The
novelist's memoirs of Jean Rhys, Sonia Orwell and Germaine Greer, linked by his
''idea that his own complicated motives in devoting himself to these friendships
is part of the story he has to tell.''

DOWN & OUT IN THE GREAT DEPRESSION. Letters from the ''Forgotten Man.'' Edited
by Robert S. McElvaine. (University of North Carolina.  Cloth, $23. Paper,
$8.95.) An affecting sampling of the millions of letters written to Federal
officials during the Depression, with commentary and a selection of the
memorable photographs of the period.

ELENI. By Nicholas Gage. (Random House. $15.95.) ''Through the personal tragedy
of his mother's death by a Communist firing squad in the Greek Civil war,'' a
reporter ''addresses the essential character of modern war, in which the
distinction between combatant and noncombatant has been lost.''

ELSA LANCHESTER HERSELF. By Elsa Lanchester. (St. Martin's.  $17.95.) The
actress's memoirs are most moving in describing her ''eccentric, idealistic,
radical socialist'' mother and the last years of her stormy marriage to Charles
Laughton.

EUGENE V. DEBS. Citizen and Socialist. By Nick Salvatore.  (University of
Illinois. $24.95.) A Bancroft Prize-winning account of the life of the popular
American Socialist, based on extensive documentation and a ''persuasive analysis
of aspects of 19th-century American culture.''

F. SCOTT FITZGERALD. By Andre Le Vot. Translated by William Byron.  (Doubleday.
$19.95.) A French critic and scholar has produced a ''painstaking account'' that
is ''a worthy addition to the study of ... 'a fine, messed-up life.' ''

FAR FROM DENMARK. By Peter Martins, with Robert Cornfield.  (Little, Brown.
$24.95.) An illustrated memoir by the leading dancer and choreographer (and now
codirector) of the New York City Ballet, describing ''his still uncompleted
journey to artistic self-realization.''

THE FORTIES. From Notebooks and Diaries of the Period. By Edmund Wilson. Edited,
with an introduction, by Leon Edel. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) While the
40's were a crucial decade of personal and political activity for the eminent
author and critic, the editor's commentaries ''may be the best part of the
book.''

FURY ON EARTH. A Biography of Wilhelm Reich. By Myron Sharaf.  (Marek/St.
Martin's. $24.95.) A student, patient and colleague of Reich's for 10 years, the
author spent another decade writing this remarkable, often passionate and
sometimes painful biography of the analyst and thinker whose life was a mixture
of mysticism and tragedy.

THE FIRST ELIZABETH. By Carolly Erickson. (Summit. $19.95.) England was her only
spouse and history her great lover, and if this intimate portrait of Elizabeth I
''is not a picture Gloriana would have chosen to put on the coins of her realm,
it is one the private woman might well have recognized, and ribaldly enjoyed.''

FRIDA. A Biography of Frida Kahlo. By Hayden Herrera. (Harper & Row. $21.95.)
The life of the Mexican artist and wife of Diego Riviera who ''lived
dramatically, even melodramatically, in dramatic times.''

THE HOUND & HORN LETTERS. Edited by Mitzi Berger Hamovitch.  Foreword by Lincoln
Kirstein. (University of Georgia. $25.) Letters, mainly to and from its founder,
Lincoln Kirstein, about the magazine that ''from 1927 to 1934 proved how good a
little magazine can be.''

A GENERAL'S LIFE. By Omar N. Bradley and Clay Blair. (Simon & Schuster. $19.95.)
The General of the Army died while he was still at work on this memoir, in which
the mild-voiced Bradley of ''A Soldier's Story'' is replaced by an acerbic man
who is not reluctant to put down, sometimes in acid lines, his judgments about
other officers and politicians.

H.H. ASQUITH: LETTERS TO VENETIA STANLEY. Edited by Michael and Eleanor Brock.
(Oxford. $35.) An extraordinary collection of letters written during the first
two years of World War I by the British Prime Minister to a woman 34 years his
junior. Filled with his thoughts about literature, love, politics, the war,
Cabinet secrets and his celebrated colleagues.

HAMMETT. A Life at the Edge. By William F. Nolan. (Congdon & Weed.  $16.96.) A
biography of the mystery writer that draws on sources other than those
authorized by his friend Lillian Hellman and investigates the withering of his
literary output after 1934.

JFK. The Presidency of John F. Kennedy. By Herbert S. Parmet.  (Dial. $24.95.)
The second volume of a biography that presents ''a finely tuned politician
-young, glamorous, brilliant - who disappointed the expectations that he was so
good at arousing.''

A JOURNEY FOR OUR TIMES. By Harrison E. Salisbury. (Harper & Row.  $22.50.) A
journalist's autobiography that describes ''the forging of an obsession'' with
Russia and a gritty, skeptical sensibility that has ''served his readers for 40
years.''

THE LAST HERO. Wild Bill Donovan. By Anthony Cave Brown. (Times Books. $24.95.)
A ''massive, yet continually fascinating, biography of the founder'' of the
Office of Strategic Services.

THE LETTERS OF ARCHIBALD MACLEISH. 1907-1982. Edited by R.H.  Winnick. (Houghton
Mifflin. $20.) Letters from seven decades of the poet's life that show
''MacLeish's relation to poetry was mixed and even sporadic.''

THE LETTERS OF HENRY ADAMS. Volume One: 1858-1868. Volume Two: 1868-1885. Volume
Three: 1886-1892. Edited by J.C. Levenson and others. (Harvard. $100.) This
edition of the letters of one of the greatest letter writers in American
history, who was also one of our most interesting thinkers, supplants all
previous editions.

LEON BLUM. By Jean Lacouture. Translated by George Holoch. (Holmes & Meier.
Cloth, $39.50. Paper, $24.50.) The French journalist and biographer turns to the
life of the controversial French Socialist.

LUTHER. By John M. Todd. (Crossroad. $17.50.) A vigorous biography that
''enables the theologically untrained to get a feel both for the man and the
movements of his time.''

MARCEL PROUST. Selected Letters (1880-1903). Edited by Philip Kolb. Translated
by Ralph Manheim. (Doubleday. $19.95.) A ''representative selection'' from the
nine volumes of letters already published in French that ''constitute a sort of
epistolary autobiography of great psychological interest'' and show a very
neurotic young man.

MARIE BONAPARTE. By Celia Bertin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  $17.95.) The
melodramatic life of the wealthy French aristocrat, analysand of Freud and
psychoanalyst, apparently written with access to sealed documents.

MEMOIRS. By Petro G. Grigorenko. Translated by Thomas P. Whitney.  (Norton.
$19.95.) A ''substantial account'' of the life of the dissident Soviet major
general now exiled in the United States.

MINOR CHARACTERS. By Joyce Johnson. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) The memoir of a
sometime girlfriend of Jack Kerouac. ''Her portrayal of growing up bright and
sensitive in Manhattan is the true heart of the book.''

A PRIVATE VIEW. By Irene Mayer Selznick. (Knopf. $16.95.) An ''account of
growing up under, surviving and absorbing the influence of two overpowering
men,'' her father, Louis B. Mayer, and her husband, David O. Selznick.

REMARKABLE WOMEN. The Story of the Pearsall Smith Women. By Barbara Strachey.
(Universe Books. $15.95.) The author's matriarchal forebears were intimately
involved with prominent events and individuals in England and the United States
from the mid-19th century to World War II. An entertaining collective biography,
based on some 20,000 letters.

RICHARD NEUTRA AND THE SEARCH FOR MODERN ARCHITECTURE. By Thomas S. Hines.
(Oxford . $49.95.) The author of ''Burnham of Chicago'' offers a ''sensitive
examination'' of California's ''pre-eminent modernist'' architect.

ROBERT BROWNING. A Life Within Life. By Donald Thomas. (Viking.  $18.85.) A
biography that uses Browning's poetry to illuminate his life and thus reflects a
new light on the poetry. There is also information on the poet's early reading
and extensive knowledge of medicine, zoology and music.

RUTH BENEDICT. Patterns of a Life. By Judith Schacter Modell.  (University of
Pennsylvania. $25.) The first biography of the anthropologist who was a ''major
architect of modern cultural determinism'' and ''surely among the most important
woman intellectuals of the century.''

SOLO. An American Dreamer in Europe: 1933-34. By Wright Morris.  (Harper & Row.
$14.95.) A droll literary memoir that ''admits it's possible to go abroad and
have a crummy time.''

STIEGLITZ. By Sue Davidson Lowe. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.50.) ''A
Stieglitz Family Chronicle, from the arrival in New York, 1849, of Alfred's
father to the disposal of Alfred's ashes beside Lake George 97 years later.''
Done ''with verve'' by the grandniece of the great American photographer.

SON OF THE REVOLUTION. By Liang Heng and Judith Shapiro. (Knopf.  $15.) A
''harrowing but spellbinding account of Mr. Liang's growing up and coming of age
in the political maelstrom of the Cultural Revolution.''

STOKOWSKI. A Counterpoint of View. By Oliver Daniel. (Dodd, Mead.  $24.95.) A
massive biography of the controversial musician who was both ''a clown and one
of the most significant conductors in the world.''

THOMAS EAKINS. By Lloyd Goodrich. Volumes One and Two. (Harvard/ National
Gallery of Art. $70.) This study of the great Philadelphia painter ''is a
crowning achievement of the author's long and productive career.''

TONY CROSLAND. By Susan Crosland. (Jonathan Cape. $19.95.) A biography by his
widow of the admired British Labor Party politician that is a ''remarkably
intimate portrait of a public man written by a woman who does not bother to try
to hide the fact that she adored him.''

VOICES. A Life of Frank O'Connor. (Atheneum. $25.) A careful account of the
contentious life of the great Irish short-story writer.

W.H. HUDSON. By Ruth Tomalin. (Faber & Faber. $19.95.) This life of the
naturalist and novelist who wrote ''Green Mansions'' includes ''first-rate
chapters on the revolution in the world's thinking about wildlife.''

YEATS. By Douglas Archibald. (Syracuse University. $25.) A telling of the poet's
life that ''moves urbanely between biography and criticism, interpreting
literary history as other voices.''

ZAMI. A New Spelling of My Name. By Audre Lord. (Persephone Press.  Paper,
$7.95.) An ''excellent and evocative autobiography'' of the contemporary lesbian
poet, who was born and grew up in New York City.

Children's Books

ARNOLD OF THE DUCKS. Written and illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein.  (Harper &
Row. $10.50. Ages 5 to 9.) A human boy, raised by Leda Duck, learns to duck
walk, swim and fly in a story both humorous and poignant and with buoyant
illustrations.

THE DEVIL WITH THE THREE GOLDEN HAIRS. Retold and illustrated by Nonny
Hogrogian. (Knopf. $10.95. Ages 5 to 9.) A wicked monarch sets a seemingly
impossible task for a lucky lad - to pluck hairs from the devil's head - in this
felicitous retelling of a Grimm tale. The illustrations ''impart richness of
atmosphere and context.''

LAVINIA'S COTTAGE: Imagined by Her Devoted Grandfather. By John S.  Goodall.
(Margaret McElderry/ Atheneum. $8.95. Ages 4 to 7.) A pop-up book in which a
dozen doors open ''to reveal the minutiae'' of pastoral Edwardian life.

THE MAGICAL ADVENTURES OF PRETTY PEARL. By Virginia Hamilton.  (Charlotte
Zolotow/Harper & Row. $11.50. Ages 12 and Up.) In this extraordinary fantasy a
god child comes down from Africa's Mount Kenya to help her people being shipped
across the sea into slavery.

ME ME ME ME ME: Not a Novel. By M.E. Kerr. (Charlotte Zolotow/Harper & Row.
$9.95. Ages 12 and Up.) ''A deliciously wicked sense of humor'' is revealed in
this autobiographical memoir about growing up in a small upstate New York town
by one of the most successful practitioners of the young adult novel.

THE SIGN OF THE BEAVER. By Elizabeth George Speare. (Houghton Mifflin. $8.95.
Ages 10 to 14.) This story about a 12-year-old boy surviving in the Maine
wilderness of the late 1760's is ''distinguished in style and compelling in
narrative force.''

THE SILVER COW: A Welsh Tale. Retold by Susan Cooper. Illustrated by Warwick
Hutton. (Margaret McElderry/Atheneum. $11.95. Ages 4 to 8.) A marvelous bovine
sent up from the depths of a lake makes a man wealthy until he turns greedy and
ungrateful. A well-told tale with luminous illustrations.

THE SONG OF PENTECOST. By W.J. Corbett. Illustrated by Martin Ursell. (Dutton.
$10.95. Ages 10 and Up.) Allegorical adventures of a band of mice, aided by a
lying frog and a double-crossing snake, among others, on a journey for a new
home. ''A rare tale, briskly written ... with humor, suspense and tenderness.''

THE WISH GIVER: Three Tales of Coven Tree. By Bill Brittain.  Illustrated by
Andrew Glass. (Thomas Y. Crowell. $9.95. Ages 9 to 12.) An ''eerie delight, told
in a homey, back-country voice'' about three young people who are given a wish
apiece and get more than they bargained for.

THE WRECK OF THE ZEPHYR. Written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg.
(Houghton Mifflin. $14.95. Ages 7 and Up.) Sailboats fly through the air in this
handsomely illustrated, imaginative story of a boy out to prove he is the
world's greatest sailor.

Crime

THE CONDUCT OF MAJOR MAXIM. By Gavin Lyall. (Viking. $14.75.) Harry Maxim,
working with British intelligence, gets interested in the case of an army
deserter and finds himself caught up in international plottings. A smooth,
urbane and witty outing.

DEATH AND THE PRINCESS. By Robert Barnard. (Scribners. $10.95).  High jinks
among British royalty, especially a naughty princess.  Scotland Yard's Percy
Trethowan, a cop who also is an aristocrat, has to keep an eye on her. Veddy
civilized.

FELLOWSHIP OF FEAR. By Aaron J. Elkins. (Walker. $11.95.) An American
anthropologist at Heidelberg gets mixed up in espionage and is chased all over
Europe. His knowledge of human anatomy helps him to unravel the plot against
him. A good-humored first novel.

HARD LINE. By Michael Z. Lewin. (Morrow. $11.95.) Featuring Lt.  Leroy Powder of
the Indianapolis Police Department (Missing Persons Bureau). Tough, crusty and
independent, he does not at first relish having a lady cop assigned to his unit
but they learn how to work together. Tersely written, with particularly
effective dialogue.

NIGHT RITUALS. By Michael Jahn. (Norton. $12.95.) A New York procedural about
the murder of women in Riverside Park. A hard look at the city's racial
tensions.

RITUAL MURDER. By S. T. Haymon. (St. Martin's. $10.95.) A sensitively written
story about a murder in a cathedral in Britain that duplicates a crime blamed on
the Jews in the 12th century.  Suddenly anti-Semitism appears in a quiet town.
The ending is a shocker.

TRAP LINE. By William D. Montalbano and Carl Hiaason. (Atheneum.  $13.95.) A
basically honest Florida fisherman, making an illegal run because of financial
problems, is framed and has to get out of a nasty situation - against gangsters
who play very rough.

THE WIDENING GYRE. By Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte. $12.95.) The eleventh in the
series featuring Spenser, the heroic Boston private eye. Here he is the
bodyguard of a right-wing politician whose alcoholic wife is being blackmailed.
Fortunately Spenser's black friend Hawk is on hand to help him take on the mob.

Current Affairs & Social Comment

THE AFRICANS. By David Lamb. (Random House. $17.95.) A political and social
survey of the continent by a former correspondent of The Los Angeles Times that
''invites comparison with John Gunther's 'Inside Africa,' published 30 years
ago.''

THE AMERICAN CONDITION. By Edmund Fawcett and Tony Thomas. (Harper & Row.
$18.95.) The views of two correspondents of The Economist -and ''it's heartening
that after all these years the United States still has the capacity to bewilder
Englishmen.''

THE BIGGEST GAME IN TOWN. By A. Alvarez. (Houghton Mifflin.  $13.95.) The
British poet and author went to the World Series of Poker in Las Vegas for The
New Yorker and expanded his entertaining account into a book.

BLUE HIGHWAYS. A Journey Into America. By William Least Heat Moon (William
Trogdon). (Atlantic/Little, Brown. $17.50.) An account of the part-Osage
author's travels by van along the country's back roads (colored blue on vintage
maps). ''Especially good about the people'' who live in out-of-the-way places,
like Dime Box, Tex.

THE CHANGING ANATOMY OF BRITAIN. By Anthony Sampson. (Random House. $17.95.) A
revision of Mr. Sampson's 1962 book offers a portrait of Britain that is ''as
good as ... any writer is likely to provide.''

CHARLIE COMPANY. What Vietnam Did To Us. By Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller. With
Richard Manning, Stryker McGuire, Wally McNamee and Vern E. Smith. (Newsweek/
Morrow. $15.95.) An expansion of Newsweek's 1981 report on what has happened to
the men who served in an infantry company in Vietnam.

THE CONSPIRACY AND DEATH OF LIN BIAO. By Yao Ming-le. With an introduction by
Stanley Karnow. (Knopf. $13.95.) A pseudonymous ''sensational and bizarre
account'' of a foiled 1972 plot to assassinate Mao Zedong by the Chinese
Minister of Defense, Lin Biao.

THE DEINDUSTRIALIZATION OF AMERICA. Plant Closings, Community Abandonment, and
the Dismantling of Basic Industry. By Barry Bluestone and Bennett Harrison.
(Basic Books. $19.95.) An ''important book'' that ''documents abundantly the
human and social costs'' of American industry's failures in the last decade.

DANGEROUS CURRENTS. The State of Economics. By Lester C. Thurow.  (Random House.
$16.95.) The scholar, columnist and author of ''The Zero-Sum Society'' offers an
analysis of ''the discipline of economics rather than the troubled state of the
American economy.''

DANGEROUS RELATIONS. The Soviet Union in World Politics, 1970-1982. By Adam B.
Ulam. (Oxford. $25.) A ''superbly knowledgeable reconstruction of events'' of
the 70's, ''primarily as seen from the Soviet side,'' by the prolific Harvard
authority.

DISTANT WATER. The Fate of the North Atlantic Fisherman. By William W. Warner.
(Atlantic/Little, Brown. $17.95.) The author of ''Beautiful Swimmers'' writes
about the ''men, ships, gear, weather, biology and politics of trawling in the
raw, frightening, ice-laden North Atlantic.''

THE DRAGON AND THE BEAR. China & Russia in the Eighties. By Philip Short.
(Morrow. $19.95.) A ''sprawling, compendious account of the Communist giants
that ... places both of them squarely (in) what might be called the mainstream
totalitarian experience of the century.''

THE EUROPEANS. By Luigi Barzini. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) The Italian writer
and journalist, the author of ''The Italians,'' offers a fluent account of the
Common Market countries. ''Very often, it is like being at dinner with a
fascinating and knowledgeable causeur.''

THE FRENCH. By Theodore Zeldin. (Pantheon. $17.95.) A contemporary national
portrait by the author of ''France 1848-1945.'' The topics covered range from
feminism through the rich and famous to the treatment of foreigners.

HARD CHOICES. Four Critical Years in America's Foreign Policy. By Cyrus Vance.
(Simon & Schuster. $19.95.) The Secretary of State during most of the Carter
Administration describes the events of those years in a book that reflects his
''quiet, clinical diplomacy.''

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE. Lessons From America's Best-Run Companies. By Thomas J.
Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr. (Harper & Row.  $19.95.) Two management
consultants maintain that excellent companies are ''distinguished by good
old-fashioned values -respect for the individual, devotion to service and
attention to the customer.''

IN THE SPIRIT OF CRAZY HORSE. By Peter Matthiessen. (Viking.  $20.95.) The
author of ''Far Tortuga'' and ''The Snow Leopard'' reports on Indian-white
relations in the United States, especially the contemporary American Indian
Movement.

JUSTICE WITHOUT LAW? By Jerold S. Auerbach. (Oxford. $16.95.) An examination of
ways to resolve disputes without litigation that is ''more an extended
meditation on the meaning of community than a historical narrative.''

LIFE AND DEATH ON THE CORPORATE BATTLEFIELD. How Companies Win, Lose, Survive.
By Paul Solman and Thomas Friedman. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) An examination
of corporate business as it operates and as it is taught, by the creators of the
''Enterprise'' television series, who conclude that the ethic of managerial
selfinterest ''is more likely to damage than improve the efficiency of American
capitalism.''

THE LONGEST WAR. Israel in Lebanon. By Jacobo Timerman. Translated by Miguel
Acoca. (Knopf. $11.95.) The Argentine journalist and author of ''Prisoner
Without a Name, Cell Without a Number,'' who now lives in Israel, offers an
account of last summer's war in Lebanon that ''concludes in near despair.''

THE NEXT AMERICAN FRONTIER. By Robert B. Reich. (Times Books.  $16.50.) In this
''first-rate'' diagnosis of corporate malaise, the author shows how American
managers ''have strayed from the attitudes needed to compete successfully in
world markets'' and issues a vigorous call for ''a new managerial ethic.'' ''

NOW THAT THE BUFFALO'S GONE. A Study of Today's American Indians.  By Alvin M.
Josephy Jr. (Knopf. $15.95.) The author of ''Black Hills, White Sky'' offers ''a
cogent and richly detailed examination of four centuries of relations between
Indians and non-Indians.''

A PALESTINIAN STATE. The Implications for Israel. By Mark A.  Heller. (Harvard.
$16.) Although the author rigorously establishes that Israeli security fears
correspond to reality, he ''is alive to Palestinian demands that have to be
met.''

THE PARTNERS. Inside America's Most Powerful Law Firms. By James B. Stewart.
(Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) The executive editor of The American Lawyer examines
how eight nationally prominent law firms labored on important cases of the
1970's.

POWER AND PRINCIPLE. Memoirs of the National Security Advisor, 1977-1981. By
Zbigniew Brzezinski. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $22.50.) An account of foreign
policy formulation in the Carter Administration that is ''fascinating as an
insight into how a crucial part of government works, intimidating as a
reflection of what it takes to go forth in bureaucratic wars and appealing in
its candor.''

RECOGNIZING ISLAM. Religion and Society in the Modern Arab World.  By Michael
Gilsenan. (Pantheon. Cloth, $16.50. Paper, $7.95.) A historian and
anthropologist ''acts as a guide through a labyrinth of Islamic communities,''
to ''show how the mass of ordinary people have sought to reformulate Islam in
response to the disruption of their societies by Western penetration.''

SALVADOR. By Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster. $12.95.) Impressions of El Salvador
by the novelist and journalist. ''She argues that the United States has been
persuaded to accept and act on political perceptions that would never pass
muster at home.''

THINKING ABOUT THE NEXT WAR. By Thomas Powers. (Knopf. $10.95.) A ''very
personal, honest and engaging'' essay on nuclear war drawn from the author's
monthly columns in Commonweal.

THE TRUTH ABOUT THE NEUTRON BOMB. The Inventor of the Bomb Speaks Out. By Sam
Cohen. (Morrow. $12.50.) An ''extremely interesting book, which casts light on
many dark corners of the weapons design business, reveals a hidden side of the
great argument over the test ban treaty and helps explain why high level debate
over nuclear weapons is so contentious.''

U/S. A Statistical Portrait of the American People. Edited by Andrew Hacker.
With the assistance of Lorrie Millman. (Viking. $25.) A witty and clearly
written report, based on the ''Statistical Abstract of the United States'' from
the 1980 census, that ''focuses on statistics that either tell us something
about American society or have some interest as highbrow gossip.''

VERY MUCH A LADY. The Untold Story of Jean Harris and Dr. Herman Tarnower. By
Shana Alexander. (Little, Brown. $17.50.) In a sympathetic and compelling
account of the affair of Mrs. Harris and the Scarsdale Diet doctor, her killing
of him and her trial, the author ''has followed every lead back to its source
like a thorough lawyer building a case.''

THE VOICE OF THE POOR. Essays in Economic and Political Persuasion. By John
Kenneth Galbraith. (Harvard. $8.95.) Drawn from lectures given in India by the
Harvard economist who was once United States Ambassador there, these essays
concern the relationship of the developed nations to the third world.

WAR IN THE FALKLANDS. The Full Story. By The Sunday Times of London Insight
Team. (Harper & Row. $14.95.) An ''unabashedly British'' account of the events
of 1982 in which ''the war itself is presented as a morality play.''

Essays & Criticism

ADVENTURES IN THE SCREEN TRADE. A Personal View of Hollywood and Screenwriting.
By William Goldman. (Warner. $17.50.) The successful screenwriter and former
Broadway playwright tells almost all about writing, acting, directing and
producing in Hollywood.

ALL AMERICAN MUSIC. Composition in the Late Twentieth Century. By John Rockwell.
(Knopf. $15.95.) A ''spirited defense of contemporary composition, celebrating
its many conceptual and technical innovations,'' by a music critic of The New
York Times.

ART & ARDOR. By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf. $16.95.) Essays, ''by turns quarrelsome,
quirky, unfair, funny and brilliant,'' by the novelist and critic in her roles
as ''a rabbi, a feminist and a disciple of Henry James.''

ART, MIND, AND BRAIN. A Cognitive Approach to Creativity. By Howard Gardner.
(Basic Books. $20.) Essays by the cognitive psychologist, paying special
attention to Project Zero, the Harvard University study of creativity in
children.

CHOREOGRAPHY BY GEORGE BALANCHINE. A Catalogue of Works. (Eakins Press. $75.) A
''chronological inventory'' of the late choreographer's works; there is ''logic
and clarity, formal beauty and rigorous economy in each condensed entry.''

FEIFFER. Jules Feiffer's America From Eisenhower to Reagan. Edited by Steven
Heller. (Knopf. Cloth, $25. Paper, $12.95.) The cartoonist's ''social, sexual
and political history of the last quarter-century ... two rueful laughs a
page.''

FREUD AND MAN'S SOUL. By Bruno Bettelheim. (Knopf. $11.95.) The 80-year-old
Vienna-born analyst muses on English translations of Freud's work and condemns
the editors of the ''Standard Edition'' for losing the humanity of Freud's
vision.

LOST IN THE COSMOS. The Last Self-Help Book. By Walker Percy.  (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $14.95.) This ''problematic ...  pop-Socratic'' exercise by the author
of ''The Moviegoer'' consists largely of parodies of magazine questionnaires
''that plumb different modes of despair.''

MIDNIGHT MOVIES. By J. Hoberman and Jonathan Rosenbaum. (Harper & Row. $18.95.)
An account of ''Hollywood's Off Broadway,'' the ''underground'' films whose
assaults on good or popular taste have found a cult audience in big cities and
university towns.

OVERLAY. Contemporary Art and the Art of Prehistory. By Lucy R.  Lippard.
(Pantheon. Cloth, $30. Paper, $16.95.) The central argument of ''the art world's
most outspoken feminist/ socialist critic'' is that ''art needs to become useful
again.''

PIPERS AT THE GATES OF DAWN. The Wisdom of Children's Literature.  By Jonathan
Cott. (Random House. $19.95.) An essay based on interviews with six writers of
contemporary children's literature and two students of children's play.

THE PORTABLE EDMUND WILSON. Edited, with an introduction and notes, by Lewis M.
Dabney. (Viking. Cloth, $18.95. Penguin. Paper, $6.95.) ''An almost overrich
intellectual feast that displays Wilson at work in a great variety of genres.''

PRESENT HISTORY. By Theodore Draper. (Random House. $19.95.) A stimulating
collection of political essays about ''subjects of the greatest urgency and
controversy,'' including nuclear arms, Vietnam and the Western alliance.

READ ALL ABOUT IT! The Collected Adventures of a Maverick Reporter. By Sidney
Zion. (Summit. $16.50.) A collection of energetic articles and commentary by ''a
guerrilla warrior of journalism who wears his considerable ego on his sleeve.''

SECRETS. On the Ethics of Concealment and Revelation. By Sissela Bok. (Pantheon.
$16.95.) In this companion volume to her previous book, ''Lying,'' the author
examines the rationale for various kinds of secrets and warns that secrecy
''risks damaging the judgment and character of those who exercise it.''

SOMETHING TO DECLARE. Twelve Years of Films From Abroad. By John Simon.
(Clarkson N. Potter/ Crown. $19.95.) A collection of richly styled essays by the
acerbic critic.

SPHERES OF JUSTICE. A Defense of Pluralism and Equality. By Michael Walzer.
(Basic. $19.95.) An ''imaginative'' way to think about the conflict between
liberty and equality in a democratic society from a noted political philosopher.

A STROLL WITH WILLIAM JAMES. By Jacques Barzun. (Harper & Row.  $19.95.) The
historian conducts a kind of meditative dialogue between himself and the great
psychological investigator he has studied for nearly half a century.

THIRD HELPINGS. By Calvin Trillin. (Ticknor & Fields. $12.95.) More from ''the
most easily read, most joyous and least sobersided'' food writer, ''the Walt
Whitman of American eats.''

THIS IS NOT A PIPE. By Michel Foucault. With illustrations and letters by Rene
Magritte. Translated, with an introduction, by James Harkness. (University of
California. $14.95.) The French social philosopher and the witty artist make a
surprisingly compatible pair: ''Magritte's art provides the perfect pretext for
Mr. Foucault's sermon'' on the nature of reality.

THE WITNESS OF POETRY. By Czeslaw Milosz. (Harvard. $8.95.) These lectures,
given at Harvard by the 1980 Nobel laureate in poetry, draw on ''the terrible
experiences of Polish poets in our time'' and deplore ''everything that is
trivial and trivializing in contemporary poetry.''

WOMAN AND THE DEMON. The Life of a Victorian Myth. By Nina Auerbach. (Harvard.
$17.50.) A ''beautifully written and even moving'' argument that the ''Victorian
myth of woman as 'angel in the house' '' disguises a ''myth of woman as demonic,
polymorphous, vital, dangerous and transcendent.''

Fiction

ALICE IN BED. By Cathleen Schine. (Knopf. $12.95.) This ''striking'' and
improbably funny first novel is about a young woman who spends a year in bed
suffering from a mysterious and painful disease.

ANCIENT EVENINGS. By Norman Mailer. (Little, Brown. $19.95.) A long, unusual
novel about gods and mortals, feasting, war, sex and daily life in early Egypt.
''Despite the brilliance of the first 90 pages,'' this interesting and
extravagant book does not live up to expectations.

ARARAT. By D.M. Thomas (Viking. $13.50.) The narrator, a contemporary Russian
poet named Rozanov, improvises stories about characters who improvise stories
whose characters include Pushkin and Cleopatra. The author of ''The White
Hotel'' here displays an ''astonishing virtuosity in poetry, prose and
translating.''

AUTHOR FROM A SAVAGE PEOPLE. By Bette Pesetsky. (Knopf. $12.95.) ''A savage,
funny, small novel'' about a ghostwriter who resorts to blackmail when one of
her clients wins the Nobel Prize for a book she has written. A ''dramatization
of the view that women do most of the work while men get most of the credit.''

BABARU. By B. Wonger. (University of Illinois. Cloth, $11.95.  Paper, $4.95.) A
collection of tales about tribal life among Australian aborigines. with
ever-present spirits and magical transformations of men into animals and animals
into men, that strikes ''the heart with elemental truth.''

BANKER. By Dick Francis. (Putnam's. $14.95.) Mixing his usual ingredients of
crime and race horses, Mr. Francis fashions his plot around a scheme to destroy
the reputation of a multimillion-dollar stud horse so that it can be bought
cheap.

BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. By Ed McBain. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston.  $13.50.) ''A
tightly structured, absorbing murder mystery'' that features Matthew Hope, a
Florida lawyer whose client is being framed for the murder of his wife.

THE BIRTH OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF ANTARCTICA. By John Calvin Batchelor.
(Dial. $16.95.) An ambitious, futuristic novel narrated by a Swedish-American
adventurer named Grim Fiddle, whose ''fantastic voyages'' encompass many
contemporary moral and spiritual questions.

ON THE BLACK HILL. By Bruce Chatwin. (Viking. $14.75.) Mr.  Chatwin's first
novel about inseparable twin brothers who spend the 80 years of their lives on a
Welsh farm reflects ''an enraptured attention'' to rural, homely things ''that
cause them to glow with an almost visionary light.''

THE BREAKS. By Richard Price. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) Mr. Price extends his
vision of ''hard-hat urban reality'' in his fourth novel, as the hero, a college
graduate, struggles to readjust to his working class roots.

BROTHER OF A MORE FAMOUS JACK. By Barbara Trapido. (Viking.  $12.95.) An
''unpretentious, very funny'' first novel about the ordinary adventures and love
affairs of a London university student who matures as she travels in Europe -
''highly polished.''

CHRONICLE OF A DEATH FORETOLD. By Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf.  $10.95.) The
story of a vengeance killing in a small Caribbean town told 27 years after the
fact by a narrator who gathers the evidence of documents, gossip, speculation
and faded memories. This story will stand ''as one of the best and most
powerfully rendered'' murders in modern literature.

THE COFFIN TREE. By Wendy Law-Yone. (Knopf. $12.95.) A brother and sister flee
to America after a coup in their native Burma and struggle against poverty and
loneliness in a first novel that ''describes a universe where madness goes
beyond the personal.''

A COIN IN NINE HANDS. By Marguerite Yourcenar. Translated by Dori Katz in
collaboration with the author. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $11.95.) The coin that
passes through the hands of nine people in Italy during the Fascist reign of the
1930's links the parts of this episodic novel by the grande dame of French
literature.

THE DETLING SECRET. By Julian Symons. (Viking. $14.75.) Victorian England is the
setting for the newest of Mr. Symons's murder mysteries. This one has an old
family and new money, with some Irish terrorism in the background.

DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THE SENTIMENTAL AGENTS IN THE VOLYEN EMPIRE.  Canopus in
Argos: Archives. By Doris Lessing. (Knopf. $12.95.) The fifth volume in the
author's series of visionary novels about life in a distant galaxy is ''a dark
satire, a dissection of the political illusions of our own terrestrial 20th
century - and a parable about how language is debased when used as an instrument
of empire.''

DULUTH. By Gore Vidal. (Random House. $13.95.) A multi-level fictional attack on
''Middle America's political and sexual practices, its cultural pretensions and
its literary preferences'' that for the most part is ''more footloose than
funny,'' from the prolific novelist, essayist and, recently, politician.

THE END OF THE WORLD NEWS. By Anthony Burgess. (McGraw-Hill.  $15.95.) This
book, which the author calls an ''entertainment,'' is composed of a fictional
life of Freud, a musical about Trotsky in New York in 1917 and a science-fiction
tale of a planet that will crash into the earth around the year 2000.

THE EYE OF THE HERON. By Ursula K. Le Guin. (Harper & Row.  $11.95.) The
conflict between two groups of space colonists - pacifists and bullies - is the
focus of this tale by a writer who ''as a novelist of ideas has no peer in
science fiction.''

FAMOUS ALL OVER TOWN. By Danny Santiago. (Simon & Schuster.  $14.95.) This first
novel, which chronicles the 15th year in the life of a street-wise Chicano youth
in Los Angeles, is a ''minor classic.''

FAR FROM THE SEA. By Evan Hunter. (Atheneum. $12.95.) A touching story of a
50-year-old New York lawyer's vigil with his dying father that is bolstered by
the author's ''keen reportorial eye.''

THE FEUD. By Thomas Berger. (Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte. $13.95.) Mr. Berger's
12th novel, a ''comic masterpiece'' set in two neighboring Southern towns in the
1930's, is ''a gigantic sprawl of disasters'' triggered by small events.

GILBERT. A Comedy of Manners. By Judith Martin. (Atheneum. $14.95) Miss Martin,
a.k.a. Miss Manners, ''makes the leap from columnist to novelist with grace and
wit'' in this sly comic novel about a womanizing Harvard graduate who becomes
special adviser to the President.

HEARTBURN. By Nora Ephron. (Knopf. $11.95.) In a story that ''bristles
ferociously with wit'' and shows remarkably similarities to events in her own
life, the author describes the breakup of a marriage between a Washington
newspaper columnist and a food writer.

HER VICTORY. By Alan Sillitoe. (Franklin Watts. $16.95.) The veteran English
writer tackles the issue of women's liberation in a ''long, sometimes sluggish
but always engrossing'' story of a woman's rebellion against a debilitating
20-year marriage.

HERE TO GET MY BABY OUT OF JAIL. By Louise Shivers. (Random House.  $11.95.)
This first novel about murder and adultery in the tobacco growing region of
North Carolina in 1937 shows ''focus, freedom from self-indulgence and clarity
of purpose.''

HIS MASTER'S VOICE. By Stanislaw Lem. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. $12.95.) A highly intellectual science-fiction story about an
elaborate Pentagon project to comprehend an interstellar ''letter'' that reaches
the earth as a pulsating neutrino ray.

HUNGRY HEARTS. By Francine Prose. (Pantheon. $12.95.) The author's ''taut and
funny'' sixth novel stars golems and ghosts and Dinah Rappaport, the new queen
of the Yiddish Art Theater. The time is 1921.

THE INFINITE PASSION OF EXPECTATION. Twenty-Five Stories. By Gina Berriault.
(North Point. $12.50.) Set in the San Francisco Bay area and focused on the
''emotional ambiguities and contradictions'' of humble people, these stories are
''flawless miniatures'' that magnify the ''repellent and magnetic'' in ordinary
encounters.

IN THE PALOMAR ARMS. By Hilma Wolitzer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $14.95.) A
novel by the author of ''Hearts'' in which a ''sunny'' young woman who works
briefly in a nursing home in Southern California becomes involved in a ''sadly
predictable love affair.''.

IRONWEED. By William Kennedy. (Viking. $14.75.) Set in Albany in the 1930's,
this story of a down-and-out ex-major league baseball player has the
''tough-minded and defiant humanism'' that we've come to expect in Mr. Kennedy's
depiction of the Irish working class.

JOE THE ENGINEER. By Chuck Wachtel. (Morrow. $11.95.) Joe, a Vietnam veteran and
college dropout, reads water meters in Queens, hangs out in Mary's Bar and
Grill, watches television and lets his marriage fall apart. This first novel
offers a ''fresh, realistic look at comparatively unfamiliar social territory''

JOURNEY TO THE WEST. Translated and edited by Anthony C. Yu.  (University of
Chicago. Four volumes. Cloth, $35 each. The first two volumes in paper, $8.95
and $12.95.) The complete text of the 16thcentury Chinese classic known until
now to English-speaking readers under the title ''Monkey.'' This edition of the
tale of a monk sent to heaven in quest of basic Buddhist scriptures ''is one the
great ventures of our time in humanistic translation and publication.''

KEPLER. By John Banville. (Godine. $13.95.) An Irish novelist turns to the life
of the German astronomer in an episodic account.

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL. By John le Carre. (Knopf. $15.95.) Palestinian
terrorists, Israeli antiterrorists and an English actress named Charlie with
divided loyalties, in a very ''mature, inventive and powerful'' novel of
international intrigue.

THE LONDON EMBASSY. By Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) Eighteen
stories about American diplomats in England. Paul Theroux, the American writer
based in London, rings some new and entertaining changes on old Jamesian themes.

THE MADNESS OF A SEDUCED WOMAN. By Susan Fromberg Schaeffer.  (Dutton. $16.95.)
''An absorbing, wonderfully inventive psychological tale'' of a beautiful young
woman who commits murder out of both love and self-hatred.

THE MISTS OF AVALON. By Marion Zimmer Bradley. (Knopf. $16.95.) The story of
King Arthur and the Round Table ''gains a mythic coherence'' in this retelling
from the viewpoint of its principal women - Viviane, Gwynyfar, Morgaine and
Igraine.

THE MOONS OF JUPITER. By Alice Munro. (Knopf. $12.95.) The author's fourth
collection of stories, ''witty, subtle, passionate,'' mainly about women in or
nearing their 40's who are negotiating difficult passages in their domestic or
sexual lives.

MOSCOW CIRCLES. By Benedict Erofeev. (Readers and Writers Publishing
Cooperative/Norton. $12.95.) This 1969 samizdat novel, just surfacing here,
concerns the glories of drunkenness in the Soviet Union. ''The closest thing to
American humor ever to have come from behind the Iron Curtain.''

THE NAME OF THE ROSE. By Umberto Eco. Translated by William Weaver. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. $15.95.) Mr. Eco, a distinguished Italian scholar and cultural
figure, has written a splendid, mysterious novel about deaths in a 14th-century
Benedictine abbey.

NARCISSA AND OTHER FABLES. By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) The
author's 25th work of fiction is a collection of stories about ''a changing
society in which conventional morality has not vanished but has gone
underground, its honorable certainties turned quirky and countercultural.''

THE NATURAL MAN. By Ed McClanahan. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $11.50.) This
''superbly written'' first novel about the coming of age of a 15-year-old youth
in northern Kentucky is a ''small masterpiece'' in which there are ''endless
riches and not a line flabby or wasted.''

NATURAL VICTIMS. By Isabel Eberstadt. (Knopf. $15.95.) The relationship of a
glamorous, charming and staggeringly rich American widow and her deranged
daughter is the focus of this complicated tale in which the portrait of the
widow is ''as delicate and enduring as piano wire.''

1934. By Alberto Moravia. Translated by William Weaver. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $14.50.) The 75-year-old Italian novelist focuses on despair in this
brooding novel about the contemplation of suicide in Fascist Italy.

NO FOND MEMORY OF LOVE. By Barbara Pym. (Dutton. $12.95.) This latest in a
series of posthumously published works of the English writer seems, like her
other novels, ''drawn from the daydreams of refreshingly sensible women'' and
''reminds us of the heartbreaking silliness of daily life.''

OCCASION OF SIN. By Rachel Billington. (Summit. $14.95.) A ''memorable novel''
in which a 10-year-old marriage and a 7-year-old son are left behind when an
Englishwoman falls in love with a younger man.

OLD DEVOTIONS. By Ursula Perrin. (Dial. $14.95.) A richly detailed story of two
women who, reaching their mid-30's, reexamine their pasts from the time they
were college roommates and speculate on the future.

THE PAINTED LADY. By Fran,coise Sagan. Translated by Lee Fahnestock. (Dutton.
$15.95.) A ''French 'Ship of Fools' '' in which the author brings her ''sly and
ironic'' talent to bear on a group of rich, famous and very bored people
gathered for an autumn music cruise.

A PEOPLE BETRAYED. November 1918: A German Revolution. By Alfred Doblin. (Fromm
International. Cloth, $19.95. Paper, $10.95.) The first and second volumes of
the German novelist's trilogy ''November 1918'' provide ''one of the most
graphic accounts ever written of what led from Weimar to Auschwitz.''

PILGERMANN. By Russell Hoban. (Summit. $14.95.) The author of ''Riddley Walker''
turns from ''imagined future to historical past, but the harrowing vision
remains essentially unchanged'' in this novel set in the 11th century during the
First Crusade.

PRAISESONG FOR THE WIDOW. By Paule Marshall. (Putnam's. $13.95.) The story of a
middle-class American black woman's journey on a cruise ship to the Caribbean
and her psychological journey back to her younger self. There is no ''clearer
evocation of early marriage anywhere else in literature.''

PRETTY REDWING. By Helen Henslee. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston.  $13.95.) A North
Carolina mill owner's second wife experiences a disastrous passion for her
stepson in ''a bitter story but a beautifully written one.''

A PRODIGAL CHILD. By David Storey (Dutton. $14.95.) Bryan Morley, the child of a
working-class couple in the north of England, feels he has a ''special destiny''
and in fact does grow up to be a sculptor but at the cost of alienation from his
class. ''A thoughtful, serious novel about aspiration and the artistic
temperament.''

THE QUEEN'S GAMBIT. By Walter Tevis. (Random House. $13.95.) Beth Harmon, an
orphan, taught chess by the janitor of her orphanage, becomes American champion
by 18 but at the cost of emotional isolation. An engrossing novel by the author
of ''The Hustler''and ''The Man Who Fell to Earth.''

THE RAGE OF THE VULTURE. By Barry Unsworth. (Houghton Mifflin.  $15.95.) The
place is Turkey, the time is 1908. The aged sultan is dying, and rebellion is
stirring in Macedonia. Capt. Robert Markham of the British Military Mission,
deeply embroiled in Turkish politics, works out his personal destiny in this
''beautifully honest'' parable of contemporary history.

RUNNING TIME. By Gavin Lambert. (Macmillan. $15.95.) A gossipy history of the
movie industry by a veteran writer on the Hollywood scene told through the life
stories of a child actress and her flamboyant mother.

THE SAMURAI. By Shusaku Endo. Translated by Van C. Gessel. (Harper & Row.
$12.95.) A Spanish Franciscan missionary, with his samurai companion, sets out
on a diplomatic mission intended to facilitate Christian conversion in
17th-century Japan and becomes involved in the conflict between the pope and a
regional shogun in a story by Japan's ''most distinguished Roman Catholic
novelist.''

SANDRO OF CHEGEM. By Fazil Iskander. Translated by Susan Brownsberger. (Ardis/
Vintage. Paper, $9.95.) A comic novel by a Russian writer who ''belongs to the
party of Swift and Gogol and Mark Twain'' in which the adventures of a member of
a Georgian dance troupe allow the author to satirize nearly every aspect of
Soviet life.

SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF A FAUN. By Arno Schmidt. Translated by John E. Wood.
(Marion Boyars. $13.95.) This 30-year-old novel by the late German author
reveals a pattern of ''doom, disaster and redemption'' in the life of a county
clerk in Nazi Germany during World War II; Mr. Schmidt's ''vision of past and
future is stunning in its impact.''

SENT FOR YOU YESTERDAY. By John Edgar Wideman. (Bard/Avon. Paper, $3.50.)
Homewood, the Pittsburgh ghetto in which the author was raised, is transformed
''into a magical location infused with poetry and pathos'' in this fourth novel
by a writer ''with whom any reader who admires ambitious fiction must sooner or
later reckon.''

SISTER AGE. By M.F.K. Fisher. (Knopf. $12.95.) The splendid stylist, who has
written so often of food, ''turns her clear gaze to the art of aging'' in a
collection of short stories that are ''sometimes startlingly astute.''

STICK. By Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House. $14.50.) The adventures of Charles
Lindsay Gorman III, known as Stick on the street, who has made a fortune pushing
drugs and now wants to retire. The author ''gives us as much serious fun per
word as anyone around.''

THE STORIES OF BREECE D'J PANCAKE. Foreword by James Alan McPherson. Afterword
by John Casey. (Atlantic/ Little,Brown. $13.95.) These 12 tense, elegiac stories
set in and about the coal mining and farming area of West Virginia make up the
entire canon of a ''uniquely gifted young writer'' who committed suicide in
1979.

TEMPLE. By Robert Greenfield. (Summit Books. $15.95.) The hero of Mr.
Greenfield's second novel, an alienated Harvard Graduate School dropout, returns
to Brooklyn to resolve his ambivalence about his Jewish heritage.

THINGS TO COME AND GO. By Bette Howland. (Knopf. $11.95.) Three long stories
''by a writer of unusual talent, power and intelligence'' about people living
''in the lonely, anarchic terrain of run-down urban neighborhods,'' waiting for
their lives to change for better or worse.

THE TIGERS OF SUBUTOPIA. By Julian Symons. (Viking. $14.75.) The world of these
stories has no joy in it; instead there are bad marriages, bad sex and bad
intentions - all cast in the mystery-story mold and written with impeccable
craftsmanship.

TRUE LOVE. By Herbert Gold. (Arbor House. $14.25.) The departure of his mistress
forces a twice-divorced law professor to look for companionship in this
''seriocomic'' story of amour - California style.

WE LOVE GLENDA SO MUCH. By Julio Cortazar. (Knopf. $11.95.) An intriguing
collection of stories about ''ominous characters'' who ''exist below the
threshold of the social no man's land that is, only incidentally, Paris, Buenos
Aires or some anonymous bit of countryside.'' Cortazar writes with ''an
outpouring and a richness of language that has become the signature of Latin
American fiction.''

History

ALTERNATIVE AMERICA. Henry George, Edward Bellamy, Henry Demarest Lloyd and the
Adversary Tradition. By John L. Thomas. Harvard. $25.) A study of three
important 19th century American journalists who each preached a vision of a
Utopian America.

THE AMERICAN STYLE OF FOREIGN POLICY. Cultural Politics and Foreign Affairs. By
Robert Dallek. (Knopf. $16.95.) An analysis of key decisions in American foreign
policy in this century by a historian who argues that ''American perceptions and
actions had little to do with foreign reality and much to do with a felt need to
cure domestic disharmony.''.

THE ANARCHISTS OF CASAS VIEJAS. By Jerome R. Mintz. (University of Chicago.
$20.) An account of the best-known incident of anarchist rural rebellion in the
second Spanish Republic, compiled by an anthropologist who interviewed
agricultural laborers and ''a number of former anarchists who had participated
in the uprising.''.

A BETTER WORLD. The Great Schism: Stalinism and the American Intellectuals. By
William L. O'Neill. (Simon & Schuster. $17.95.) A neoconservative account of
''what happened to ... (American) Communists and fellow travelers in the years
after World War II,'' which suggests that ''the left itself was in large part to
blame for its plight.''

BREAKING BREAD. The Catholic Worker and the Origin of Catholic Radicalism in
America. By Mel Piehl. (Temple University Press.  $19.95.) The first ''serious,
scholarly attempt to explain (The Catholic Worker's) impact on American
Catholicism and American society.''

A CONSPIRACY SO IMMENSE. The World of Joe McCarthy. By David M.  Oshinsky. (Free
Press. $19.95.) A well-researched and well-written account of the life of the
demagogic senator that ''handles the drama of the era without getting preachy.''

CROSSROADS OF MODERN WARFARE. By Drew Middleton. (Doubleday.  $17.95.) The
military affairs correspondent of The New York Times offers an ''entertaining''
study of 16 battles fought in the 20th century.

THE EMPEROR. Downfall of an Autocrat. By Ryszard Kapuscinski.  Translated by
William R. Brand and Katarzyna Mroczkowska-Brand.  (Helen and Kurt
Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $12.95.) An ''intriguing parable'' - a Polish
journalist's reconstructed account of the court of the late Ethiophian Emperor
Haile Selassie that reflects, ironically, on the regime of Edward Gierek who
ruled Poland from 1970 to 1980.

FREEDOM. A Documentary History of Emancipation 1861-67. Selected from the
Holdings of the National Archives of the United States.  Series II: The Black
Military Experience. Edited by Ira Berlin.  Joseph P. Reidy and Leslie S.
Rowland, associate editors. (Cambridge University Press. $37.50.) An emotionally
powerful sampling, drawn from millions of documents, describing the black
military experience during the Civil War and the transition to freedom. This
series could ''mark a substantial advance for black history and Southern
history.''

LOVE, DEATH AND MONEY IN THE PAYS D'OC. By Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. (Braziller.
$30.) The eminent French historian and author of the acclaimed ''Montaillou''
examines a single 18th-century text and from it extrapolates marriage customs of
the period.

NEVER DONE. A History of American Housework. By Susan Strasser.  (Pantheon.
Cloth, $22.50. Paper, $11.95.) A ''refreshing corrective'' to the
''sentimentalization of the home and the housewife (that) has obscured the
record of how much work ... women at home have contributed to the American
economy.''

RED AND HOT. The Fate of Jazz in the Soviet Union 1917-1980. By S.  Frederick
Starr. (Oxford. $16.95.) A ''fine history'' that ''chronicles the fate of an
American style of music in the new Bolshevik state and so sheds light on Soviet
attitudes toward the West and toward art in general.''

SOUTHERN HONOR. Ethics and Behavior in the Old South. By Bertram Wyatt-Brown.
(Oxford. $29.95.) To reach a definition of honor, the historian looked ''for
patterns in such intimate relationships as marriage and child rearing and in
public behavior from extending hospitality to strangers to participating in
lynch mobs.''

TWILIGHT OF THE COMINTERN, 1930-1935. By E.H. Carr. (Pantheon.  $22.50.) A
posthumous volume from the ''prolific, controversial British scholar'' that
deals with ''the Comintern and relations with individual Communist Parties
abroad''; ''an important corrective to the widespread stereotype of the total
subordination of all Communists to the Kremlin.''

WHITE MISCHIEF. By James Fox. (Random House. $15.95.) A ''true historical
thriller.'' In 1940, in the White Highlands of Kenya, Sir John Henry Delves
Broughton was tried and acquitted of the murder of the 22d Earl of Erroll who
was beginning an affair with Broughton's wife. The author worked with the late
Cyril Connolly to discover what really happened.

Poetry

THE ARGOT MERCHANT DISASTER. Poems New and Selected. By George Starbuck.
(Atlantic/Little, Brown. $12.95.) ''A relatively late bloomer in full-scale
satire, Mr. Starbuck has been getting steadily better, waxing in brass and gall
as the swift seasons roll,'' and these poems roll over many popular pretensions
that are taken for wisdom.

THE CHANGING LIGHT AT SANDOVER. Including the Whole of The Book of Ephraim,
Mirabell's Books of Number, Scripts for the Pageant, and a New Coda, The Higher
Keys. By James Merrill. (Atheneum. $25.) This vast work, 25 years in the writing
and filled with voices of dead poets and artists and ranks of angels who all
speak through a Ouija board, as well as with magnificent lyrics, ''is perhaps an
epic'' and is certainly ''a kaleidoscope of provisional self-definitions,
misgivings, jokes and conjectures surely unique in modern American poetry.''

COUNTRY MUSIC. Selected Early Poems. By Charles Wright. (Wesleyan University
Press. $15.) His poetry is ''austere and somewhat difficult of access, but its
rhythms and images are exquisite and fully reward the reader's effort. Charles
Wright is among a handful of contemporary poets carrying the art to its
outermost limits.''

FROM THE FIRST NINE. Poems 1946-1976. By James Merrill. (Atheneum.  $20.) ''An
ample, mostly unrevised collection of 139 poems'' from Mr. Merrill's previous
books, this volume is ''an Olympic contender'' by a man ''who has long since
taken his place as one of the most accomplished satirists, wits and lyricists of
the age.''

LETTERS FROM A FATHER AND OTHER POEMS. By Mona Van Duyn.  (Atheneum. $11.95.) A
series of deft, distanced and encompassing poems about the poet's parents grown
old and dying, and many others that are filled with joy and detached compassion.
''Her book holds a world of volatility in fine equilibrium.''

ON TOUR WITH RITA. By Nicholas Christopher. (Knopf. $11.95.) ''An extraordinary
debut'' by a poet whose facility with words is rare.  ''Few poets writing today
can dazzle verbally as this young poet can.''

POINTS OF DEPARTURE. By Dan Pagis. Translated by Stephen Mitchell.  (Jewish
Publication Society of America. $12.95.) A bilingual edition of poems by the
Israeli poet, whose personal vision draws on ancient cultures and modern
realities. His poems have ''a tone strangely compounded of suffering, cynicism
and transcendence.''

THE RANDOM HOUSE BOOK OF TWENTIETH-CENTURY FRENCH POETRY. Edited by Paul Auster.
(Random House. $25.) Poems by the leading French poets in this century, with
translations by dozens of major British and American poets. ''An indispensable
work, a book that everyone interested in modern poetry should have close to
hand.''

SELECTED & NEW POEMS. 1961-1981. By Jim Harrison. (Delacorte/ Seymour Lawrence.
$14.95.) ''Mr. Harrison has few equals as a writer on outdoor life. ... At his
best, he writes so winningly that one ignores the formlessness and is simply
content to be in the presence of a writer this vital, this large-spirited.''

THE SELECTED POETRY OF RAINER MARIA RILKE. Edited and translated by Stephen
Mitchell. (Random House. $25.) Mr. Mitchell has tuned Rilke's difficult poems,
''so far as possible, to the common style of contemporary American poetry, a
loose-limbed style concerned with mobility and transitive ease.'' His
translations convey a ''sense of the poetic process in Rilke's work as a
whole.''

THRONE/FALCON/EYE. By Hugh Seidman. (Random House. $10.) Mr.  Seidman organizes
these poems around themes symbolized by three Egyptian deities who stand for
love, the world and death. When this overlaying of ancient on modern
civilization ''works the way it is intended to by this serious and ambitious
poet, we see our world with different eyes.''

VISITING RITES. By Phyllis Janowitz. (Princeton. $10.95.) There is something of
Sylvia Plath and something of Emily Dickinson in these ''brittle poems whose
voices range between the extremes of created persona and personal confession.''

Science & Social Science

ANGER. The Misunderstood Emotion. By Carol Tavris. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) A
social psychologist's energetic analysis of the uses and abuses of anger.

THE CREATIVE EXPLOSION. An Inquiry into the Origins of Art and Religion. By John
E. Pfeiffer. (Harper & Row. $29.95.) A science writer draws on ''new data to
create a picture of the Upper Paleolithic period when man ... exploded onto the
scene with all his gifts of art, intelligence and technological cunning.''

DICTIONARY OF AMERICAN NEGRO BIOGRAPHY. Edited by Rayford W. Logan and Michael
R. Winston. (Norton. $50.) This massive volume ''is a model of balanced
judgment, sober assessment and scholarly codification.''

THE HEARTS OF MEN. American Dreams and the Flight From Commitment.  By Barbara
Ehrenreich. (Doubleday. $13.95.) A ''witty'' and ''provocative'' argument that
the past three decades have witnessed ''a 'male revolt' against maturity and
responsibiity in general and against women in particular.''

HEN'S TEETH AND HORSE'S TOES. By Stephen Jay Gould. (Norton.  $15.50.) A new
collection of the Harvard paleontologist's columns from Natural History
magazine. No one since J.B.S. Haldane ''has written about biology with (such)
regularity, clarity and engagement.''

THE HUMAN CYCLE. By Colin M. Turnbull. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) The
anthropologist and author of ''The Mountain People'' offers studies of Western
and non-Western practices of bringing up children. Most of the examples are from
India, Tibet and Zaire.

IN SUSPECT TERRAIN. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $12.95.) The New
Yorker writer and author of ''Basin and Range'' continues his attempt to suggest
''the general history of this continent by describing what geologists see
written in rocks.''

JACQUES LACAN. The Death of an Intellectual Hero. By Stuart Schneiderman.
(Harvard. $14.95.) An American reports on his four years in analysis with the
celebrated French psychoanalyst and theoretician. The author ''does a remarkable
job placing Lacan's thought, if not exactly within the grasp of the
nonspecialist reader, at least within waving distance.''

JPL AND THE AMERICAN SPACE PROGRAM. A History of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
By Clayton P. Koppes. (Yale. $19.95.) A ''lively and fascinating'' biography of
the research institution that has played a crucial role in the development of
American rocketry and unmanned planetary exploration.

LISTENING TO AMERICA. An Illustrated History of Words and Phrases From Our
Lively and Splendid Past. By Stuart Berg Flexner. (Simon & Schuster. $24.95.)
The linguist, social historian and dictionary editor is ''not a grammarian but a
derivation detective ... who shows us how our society has changed old words and
brought new ones in.''

MARGARET MEAD AND SAMOA. The Making and Unmaking of an Anthropological Myth. By
Derek Freeman. (Harvard. $20.) A controversial attempt by an Australian
anthropologist ''to demolish the authority of Margaret Mead's knowledge of
Samoan society'' and thereby re-establish the primacy of biology over culture in
explaining human behavior.

PROMETHEAN FIRE. Reflections on the Origin of Mind. By Charles J.  Lumsden and
Edward O. Wilson. (Harvard. $17.50.) The authors, who hold that the human mind
has evolved according to the rules of genetics, argue against the view that
culture is the overriding determinant of human behavior.

THE SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION OF AMERICAN MEDICINE. By Paul Starr.  (Basic Books.
$24.95.) A history of modern health care that grapples with the difficult
questions posed by the transformation of medicine into ''an industry run
increasingly by corporations and the state in as yet unsettled relations with
the medical profession.''

STOLEN LIGHTNING. The Social Theory of Magic. By Daniel Lawrence O'Keefe.
(Continuum. $24.50.) A sociological theory of magic and of ''people's perception
and use of it.''

THE UNEXPECTED VISTA. A Physicist's View of Nature. By James S.  Trefil.
(Scribners. $14.95.) An ''engaging account of the wanderings of physicists ...
for the general reader interested in the physical sciences.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE FAVORITE BREW OF SINGAPORE

BYLINE: By Patricia Wells

SECTION: Section 10; Page 12, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 939 words


PATRICIA WELLS is the restaurant critic of The International Herald Tribune in
Paris.

Asians take beer very seriously. In Singapore, for instance, diners would never
think of taking curry without taking beer, and chances are the beer they'd take
is Tiger. Few brews have such a lively literary connection and few receive such
high grades world wide for taste, flavor and excellence as Tiger, brewed in
Singapore and Malaysia and exported to 50 countries. Over the years, Tiger has
consistently come out on top in world tastings, winning gold medals for its
strong, malty taste, aroma and balance.

Tiger beer first appeared in Singapore in 1931, when most of the premium brew
was sold to British forces based in the region. It became the brew of Somerset
Maugham's Singapore and is synonymous with nightclubs, girlie bars and
coffeehouses of the period. At the time, the beer was bottled in any size, shape
or bottle the brewery could find, and the only standard feature was the Tiger
logo, which has not changed for more than 50 years.

''Time for a Tiger,'' became the advertising slogan for the light lager in 1946,
and when the writer Anthony Burgess was hunting around for a title for a book
about life in Malaysia and Singapore that would accurately depict the way of
living of the time, he got permission to use the slogan as a book title.

The tiger, the beer and Singapore's Raffles Hotel have long been linked in tall
tales that have become questionable legends. In the early part of the century, a
tiger supposedly wandered off from a circus and was shot under the billiards
table at Raffles. It is not known whether the incident had anything to do with
the naming of Tiger beer, but the tiger is, in fact, a strong symbol in Asian
culture, which is probably why it was chosen as the beer's logo. Men born in the
Chinese calendar's Year of the Tiger are said to be strong and virile, while
women born under the tiger sign are hard to marry off - they are said to be
wicked ''man-eaters.''

Today, about 40 percent of the beer's production is exported, mainly to
Indonesia, Japan, Taiwan and Vietnam, with the remainder consumed locally.

Although residents of Singapore do not drink great amounts of beer by world
standards (they consume about six gallons per capita per year, as compared to
the American figure of nearly 25 gallons) they seem to know quality when they
drink it. Tiger beer's makers indicate that they have no desire to move into the
''light'' beer market, an American trend that has brought on a reduction in the
use of hops (which gives beer its characteristic bitter taste and zest), as well
as a reduction in the use of malt (which gives beer its basic flavor, character,
body and color - and its filling sensation), a practice many feel has destroyed
the essential flavor of beer.

T he success of Tiger beer is in the careful brewing process. Its makers say
that a special strain of yeast as well as a higher than average percentage of
hops are what make the beer distinctive.  Tiger's special strain of yeast is
propagated and preserved in the Dutch laboratories of one of its owners,
Heineken. Each month, Tiger yeast is packed in a vacuum-sealed stainless-steel
cylinder, packed in ice and shipped by air to Tiger brewing sites.

The basic brewing process is relatively simple: Malted barley from Australia,
Canada and Europe is ''cooked'' in hot water to produce a sugary extract that is
then flavored with American-grown hops. The hot hop-flavored extract is then
cooled, saturated with air, and then the special strain of yeast is added. The
mixture ferments, converting the malt sugars to an alcoholic brew. The beer is
then aged for about five weeks, during which it matures and gains its flavor and
taste.

Tiger is a lager beer, a generic term for bottom-fermented beer.  Many beer
drinkers prefer the light but still flavorful taste of lager, in which the yeast
works slowly at low temperatures instead of fizzling away on the surface of the
brew. Tiger's alcoholic content is about the same as most beers, about 4 percent
by weight.

Visitors to Singapore may arrange tours of the small, compact Tiger Beer brewery
by appointment. The tour gives an overview of the entire brewing process,
including a look at the mounds of malt the brewery cleans and mills itself; a
long walk up the narrow wooden stairs that lead to the fermentation rooms and a
visit to the brewing hall itself, with its attractive, European-imported copper
kettles.  Because of the heat, workers are dressed in cool white Tiger Brewery
T-shirts and shorts. The brewing process, from milling to final bottling is
carefully explained every step along the way.

The tour concludes with a visit to the company's small tap room for sampling the
golden brew. The tap room also houses a pleasant, historic presentation of Tiger
Beer publicity materials, including old metal trays, advertising signs and
antique beer-making equipment. To arrange individual or group tours contact
Malayan Breweries Limited (475 River Valley Road, Singapore 1024; telephone
633533).

A pint of Tiger beer will cost about $2.40 at the Raffles Hotel bar. Other
places for sampling Tiger beer in Singapore include the Rasa Singapura and Satay
Club outdoor food center, where the beer costs about $2 a quart, and the Min
Jiang Chinese restaurant in the Goodwood Park Hotel, where Tiger beer costs
about $2.50 a quart.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bottle of beer photo of view of brewing process

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWARK FARMERS' MARKET: DIOXIN IMPERILS FUTURE

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 2, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1339 words


NEWARK THE STREETS were nearly deserted except for a handful of curious
visitors, some of whom used to be regular customers.  A small American flag,
weathered and torn, flapped feebly in the humid breeze, adding to the ghost-town
look of the 12-acre Newark Farmers' Market, an area normally filled with people
and produce.

''It's been like this all week, and for what?'' asked 71-year-old Al D'Amore of
Freehold as he adjusted the flag. ''They find dioxin way the hell over there,
people get scared and, before you know it, there's no business.''

On June 2, Mr. D'Amore and some 40 other merchants who rent space at the market
were ordered by Governor Kean to close their doors after state environmental
specialists discovered hazardous levels of dioxin at the nearby site of the
Diamond Alkali Company.

During the Vietnam war, the company, which closed the plant about a dozen years
ago, made Agent Orange, a chemical defoliant of which dioxin is a byproduct. The
plant site, at 80 Lister Street, is 1,500 yards from the market in the Ironbound
section.

Richard Dewling, regional director of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, said earlier this month that testing at the plant site by state and
Federal environmental specialists had disclosed dioxin levels of 500 to 1,200
parts per billion. Federal officials consider one part per billion dangerous to
human health.

Late last week, environmental experts found dioxin contamination at the
neighboring S.C.A. Services Company, a chemical-waste treatment plant, at 100
Lister Street, ranging from nearly 4 to about 15 parts per billion. State
officials ordered the company's 50 employees to undergo health tests.

While safety experts had considered the contamination limited to the Alkali
plant, three of 31 test samples in the commercial and residential area around
the market contained low, but detectable, levels of dioxin, ranging from 1.1 to
5 parts per billion.

The Diamond Alkali site is one of 10 in the state where dioxin contamination is
suspected.  Last week, Governor Kean and the state's Department of Environmental
Protection amended the market closing order to allow consumer goods to be
stored, displayed and sold - but only indoors.  Open-air displays and sales of
fresh produce are still prohibited.

An order signed by Robert E. Hughey, the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection, requires merchants to hang overlapping plastic strips over all
entrances, exits and open windows to minimize the circulation of air.

Dr. J. Richard Goldstein, the state's Commissioner of Health, said last week
that the elimination of outdoor business and use of the plastic strips would
help to insure that produce would not be contaminated by airborne dioxin
particles mixed with dust coming from the Diamond Alkali site.

Farmers who sell seasonally at the market (between June and September) said that
their losses would be high because of not being allowed to sell from open
vehicles.

Although the farmers and other market merchants admit that the restrictions are
for their protection, as well as their customers', many contend that the rules
are costing them an average of $2,500 a day in lost business.

''A lot of what I have back there I'm going to wind up throwing out,'' said Mr.
D'Amore, who specializes in house and garden plants.  Taking a visitor through
his shop, he pointed to rows of yellowed plants and fruit trees with shriveling
leaves.

''All these plants and trees need fresh air and sunlight to stay strong,'' said
Mr. D'Amore, who has been doing business at the market for more than 40 years.
''I can't give them that by being indoors.  That's $2,000 right out the
window.''

To accommodate produce merchants who want to leave the Farmers' Market site,
Newark and Port Authority of New York and New Jersey officials arranged last
week to relocate them temporarily in a building on Port Authority property near
Newark International Airport and the New Jersey Turnpike. The structure,
Building No. 291, is off Corbin Avenue.

However, many merchants who have remained at the restricted market assert that
''there's only so much room at the temporary warehouse,'' and not everyone will
fit.

Hubert Williams, Newark's Police Director, admits that the Port Authority site
does not offer the same advantages as the Farmers' Market, such as easy
accessibility for the public. He said that he planned to meet with Mayor Kenneth
A. Gibson and officials of the city's Housing Authority to study other sites
closer to the existing market.

''The alternative site is not conducive to the operation of an open-air
market,'' Mr. Williams said. ''We realize that, and we're looking at other city
sites that might be the best location for these merchants until something can be
done about the dioxin problem.''

Officials of the state and Federal environmental agencies and police officials
met last week with John Francavilla, the market's general manager, to discuss
safety measures and weigh plans to overcome the 75 to 80 percent drop in
business.

Both Mr. Williams and Col. Clinton L. Pagano, Superintendent of the State Police
and director of emergency management for the state, stressed that, although
preliminary tests showed that contamination surrounding the Diamond Alkali plant
seemed to be low, many additional tests were planned. A decision to close the
market and relocate its merchants might not be made for quite some time, they
said.

Mr. Williams declined to say when a suitable relocation site might be chosen and
occupied.  ''There are not too many large-scale sites available,'' he said,
''and we have to take it from there.'' ''The bottom line here is that people
have to be protected,'' Colonel Pagano said. ''If we have to relocate this
operation, we can and we will.''

A number of merchants have operated from the Farmers' Market since it opened in
1931. It would be unfair, Colonel Pagano said, to ''tell these people to pack it
up and move overnight.''

Joseph Bender of Freehold, who has operated a grocery business there for 15
years, said: ''It's hard to accept what's going on here because, to myself and
many people who work out of here, dioxin was just a word to us, a problem that
other people had that we read about in the newspapers.

''It might have had a greater meaning for us if there were unexplained rashes
going around or people were getting sick, but that just isn't happening here.''

In the center of the market complex stands Al's Bar and Grill, owned by Edward
Cappola.  ''I grew up right across the street,'' Mr. Cappola said, ''and no one
ever experienced any severe health problems. Growing up, we used to play ball in
that chemical lot and come home with all different colored stains on our
clothes, but it never bothered us.''

John Rapicano, 62 years old, of Livingston, a dealer in Italian delicacies, said
that his losses were minimal because his company chiefly supplied restaurants in
the area. Still, he added, he is wary of leaving a site that his father picked
55 years ago.

''I've lost a lot of walk-in trade, but that can't be helped,'' Mr. Rapicano
said.  ''To me, the Government and the city are handling this problem all wrong.
You have to take the problem away from us, not us away from the problem.

''After we're all long gone, that dioxin is still going to be in the ground.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joseph Bender, owner of a grocery store photo
of John Rapicano at his Italian food store

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FROM SAIGON, WITH LOVE, EIGHT YEARS LATER

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DALEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 963 words

DATELINE: BRIDGEPORT, Conn., June 11


For years, whenever Canh Tran saw a dress at a bargain price, he would buy it
for his eldest daughter, Thuy, planning to give it to her on the day she arrived
in America.

But eight years passed, Thuy remained in Vietnam, and each time his second
daughter grew big enough to wear one of the dresses, Mr. Tran would know that
Thuy had outgrown it.

Thuy was 5 years old when the Trans fled Vietnam. The girl who stood at the
arrival gate at Kennedy International Airport on Friday night was 13.

'I Called Her Name'

Her mother recognized her right away. Her father did not. ''I was still looking
for a little girl,'' he said. ''I said: 'No that is not her. That is a lady.'
But I called her name and she opened her eyes very wide and she said, 'Oh,
Daddy.' ''

Today, on the living room floor in the yellow Victorian house here where the
Trans have lived for four years, Thuy's suitcase lay open, its contents
scattered about, mingled with the stuffed toys and stray sneakers that belong to
her brothers and sisters.

Thuy brought presents for her parents - a red, white and blue basket she had
woven, some cloth she had embroidered and a plastic bag of the spice lemon
grass. Her father gave her the latest batch of dresses he had saved. They were
too small.

Mr. Tran said he would have to buy her new dresses, but the thought did not seem
to bother him. ''Now, we are happy,'' he said. ''I was always here watching the
kids eating and I am thinking about her over there and I am thinking - does she
have food to eat?''

''She would write, 'Mommy I want to come live with you,' '' said Thuy's mother,
Loan Le, ''and I would get a pain in my stomach.'' Thuy spent her first day in
America riding double on a bicycle with one of her sisters, discovering corn
chips and hauling her youngest brother on her hip as she went down the street
for ice cream.

Occasionally, she stopped by the living room to sit quietly for a moment or two
next to one of her parents. Then she was gone again, back to corn chips or
bicycles. The Trans will have a party for her later. They did not want to rush
her, they said.

The Trans said that on April 29, 1975, as the Government of South Vietnam was
falling, they had had little more than an hour's warning to escape on the
Vietnamese naval vessel on which Mr. Tran was serving. Mrs. Tran, seven months
pregnant, had carried the 4-day-old nephew she was taking care of because her
sister was sick in a hospital. Mr. Tran had carried two of the couple's
children.

There had been no time, they said, to drive the hour and a half it would have
taken to fetch Thuy, who was living with her grandmother in Saigon, an
arrangement that Mr. Tran said was common in Vietnam.

''My mother needed a little kid around her,'' Mr. Tran said. ''You cannot
refuse. They are your parents. They gave you life. My brother would not give her
a child. I could not refuse.''

Followed the American Ships

The Trans had not known where they were going, they said, and when they left
they thought that maybe they would be going back. But they followed the American
ships out of the Can Tho harbor and later spent several months in a refugee camp
in the Philippines and then went to Pennsylvania.

Eventually, they settled here and became American citizens. Mr.  Tran works as a
machinist at night, Mrs. Tran as an accountant in the daytime.

Four years ago, when they bought their 10-room house, they picked out a room on
the third floor that would be Thuy's when she got here. And they waited and
hoped they would get their daughter back.

''I would come home from work and say, 'Did you hear anything last night?' ''
Mr. Tran said. ''My wife would come home from work and say to me, 'Did you hear
anything today?' and it went on like that for years. The Government here is
fast, but over there they take a long time. I kept thinking, why do they keep a
little girl?''

Letters arrived infrequently, one or two a year, Mr. Tran said.  Often, he said,
the letters asked why Mr. Tran did not write more.  ''We wrote a lot, but the
letters disappeared,'' he said. Thuy's letters said that nobody was happy there
and to try to get her out as soon as possible, he said. ''The people over there
don't have anything to eat or a place to live,'' Mr. Tran said. ''We have
everything we want here.''

Exit Visa Was Needed

Myra M. Oliver, the executive director of the International Institute of
Connecticut, a nonprofit social service agency that sponsored the Trans and
helped them settle in Bridgeport, said that in January 1978 the United States
Government approved the Trans' application to bring their daughter to this
country.

''The only thing that was needed was an exit visa from the Vietnamese,'' Mrs.
Oliver said. ''That's all they've been waiting for.''

On June 2, the Trans got a telegram from a relative in Vietnam saying Thuy was
coming. They and Mrs. Oliver do not know why the exit visa was suddenly granted.
''There is no rhyme or reason to it,'' said Mrs. Oliver. ''But that is quite
common.''

Thuy's room was quickly put in order. Curtains were hung, a basket of dried
flowers went in one corner and Mr. Tran took the family stereo system up two
flights of stairs and installed it in his daughter's bedroom.

In all the excitement Friday night, Thuy did not sleep in the room. She, her
three sisters, her two brothers and her cousin, all of whom speak Vietnamese as
well as English, and range in age from 2 to 12, spent the night together in
another room, doing a lot of talking and very little sleeping.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Canh Tran and family

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
THE PSYCHOPRIMARIES

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


In the beginning, a few states had primaries. Then, with all the publicity and
tourism that accrued to primary states, every state had to have a primary.

Then Iowa came up with ''caucuses,'' a semi-primary of party workers, which
permitted it to come up with a big news story without causing an invasion of New
Hampshirites, who are determined to hold the first primary. Following the hoopla
around Jimmy Carter's win in 1976 and George Bush's win in 1980, many more
states are having caucuses.

Now, in a lunge to be the first to provide a launching pad for the next
President, some states are having ''straw votes.'' These do not gather the votes
of registered voters as in a primary, nor do they form the expressed opinion of
a state party's rank and file as in a caucus; they sample the preliminary views
of delegates to state conventions so that the gatherings should not be a total
loss.

However, the wind in the straw fills a news void in an off-year.  The importance
given the pseudo-events by pols and pundits turns them into what Republican
Senator Bob Packwood calls ''psychoprimaries'' - tests of strength and appeal
that give these first matchups the psychological weight of real primaries.

Senator Alan Cranston has just established the first winning streak in the
nominating struggle. After a win in his native California and a strong showing
in liberal Massachusetts, he has just won the straw vote in liberal Wisconsin.
He corralled 789 straws to 727 for Walter Mondale and 443 for Gary Hart; John
Glenn, who knew he faced defeat and would not campaign, received 39 straws.

What does this small sampling - a year before the national convention -tell us?
First, it tells us to stop making fun of knobby-looking Alan Cranston as
''E.T.'s father.'' He is a serious contender who has embraced the nuclear freeze
as Gene McCarthy embraced withdrawal from Vietnam. Other Democratic candidates
endorse this unilateral disarmament, but Senator Cranston gives activist doves
the feeling that he might actually go through with a freeze. He's got our
''Greens,'' who make nominatable whomever they rally behind and make unelectable
whomever they help nominate.

Next, it bloodies the nose of front-runner Walter Mondale, who needed a bloody
nose to avoid appearing to sail serenely and boringly toward party coronation,
like Thomas E. Dewey. The disguised blessing is an early op-portunity to get off
the floor and make a comeback. There will be other straw votes as the use of
this technique spreads, and not every Democratic state convention will be
controlled by the far left.

Senator Cranston's Wisconsin campaign was essentially against Senator Gary Hart
for control of the money and enthusiasm of unabashed liberals. In 1976, the
leftish candidates kept splitting their vote in the early primaries, letting
Jimmy Carter take the non-left; this time, lefties hope, Senator Cranston or
Senator Hart will emerge as the only unmistakably liberal-dovish entry. Mr.
Hart's strategy has been to surprise everyone with an organizational triumph in
Iowa's caucus and New Hampshire's primary, knocking out John Glenn as the
alternative to Walter Mondale. But now he will first have to find a place to
ambush Alan Cranston.

What of the man who wasn't there? John Glenn chickened out of Wisconsin, which
was short-run smart and long-run dumb.  Specialinterest work, not poll
standings, is the name of the nomination game; he should have gone in and made a
big national point out of losing in Wisconsin on defense issues. Senator Glenn
thinks he can be the Dwight Eisenhower of the Democratic Party by relying on his
personality and poll strength, but unless he is willing to take political risks,
he will wind up the Nelson Rockefeller of the Democratic Party.

For Republicans, the early foot of the far left is good news.  Freezenik
takeovers, along with strident calls for isolationism in Central America and tax
increases at home, are like mother's milk to right-wingers. If Mr. Reagan
declares prosperity and does not run (and the selection of nonpolitical Paul
Volcker to another Fed term would be an indication of impending retirement), any
Republican candidate would win, as Mrs. Thatcher did, on the dangerous kookiness
of a far-left government. With Jesse Jackson marching out with the blacks and
John Anderson using taxpayer dollars to pitch the Brie-and-Chablis set, the
Democrats would be lucky to do as well as British Labor.

And what of this tendency to stretch out our Presidential campaign with straw
votes in addition to caucuses and primaries? (Next week, Alabama.) Wouldn't it
be better to have brief, inexpensive campaigns, with less wear and tear on
candidates?

Baloney. A long, grueling campaign with frequent skirmishes prepares a man and
his party competitors for the toughest job in the world. Bring on the
psychoprimaries! I hate off-years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER ROLE IN '68 RACE STIRS CONFLICTING VIEWS

BYLINE: By TERENCE SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1386 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


Two former national security advisers, each from the other side of the political
fence, were having lunch one day last month in a Washington hotel dining room
and reminiscing about their respective roles in the 1968 Presidential campaign.

Richard V. Allen, who worked for Richard M. Nixon in that campaign and later
served as President Reagan's national security adviser, was trading stories with
Zbigniew Brzezinski, who supported Hubert H.  Humphrey in 1968 and subsequently
held the national security post under President Jimmy Carter.

''You know,'' Mr. Allen recalled saying, ''we had your side fairly well
penetrated in that campaign. Henry Kissinger was providing us with a steady flow
of information on the Paris peace talks.''

''The hell you say,'' Mr. Brzezinski replied indignantly, according to Mr.
Allen, ''Henry was working for our side.'' The two men were startled at first,
then amused as they compared notes. ''We just shook our heads in disbelief,''
Mr. Allen said.  The issue of Mr. Kissinger's role in that campaign was thrust
into the news recently with the publication of a book by Seymour M. Hersh
charging that Mr. Kissinger played both sides of the political street in 1968,
providing secrets about the Vietnam negotiations to Mr.  Nixon's camp while
offering a confidential campaign file to the Humphrey forces for use against Mr.
Nixon.

A Denial From Kissinger

Mr. Kissinger immediately denounced the Hersh account as 'a slimy lie' and
denied flatly that he had offered any file on Mr. Nixon to the Humphrey
campaign.

Since then, however, four Humphrey campaign aides have told The New York Times
that Mr. Kissinger offered to turn over a file on Mr.  Nixon that had been
compiled earlier in the year by the campaign staff of Nelson A. Rockefeller. The
file apparently consisted of a compendium of Nixon pronouncements on foreign
poilicy that the Rockefeller research staff had assembled for use against Mr.
Nixon in the Republican primaries that year.

In addition, Mr. Allen has reiterated to The Times the Hersh charge that Mr.
Kissinger provided sensitive information to the Nixon camp on the secret
negotiations under way in Paris to end the Vietnam War. In his memoir, ''RN,''
Mr. Nixon refers briefly to this Kissinger role and notes: ''During the last
days of the campaign ... Kissinger was providing us with information about the
bombing halt.''

Mr. Kissinger repeated his denial of the charges late last week in a telephone
interview from Goteborg, Sweden. He said he had ''no recollection'' of offering
any file on Mr. Nixon to the Humphrey camp. Regarding the Paris talks, he said
he merely answered a few questions from the Nixon camp about the probability of
a bombing halt.

Brzezinski's Recollections

The conflict between the two versions of events thus continues, with members of
the foreign policy community here and in New York taking sides. There is even
division among former Humphrey aides.  Some, such as the lawyers Max Kampelman
and David Ginsberg, say they have no memory of Mr. Kissinger offering a file or
any other help to the Humphrey campaign. Both said in interviews that it was
''inconceivable'' to them that such an offer would have been made without their
knowledge.

Other Humphrey aides, however, say they recall the offer well. Mr.  Brzezinski,
who was among Mr. Humphrey's foreign policy advisers, said in an interview that
Mr. Kissinger offered to provide the file to the Humphrey campaign in a
telephone conversation shortly after the Republican convention in Miami.

''I definitely recall discussing with Henry his offer of access to a Rockefeller
campaign file on Nixon that would be helpful to the campaign,'' Mr. Brzezinski
said.

Mr. Brzezinski added that, weeks later, when he called Mr.  Kissinger's office
in an effort to obtain the file, he was told by a secretary that Mr. Kissinger
had by then aligned himself with Mr.  Nixon. ''We never received the file or saw
it.'' Mr. Brzezinski said.

Three other Humphrey aides, Ted Van Dyk, a key assistant to the Vice President;
Samuel Huntington, a Harvard professor who was on the Humphrey foreign policy
advisory panel, and Robert Hunter, a Humphrey speech writer, all told The Times
that they recalled repeated discussions of Mr. Kissinger's offer to provide a
file on Mr. Nixon.

'Henry Had Second Thoughts'

''Zbig called Kissinger to get his comments on a foreign policy paper and Henry
offered to turn over Rockefeller's files on Nixon,'' said Mr. Van Dyk, now the
president of the Center for National Policy, a Democratic think tank. ''They
were described to me as negative files on Nixon that would be helpful to us. But
later, when we tried to get the files, Henry had second thoughts about providing
them.''

Professor Huntington also recalled the Kissinger offer. ''My recollection,'' he
said, ''is that Kissinger said that the Rockefeller campaign had put together a
virtually complete file on Nixon's foreign policy statements, very well
organized and indexed, and that he offered it to us. There was no dirt in it, as
I understand it, but it would have been very useful to us because it was certain
to be better organized and more thorough than anything the Humphrey campaign had
the time or money to put together.''

''Kissinger did say he would provide us with the file, but it never came,'' Mr.
Huntington said.  Mr. Hunter, now a Washington consultant, said he was told that
''Henry had indeed offered to make the Nixon file available to us.  Later, we
were told we couldn't have it because Henry had moved closer to Nixon.''

Speaking from Sweden, Mr. Kissinger said: ''I have no recollection of anything
like this. The only files we had in the Rockefeller campaign were research files
on public statements that Nixon had made on foreign policy, all material that
was available publicly.

A Kissinger Letter Recalled

''I have no recollection, 15 year later, of having offered those files to the
Humphrey camp,'' Mr. Kissinger continued. ''I wouldn't consider it a crime to
make available publicly known statements, but the fact is, none were made
available. Certainly I had no derogatory files on Nixon.''

Mr. Kissinger said that the files on Mr. Nixon's public pronouncements had been
assembled by the Rockefeller campaign research staff. One member of that staff
was Nancy Maginnes, who is now Mr. Kissinger's wife.

Mr. Van Dyk, recalling another incident, said he remembered reading a letter
from Mr. Kissinger to Mr. Humphrey in late October, 1968, when the Democratic
candidate was rising sharply in the polls. In the letter, Mr. Kissinger
expressed his ''distaste'' for Mr. Nixon, his high regard for Mr. Humphrey and
his willingness to serve in a Humphrey administration.

''I remember thinking to myself, here's another letter from another academic
looking for a job,'' Mr. Van Dyk said. ''I laughed and threw it in the 'out'
box.

'That's a Total Lie'

Mr. Kissinger, asked about that account, angrily denied ever writing such a
letter. ''That's a total lie, a goddammed lie,'' he said. ''Let them produce
such a letter.''

Mr. Kissinger also denied the accusation in the Hersh book, attributed to Mr.
Allen, that he was providing to the Nixon camp information obtained through
friends and associates in the Johnson Administration about the Paris peace
talks.

Mr. Kissinger said his only contact on that subject was with John N. Mitchell,
Mr. Nixon's campaign manager and later Attorney General, who sought his advice
about whether a bombing halt was likely before the November elections. Mr.
Kissinger said he replied that he thought such a halt was probable and that he
advised the Nixon campaign against making an issue of it.

Mr. Allen, now a Washington consultant, disputes this. ''It is simply not so,''
he said. ''Henry was in active contact with us about what was going on in Paris
throughout the period.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Henry A. Kissinger Photo of Zbigniew Brzezinski

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LIBEL SUIT LAWYER SAYS CBS DESTROYED A TAPE

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


The lawyer representing Gen. William C.  Westmoreland in his libel suit against
CBS News asserted today that the network had surreptitiously tape recorded an
interview with former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, later destroyed the
tape and improperly concealed these facts in formal pretrial proceedings.

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer in Washington, made these accusations
in a letter dated today to Judge Pierre N. Leval of the Federal District Court
for the Southern District of New York, who is presiding over the $120 million
lawsuit. The suit stems from a CBS television documentary that said the general
had conspired to falsify enemy troop strength figures during the Vietnam War.

While General Westmoreland was commander of United States forces ino Vietnam,
Mr. McNamara was Secretary of Defense.  David Boies, a partner in the New York
firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, who is representing CBS in the lawsuit, flatly
denied any improper concealment of the McNamara interview. He said Mr. Burt's
comments were a deliberate falsehood.

Accusation a 'Smokescreen'

''This is a smokescreen on his part,'' Mr. Boies said, accusing Mr. Burt of
seeking to distract attention ''from the fact that they're concealing documents
from us'' in the pretrial phase of the lawsuit, when information is exchanged by
both sides.

Victor Kovner, a New York lawyer representing George Crile, the CBS producer who
interviewed Mr. McNamara in 1981 during the preparation of the Vietnam
documentary, said in an interview today that the only tape recording of Mr.
McNamara ''was of a telephone conversation; it was not of an in-person
interview.''

Mr. Kovner said that one of his associates had told a lawyer working with Mr.
Burt ''months ago'' that audiotapes of unimportant interviews ''had been reused,
which in effect erases them'' before the broadcast. He said he was not positive
whether Mr. Crile had told Mr. McNamara that the telephone conversation was
being recorded.

Mr. Burt said in his letter to Judge Leval that he believed that ''more than
five'' audiotapes of interviews were made during the preparation of the
broadcast and later destroyed. He said today, ''We suspect that they were made
without the knowledge of the party on the other end of the line.''

Mr. Burt said in his letter that Mr. McNamara had told one of Mr.  Burt's
associates last January that Mr. Crile's interview with Mr.  McNamara ''was off
the record, and he was certain that the interview had not been recorded.'' From
this, Mr. Burt said, he drew the inference that Mr. Crile had a concealed tape
recorder with him when he spoke with Mr. McNamara.

Mr. McNamara and Mr. Crile could not be reached today for comment.  Mr. Boies
said that the CBS audiotape of all or part of an interview with Mr. McNamara and
an audiotape of an interview of at least one other man in connection with the
broadcast of January 1982 were erased or otherwise destroyed in the routine
course of business, before General Westmoreland filed his lawsuit.

He denied Mr. Burt's assertion, in the Burt letter to Judge Leval, that this
amounted to ''destruction of critical evidence.'' In his letter to Judge Leval,
Mr. Burt accused CBS and other defendants of supplying him ''with false and
misleading information concerning the materials destroyed.''

Tape Copies Were Requested

Mr. Burt said he had formally requested CBS in September to provide copies of
all audiotapes relating to the Vietnam broadcast and to describe any that had
been made and then destroyed or otherwise disposed of.

According to Mr. Burt, CBS concealed the McNamara recording episode until
Friday. He said that he had specifically asked Mr. Boies last January in an
informal telephone conversation whether there were a recording of Mr. McNamara,
and that Mr. Boies said ''no such recording had been made.''

Mr. Burt said that he had recently acquired new evidence that there had been a
McNamara recording, had called Mr. Boies on Friday and confronted him with some
of the evidence, and that Mr. Boies had called back later Friday and
acknowledged for the first time that such a recording had been made and later
destroyed.

Mr. Boies, when told of Mr. Burt's allegations, said: ''That's simply not true,
and he knows it's not true.'' He said he had never denied to Mr. Burt that there
had been a McNamara recording.

Mr. Burt said the destroyed off-camera audiotapes were important to the lawsuit
because they were the best evidence of whether CBS fairly represented what it
had been told by people it interviewed, better than written notes taken at
interviews.

He said of Mr. Crile, who did much of the interviewing for the Vietnam
documentary: ''All his notes are suspect now. It seems his notes are generally
at variance with what the other parties to those conversations say, and the best
evidence of the conversations is gone. I wonder why?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-C.I.A. HEAD NOW WORKS FOR A NUCLEAR FREEZE

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1421 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


Eight years ago, while this city was undergoing its post-Watergate cleansing,
William E. Colby did something unusual for a director of Central Intelligence.

He disclosed the agency's ''family jewels,'' as its dark secrets and illegal
activities were called by insiders, before a Senate committee. At the same time
he turned over to the Justice Department the findings of an internal inquiry
that led to the prosecution of Richard Helms, one of his predecessors, for lying
to Congress about C.I.A. activities in Chile.

The agency's old guard reacted with harsh accusations and innuendoes. Some,
including James J. Angleton, who had been ousted as head of counterintelligence
by Mr. Colby, suggested at the time that he might be a Soviet mole; others
accused Mr. Colby of paralyzing the agency's ability to conduct covert
operations by kneeling before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence as if
it were, in the words of one former C.I.A. director, ''a mourner's bench.''
President Ford asked for Mr. Colby's resignation in late 1975.

These days Mr. Colby, who practices international law here, is again playing a
surprising role for a former director of Central Intelligence. He has joined the
public debate on nuclear arms control on the side of the Catholic bishops and
the nuclear freeze movement, and this has brought a new round of criticism of
Mr. Colby by some of his old C.I.A. colleagues who never forgave him for opening
the agency's black bag to the world.

Known as a 'Soldier-Priest'

''My position is a little incongruous for a former C.I.A. man, and I understand
that,'' he said, adding that, contrary to what some are saying, neither religion
nor guilt brought him to his present view.

Still, friends and critics alike, including two former directors of Central
Intelligence, suggest privately that Mr. Colby, known around the C.I.A. as the
''soldier-priest,'' may be motivated in part by his deep commitment to his Roman
Catholic faith and a sense of guilt from some of the most painful periods of his
life.

After he was appointed C.I.A. Director in 1973, antiwar groups tacked up posters
in Washington labeling Mr. Colby a ''murderer'' and war criminal for his role in
directing Operation Phoenix, an effort to identify and recruit or imprison
leaders of the Vietcong in South Vietnam. Some 20,000 Vietcong ''suspects'' were
killed during the operation. Mr. Colby told a House committee that there had
been some ''excesses'' despite his rules against illegal killings, but he
insisted that the program had, on the whole, been successful.

Still, Mr. Colby was shaken by suggestions that he had condoned political
assassinations. ''How does it feel to be married to a war criminal?'' he asked
his wife when the posters went up.

His public tribulations were matched by his personal grief. In 1971 his eldest
daughter died in Washington after a long illness, and friends say Mr. Colby, who
was stationed in Vietnam during the years her health was deteriorating, felt a
sense of guilt for not having spent more time with her.

Practical and Moral Aspects

Mr. Colby, whose poker player's face rarely betrays his emotions or private
thoughts, nodded slightly as a reporter repeated this speculation about why he
went from the cold to the freeze.

''If I were taking the other side, nobody would bat an eyebrow about it,'' he
said. ''I felt this way long before the bishops' letter came out and, in fact, I
helped to some degree in explaining the issue to Catholic groups. I figure the
priests can take care of the moral aspects and I'll talk about the practical
aspects.''

Mr. Colby, who is waging his personal freeze campaign on the speaking circuit
and in newspaper columns, contends that his antinuclear activities are ''a
logical extention of what I was doing in the intelligence business.''

He goes on: ''At the C.I.A. it became obvious to me that the real function of
intelligence is not to win battles but to help with the peace, to avoid the kind
of destabilizing surprises that can occur.  It is clear to me that the arms race
has us on the verge of another one of these terrible destabilizing steps that is
moving us toward a hair-trigger world with all this talk of launch under attack.
My God, we're talking about the fate of the world.''

If Mr. Colby's former colleagues in the intelligence community are perplexed by
the latest public role of this man who calls himself ''an unreconstructed cold
warrior,'' so are some liberals who have welcomed him into the ranks of the
nuclear freeze movement despite his support for the Reagan Administration's
policies in El Salvador and his unwavering defense of American involvement in
Vietnam.

Schlesinger's View Differs

James R. Schlesinger, a former C.I.A. director who disagrees with Mr. Colby's
position on arms control, said he did not doubt his former colleague's
sincerity, but, like some other members of the national security community, said
he felt that Mr. Colby's words were taking a turn toward stridency.

Mr. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense in the Nixon and Ford Administrations,
said he read with dismay Mr. Colby's recent remarks to an antinuclear group at
Georgetown University. Mr. Colby told that audience: ''I think it's time for
people to take this matter away from the priesthood that has gotten us into this
mess and to simply insist that we stop building these things.''

In an interview, Mr. Schlesinger said: ''I get restless, and I suspect others do
too, over firebrand comments about a supposed nuclear priesthood. Bill knows
better than that. Discussions regarding nuclear strategy khave been quite open,
more so than in the intelligence matters, and Bill would properly resent casual
remarks about an intelligence priesthood.''

Whatever his motivation, Mr. Colby has not come lately to the arms control
issue. He did some personal lobbying on Capitol Hill for the second treaty on
limiting strategic arms that became a casualty of the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan, trying unsuccessfully to reassure Senator John Glenn, Democrat of
Ohio, on his concerns about verification. Looking back, Mr. Colby says Senator
Glenn's position had ''a very large impact on the failure of Salt II.'' More
recently, Mr. Colby has spoken out against the Reagan Administration's MX
missile program.

Described as 'Anticharismatic'

At the age of 63, Mr. Colby still fits his description of the perfect
clandestine operative, ''the traditional gray man, so inconspicuous that he can
never catch the waiter's eye in a restaurant.'' Mr. Colby, a wiry man with a
stern face and pale blue eyes framed by translucent pink glasses, has a reserve
and quiet that are difficult to reconcile with the stories of his courage in
World War II. His personality has been described as ''anticharismatic.''

Despite his unassuming physical profile, Mr. Colby has not been a man easily
overlooked since he went before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in
1975 to confess the misdeeds of his agency.

Mr. Helms, the former C.I.A. director who gave Mr. Colby some key career breaks
at the agency, has never forgiven his old colleague for handing over to the
Justice Department evidence that forced him to enter into a plea bargain
arrangement to avoid a perjury charge. Mr.  Helms pleaded nolo contendere to a
misdemeanor charge of testifying inaccurately and incompletely on C.I.A.
activities in Chile.

Mr. Helms, who says he is proud to be known as the man who kept the secrets,
said in a recent interview that he did not want ''to reopen old wounds'' by
expressing an opinion on Mr. Colby's role in the arms control movement. Mr.
Helms is a member of the Presidential commission that recently recommended
deployment of the MX missile, and that, he said, was the limit of his
involvement in the nuclear weapons issue.

''I have preferred to remain independent of politics,'' Mr. Helms said, letting
the contrast speak for itself. ''I haven't done a lot of public speaking. When
in comes to the intricacies of weapons systems, I believe someone in my position
can be humble about his knowledge.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Colby

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
THE KISSINGER DEBATE

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 884 words


So swift and so virulent have been the attacks by friends and suitors of Henry
Kissinger on a new book, ''The Price of Power,'' that one feels compelled to try
to understand the significance of this controversy.

Mr. Kissinger's admirers seem to think that if readers accept what Seymour
Hersh, a respected investigative journalist, has written about the former
national security adviser and Secretary of State, then the underpinnings of
contemporary American foreign policy will have been badly eroded. So let us not
probe into the past, they say, let us look at the ends and not the means Mr.
Kissinger employed. Let us forgive his abuses of power and gather round his
flame instead, to keep anyone or anything from extinguishing it.

In short, these admirers make Henry Kissinger more important to the American
Republic than he is. Perhaps Mr. Hersh's exhaustive book has the effect of doing
the same, but his work is designed as a corrective, an examination of the
carefully crafted Kissinger legend to see if it stands up.

What Mr. Hersh essentially says, with heavy documentation, is that Mr. Kissinger
rarely acted in the national interest but rather in his own, and that this
pursuit of ambition and power seriously flawed his policies and his legacy.

Mr. Kissinger's protectors would like to depict this as a dispute between, on
the one hand, a brilliant statesman and, on the other, a monomaniacal journalist
with an intent to smear.

But this only trivializes the matter, and it is a much more important issue than
that.  The issue is government by constitution, by laws and by our rules of
checks and balances.  Mr. Kissinger's own memoirs, perhaps unwittingly, told us
how annoying he found these laws and checks. If only Congress had not been
pusillanimous, he kept saying, if only the liberals hadn't opposed the Nixon
Administration policies so vigorously, then the Kissinger-Nixon program would
have succeeded in Vietnam, Cambodia and other places where it failed. How
debilitating he found any difference of opinion with his methods.

Were those methods inconsequential side issues, as the guardians of his
reputation contend, or were they central to his policies - and thus central to
the debate over how American foreign policy ought to be conducted?

The evidence, I think, including that in Mr. Kissinger's own writings, says they
were central. So consistently did he circumvent the limitations placed on his
use of power by the Constitution and by Congress that subversions became the
norm, not the exception.

Perhaps one's opinions are shaped to some degree by geography. I watched the
results of Mr. Kissinger's policies from India and Cambodia in the 1970's. Maybe
when you become an unwilling expert on refugees and an involuntary observer of
death by malnutrition and bombing, you start looking for explanations that you
might otherwise have lacked the urge to pursue.

Mr. Kissinger, the record shows, presided over the secret bombing of Cambodia in
1969-70 without the advice and consent of Congress. He says this bombing was
necessary to disrupt Hanoi's sanctuaries in Cambodia so that U.S. troops could
be extracted more painlessly from South Vietnam; but the test of history says
the bombing widened the war and thus made no longer tenable Cambodia's important
but fragile neutrality. That bombing, and the U.S. invasion that followed in the
Spring of 1970, were the first steps in a policy that brought the war full-blown
to Cambodia and thus began creating the conditions that made possible the rise
to power and to terror of the Khmer Rouge Communists, who in 1970 were but a
small and disorganized force.

Mr. Kissinger showed his impatience with laws and Congress and calls for
restraint - and his lack of concern for the Cambodians - in many ways. He sent
subordinates to testify before Congressional committees that there was no
significant refugee problem in Cambodia, and therefore no need for much refugee
aid -when the problem in actuality was severe. Time and again, he sought to
evade the Cooper-Church Amendment, which had put limitations on U.S.
involvement in the Cambodian war; when these abuses were occasionally exposed,
his surrogates at the American Embassy simply told lies.

Cambodia of course is not the whole picture, but it is a microcosm of Mr.
Kissinger's methods - and their results.  No doubt some of Mr. Kissinger's
supporters will rise to attack this column as part of the personal
''hatchet-job'' conspiracy they see in the Hersh book. But this discussion is
not about personalities.

It is about the laws and constitutional rules that are fundamental to our
Government and make it different from the other great powers.  The alternative
is an authoritarian form of government. I think that's the question raised by
Mr. Kissinger's years as architect of our foreign policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Tom Wicker is on vacation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE OREN R. LEWIS; KEY FIGURE IN RULING IN '54 ON SCHOOL BIAS

BYLINE: By WALTER H. WAGGONER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


Federal District Judge Oren R. Lewis died Sunday at Arlington Hospital in
Virginia after suffering a heart attack at his home in Arlington. He was 80
years old.

Judge Lewis was a newspaper owner and publisher and a lawyer in Arlington County
when he was appointed to the Federal Court in the Eastern District of Virginia
by President Eisenhower in 1960. He became a senior judge in 1973 but remained
active on the bench until his death. He was said to be the oldest district judge
still hearing cases in Virginia.

In recent years his service had been marked by controversy, with higher-court
reversals of some of his rulings. Last March the United States Court of Appeals
for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond overturned two of his rulings in one week.

Malpractice Retrial Ordered

In one decision, the appeals court ordered a new trial of a medical malpractice
suit against the United States. Judge James M.  Sprouse of the appeals court
said Judge Lewis had ''predetermined the outcome'' of the case.

In the other reversal, the appellate court, citing what it described as an
accumulation of errors by Judge Lewis, ordered a new trial for a man convicted
of assaulting a Federal officer.

In yet another controversial case, Judge Lewis froze the assets of Frank Snepp,
a former agent of the Central Intelligence Agency whose book, ''Decent
Interval,'' criticized the performance of American officials in the last days of
the Vietnam War.

Judge Lewis ruled in favor of the Government suit that charged Mr.  Snepp with
violating rules against publishing without prior approval and gave the
Government a ''constructive trust'' on Mr. Snepp's earnings from the book. The
appeals court disagreed and ordered a new trial, but the United States Supreme
Court eventually upheld Judge Lewis.

Judge Lewis was the author of a school desegregation opinion in Virginia that
was a basis for the Supreme Court's decision in 1954 in Brown v. Board of
Education, a landmark case.

Also a Newspaper Publisher

Oren Lewis, a native of Seymour, Ind., received his law degree from the National
Law School, now the George Washington University Law School. In addition to
practicing law, he owned and published newspapers in Virginia from 1940 until
his appointment to the bench.

He is survived by his wife, Grace Marguerite; two sons, Robert Wells Lewis of
Vienna, Va., and Oren R. Lewis Jr. of Arlington; a brother, State Judge John M.
Lewis Jr. of Seymour, Ind., five grandchildren and a great-grandchild.

A service will be held at 11 A. M. Wednesday at the Old Chapel in Fort Myer, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Oren Lewis

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MCNAMARA CRITICIZES CBS ON TAPING OF CALL

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR JR., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


Robert S. McNamara, the former Secretary of Defense secretary, said today that
it would have been ''entirely unethical'' if CBS News had made an audiotape,
without his knowledge or consent, of what he said had been an ''off-the-record''
telephone conversation with a CBOS producer.

Mr. McNamara was reacting to a report that lawyers representing the network and
the producer, George Crile, in a libel suit had acknowledged that Mr. Crile had
made a tape recording, which now cannot be found, of a telephone conversation
with Mr. McNamara in 1981, while preparing a documentary about the Vietnam War.

Mr. Crile's lawyer, Victor Kovner, said it was legal for journalists to tape
telephone interviews without the consent of the other parties.

Mr. McNamara said in an interview today that he had not been told by CBS that he
was being taped either during the telephone conversation or during a subsequent
in-person ''off-the-record'' interview. ''I think it's entirely unethical to
record a telephone conversation without informing the other party, and I hope
that isn't standard CBS practice,'' he added.

Charge Called 'Outrageous'

Mr. Kovner and David Boies, a lawyer representing CBS, emphatically denied
suggestions by Dan M. Burt, a lawyer representing Gen. William C. Westmoreland,
the plaintiff in the libel suit, that Mr. Crile may have carried a concealed
tape recorder with him when he interviewed Mr. McNamara in person.

They also denied as ''outrageous'' Mr. Burt's charge that the McNamara tape and
others had been improperly ''destroyed.'' Mr. Boies said today: ''Nobody
intentionally erased it or concealed it; it is even possible that that tape
still exists. We have not been able to find it.''

The existence of the McNamara tape and other CBS audiotapes that can no longer
be found are the subject of a bitter pretrial dispute in the libel suit, which
charges the network with falsely reporting in the January 1982 documentary that
General Westmoreland had conspired to falsify enemy troop strength estimates
while he was commander of United States forces in Vietnam.

Mr. McNamara was Secretary of Defense at the time.  Mr. Burt and Mr. Boies
accused each other, in letters and interviews Sunday and today, of dishonesty
and of concealing important evidence from one another.

Taping 'Not Unusual'

Mr. Crile did not return a telephone call seeking his comment on the McNamara
taping episode today. Mr. Kovner, his lawyer, said: ''On occasion Mr. Crile,
like a number of reporters, will tape phone conversations without explicitly
requesting consent.''

Mr. Kovner said ''it is not unusual and it is not against the law in New York,''
where Mr. Crile works, although he said some states have laws barring the
undisclosed taping of telephone conversations.

Mr. Kovner added that ''if he were to wear a concealed wire in an in-person
interview, that would be against the law, and that has never happened.'' Other
legal experts said it might not be illegal to do this, although it would raise
serious questions of journalistic ethics.

Mr. Kovner also said the McNamara interview was unimportant and ''peripheral''
to the lawsuit.

Both Charge Concealment

Since Friday, each side in the Westmoreland lawsuit has formally asked Judge
Pierre N. Leval, of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New
York, to take steps against the other for allegedly concealing important
evidence. Each has denounced as baseless the allegations of concealment made by
the other.

Mr. Burt has accused the lawyers for CBS and Mr. Crile of concealing, during
several months of pretrial proceedings, the making and the destruction or
erasure of the McNamara tape and several other audiotapes that were recorded in
1981, in preparation for the Vietnam broadcast.

Mr. Boies has accused Mr. Burt of ''continued refusal to produce documents'' in
his possession regarding military estimates of enemy troop strength in Vietnam
during 1967 and 1968.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 15, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Australian Sees Peace Role

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 101 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


Prime Minister Robert Hawke of Australia said today that his country stood ready
to act as a mediator in Southeast Asia. After a meeting with Secretary of State
George P.  Shultz, Mr. Hawke said the Secretary had expressed the hope that
Australia would be able to take a leading role in efforts to persuade Vietnam to
withdraw its forces from Cambodia. ''I indicated that the major concern of
Australia is to achieve the position where Vietnam will be able to resume her
place within the broader community of nations,'' Mr. Hawke said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 15, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Laurie Johnston and Susan Heller Anderson

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


A Police Horse That's Gentle and Retiring

E ven his name, Maverick, smacks of the 1960's, when the bay gelding from
Oklahoma was recruited for crowd-control duty with the New York Police
Department mounted unit. He was used at demonstrations against the Vietnam War,
led nearly every major New York parade - including last Sunday's for Puerto
Rican Day -and headed contingents at the National Horse Show and the 1980 Reagan
inauguration.

''When you were riding at a demonstration, he would see what you saw and move
even before you gave him the signals,'' Capt. Walter Melnick, commander of the
mounted unit, said yesterday.

But it was Maverick's gentleness that got him assigned to training new police
horses and riders. And yesterday, when he retired as senior horse at the age of
27, he was carrying kids one last time in the department's riding program for
handicapped children.

At the ceremony, at Van Cortlandt Stables in the west Bronx, Maverick got a
custom-made blue blanket gold-embroidered with ''1967-83.'' He will retire to an
Orange County farm with 30 other over-age police horses.

''He's the horse for all seasons,'' Captain Melnick said, ''the one we would
clone if we could.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 15, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

APPRAISING VOLCKER'S RECORD

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1501 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


Growth of the economy was beginning to stall. The dollar was plunging, and
interest rates were soaring. The price of an ounce of gold, the recourse of
frightened investors, was climbing above $800. Opinion polls were showing that
what people feared most in the economy was no longer unemployment but
ever-rising prices.

It was then, in July 1979, that President Carter turned to Paul A.  Volcker to
take over the chairmanship of the Federal Reserve Board, the one agency in
Washington with the power to command a fairly rapid change in the direction of
the economy. The night Mr. Volcker acted was a Saturday in October, three months
after he was named, and the change he ordered then has produced an economy today
that is the polar opposite of the one he inherited.

Then, inflation was at more than 10 percent a year and rising, a profoundly
worrisome situation that had not been an America problem in peacetime. Under Mr.
Volcker, inflation has fallen to less than 5 percent a year, but at the price of
an unemployment rate that went from less than 6 percent to more than 10 percent.

Mr. Volcker's four-year term as chairman of the Federal Reserve ends in August.
It is a measure of the Fed's performance during his tenure that many economists,
both here and overseas, consider this single appointment, of Mr. Volcker or
someone else, the most important President Reagan will make, both for the
economy and possibly for the prospect of Mr. Reagan's re-election next year,
should he choose to run.

Like the White House, the nation's bankers, its economists, businessmen and
politicians - nearly anyone with a workaday role in dealing with the economy -
have been assessing the record of the man. Such has been his impact that the
news media have made a celebrity of this 55-year-old, 6-foot-7 smoker of long,
25-cent cigars who is invariably called the second most powerful man in the
country, one who is content with that power on a salary of $69,800 a year.

On the record of Mr. Volcker, and his six fellow members of the Federal Reserve
Board, stands the longest recession since the Depression, the 17-month slide
that ended in December and resulted in the highest levels of unemployment and
business failures in 40 years. Most economic declines are named for the
Presidents then in office.  The last, however, is called the Volcker Recession.

It resulted largely from the restrictions he placed on the growth in the money
supply, restrictions that resulted in such a runup of interest rates - the prime
rate reached 21 1/2 percent in December of 1980 - that investment and buying
were stifled and the economy went into recession.

But Mr. Volcker and the Fed are also the authors of the successful assault on
the virulent inflation. Running at a rate of 13 to 14 percent in the autumn of
1979 and now down to 4 or 5 percent, it was a phenomenon that most economists
and politicians saw as a worse evil than the jobs lost in bringing on the
recession to combat it.

''He broke the back of the worst inflation in United States history,'' said
Allen Sinai of Data Resources, an economic consulting firm in Lexington, Mass.
''When one looks at the severity of inflation in 1979, it seems the costs of not
coming to grips with it would have been much greater.''

To batter down inflation, however, Mr. Volcker is charged with overkill in
letting the unemployment level rise from the near ''full employment'' rate of
about 6 percent when he took over to well above 10 percent.

''You just have to say Volcker is the most qualified man to operate in that job
in this generation,'' said Walter W. Heller, a professor at the University of
Minnesota who was chief economic adviser to President Kennedy. ''But I was one
of the critics last year who said he overdid tight money to curb inflation. By
the time he finally quit, he was going in the wrong direction.''

Thesis Called Wrong

The assessment of another economist, Gar Alperowitz, an adviser to the liberal
wing of Democratic Congressmen, is harsher. ''No one disagreed that you could
control inflation by throwing 10 or 12 million people out of work,'' he said.
''The thesis that the cause of inflation was the Federal deficit or growth of
the money supply was wrong.''

The causes, Mr. Alperowitz said, were such secular developments as the cost of
the war in Vietnam, rising grain and oil prices and rising health costs. Because
such problems could recur, he said, the economy may face another bout of severe
inflation.

The assault that the Fed began against inflation three and a half years ago
marked an extraordinary change in the way that the central bank managed the
nation's money supply. Until then, it had tried to control inflation by setting
limits on the discount rate that it charges banks for loans from the Fed. By
managing the level of the rate, the Fed thought it could thwart incipient bursts
of inflation, but the method was not working.

That method's weakness was politics. In the 1960's and 1970's, in face of
Presidential and Congressional elections, the White House would often bring
pressure on the Fed to ease off on interest rates to stimulate investment and
credit buying and thus help give the economy a ballot-box boost. Ultimately, the
Fed would go along.

Another Tool Embraced

This time, Mr. Volcker and his fellow governors turned to another tool, managing
the money supply. Through its open market operations of selling Government
securities to the Fed's member banks, which sops up cash and thus slows the
growth of the money supply, and through buying securities from the banks, which
increases the money supply, the Fed hoped it could keep inflation low and
discourage political interference.

''It was a way to deflect public attention from interest rates,'' said Barry
Bosworth, who was President Carter's budget director.  The policy change, Mr.
Bosworth added, helped Mr. Volcker resist continuing criticism from the White
House, Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan and even some members of the financial
community who, at various times, said Mr. Volcker was pressing too hard or not
hard enough.

''He did not back down,'' Mr. Bosworth said. ''He stuck with the program no
matter what the cost in unemployment and no matter how high interest rates
went.''

There are limits on the Fed's independence, however. In March 1980, in the face
of the record-high interest rates that had resulted from the Fed's program to
bring down inflation through managing the money supply, President Carter ordered
the Fed to impose controls on borrowing. Mr. Volcker opposed the move, believing
his monetary policy was working well enough, but he went along. Four months
later, the controls were lifted.

Skirmishes with the Reagan Administration could explain the Fed's delay in
easing off its anti-inflation policy, even though some economists feel that the
Fed's policy had smothered inflation by the end of 1981. Nevertheless, he
pressed on with his policy, perhaps because of a battle with the Reagan
Administration over the President's proposed tax reductions. Mr. Volcker,
fearing that large budget deficits would reignite inflation, urged repeatedly
that the tax cuts had to be coupled withsubstantial spending cuts so that the
deficit could be controlled.

''Fiscal policy was simply ignoring the deficit,'' said Albert Sommers, an
economist at the Conference Board. ''Mr. Volcker lashed out against it as much
as he could, but he wasn't winning the argument, and he finally let up.'' That
came last summer, when Mr.  Volcker eased up enough to permit interest rates to
slide, and an economic recovery got under way.

Mr. Volcker has won widespread praise for his role in the global economy. The
rebound of the dollar - a rebound fueled by Mr.  Volcker's high interest rates,
which attracted foreign investment in dollars - is sometimes cited for
curtailing American exports and undermining the weaker European economies. But
there is another side. ''He has restored the dollar as the world's most
preferred currency,'' Mr. Sinai said.

Mr. Volcker was also among the first to warn of the emerging problem of third
world debts. Several months ago, when the decline in oil prices raised the
specter of default over Mexico, Mr. Volcker helped engineer a solution with the
country's American bankers.

Some of Mr. Volcker's critics find the present, with inflation in check and
unemployment falling, a difficult moment to score many points against him. ''He
stands,'' says Arthur Levitt, chairman of the American Stock Exchange, ''as a
unique symbol of economic integrity and rectitude.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Volcker graph of inflation and money
supply growth under Volcker

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 16, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT PRESSES SCHOOL MERIT PAY

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M., June 15


President Reagan cautioned against making a political football of the education
issue today as he stepped up his attack on the National Education Association,
the country's largest group of organized teachers, for opposing merit pay
programs.

The President, presenting himself as a sharp critic of the Federal Government,
told the National Congress of Parents and Teachers that the N.E.A.'s opposition
to merit pay could delay ''desperately'' needed reforms in education.

''If we test other professionals, why shouldn't we test the people who will be
responsible for teaching our children?'' the President asked, addressing the
convention here of leaders of Parent-Teacher Associations at the convention
center and criticizing the twomillion-member teachers' union.

Tax Credits Not Mentioned

In a speech that did not mention tax credits for parochial schools and other
Presidential initiatives opposed by P.T.A. officials, Mr.  Reagan had two main
targets: Federal influence on education and the N.E.A. leadership. He drew a
distinction between teacher union leaders and teachers in general.

''It wasn't teachers who condoned the drug culture, sexual license and violence
in our society,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''It wasn't teachers who encouraged the
banality of TV over the beauty of the written word. And it wasn't teachers who
asked for a 'Washington knows best' attitude that too often showered them with
rules, regulations and uniformity.''

Pay Guidelines Criticized

Mr. Reagan chided the N.E.A. leadership as ''clinging to'' such standards as
professional seniority and ''the number of college credits'' in postgraduate
studies as guides for determining pay scale.

''Until it relaxes its opposition to the badly needed reforms the country wants
- in hiring, salary, promotion and tenure - the improvements we so desperately
need could be delayed,'' the President said.

The merit pay question, which Reagan strategists have elected to make a major
political issue in the event he chooses to run for reelection, was pursued by
the President for his third national appearance this week. The N.E.A., which
bargains collectively for teachers, opposes merit pay programs as unworkable and
susceptible to patronage abuse. The teachers' association is expected to work
vigorously against Mr. Reagan's re-election and emphasize what it considers the
larger issue of his attempts to cut Federal support of education.

''Send a message to Washington, D.C., and make it loud and clear,'' the
President told the P.T.A. officials. ''Tell them you want the basics in your
schools and the parents back in charge; tell them education must never become a
political football because your children come first.''

Ovation on Religion and Schools

Mr. Reagan was warmly applauded at several points. He drew his strongest ovation
when he contended that the First Amendment ''was never written to exclude
religion from our schools.''

The gathering stood and applauded as the President, invoking God, said, ''He who
has so blessed this land should never have been expelled from our classrooms.''
The officials also applauded strongly when Mr. Reagan denounced drug and alcohol
abuse among students as ''a dark and dangerous enemy.''

While P.T.A. leaders have urged more Federal support for education, Mr. Reagan
defended his budget policies and said that critics felt the solution to school
problems was in ''one, big, five-letter word, money.''

This time Mr. Reagan did not repeat his past erroneous assertions that his
Administration had not cut Federal education aid. Instead, he offered a broad
statistical assertion in saying that from 1960 to 1980 ''spending on education
increased twice as fast as spending on defense.'' He referred to a period when
the large military costs of the Vietnam War were scaled back and when the
Federal Government increased its education aid to campaigns against poverty and
other programs.

School Days Recalled

The President clearly warmed his audience by remembering his own school days
when, he said, ''I was not as attentive as I might have been.'' He talked of
civic virtues that can not be learned in instruction manuals or ''computer
printouts.'' ''We can't create them with more Federal spending,'' he said of the
virtues, telling the convention, ''I just hope you never let anyone in
Washington forget it.''

Mr. Reagan repeated his assertion that in recent years ''a 600 percent
increase'' in total educational spending by all government sectors combined had
been met with failure. ''If a 600 percent increase couldn't make America
smarter, how much more do we need?'' he asked, urging firmer management and
curriculum controls to get ''our money's worth for what we spend.''

In his speech, President Reagan echoed a predecessor, President Kennedy, in
calling for an emergency program to add 50 points to the average mathematics and
verbal college testing scores in the next decade. Unlike the heavily budgeted
moon flight program of Mr.  Kennedy, however, President Reagan urged that the
educational goal be reached through emphasis on stronger school management and
firmer curriculum requirements.

----

Reagan Calls O'Neill

WASHINGTON, June 15 (AP) - The Speaker of the House, Thomas P.  O'Neill Jr.,
stayed away from work with an inner ear infection today, and the President
called him from New Mexico to wish him a speedy recovery, a Presidential aide
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 16, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RISING INFLUENCE OF A KEY AIDE ON LATIN AMERICA

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


It is 7:30 A.M., and Margaret Daly Hayes has stepped out of her 1974 chocolate
brown Audi Fox at a Senate parking lot beside Union Station to walk the five
long blocks to her office at the Foreign Relations Committee.

''It's great in the rain, it's great when I'm exhausted and carrying a heavy
attache case at night,'' Mrs. Hayes said. ''If I had the seniority, I'd get a
closer parking lot.''

As a Senate employee for only two years, Mrs. Hayes may lack the seniority that
allows certain perquisites, but she plainly makes up for that with the almost
magical gift that assures every phone call to the White House will be answered
with dispatch, that sends fourstar generals from the Pentagon rushing across
town to her cramped, newspaper-cluttered office.

Mrs. Hayes has power.  As the key staff aide on Latin America to the Republican
majority on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mrs. Hayes is barely visible
at public hearings; she is a blur, whispering to other Congressional assistants,
welcoming witnesses, hovering beside her boss, Charles H. Percy, the committee
chairman. It is only in the privacy of her office, however, that Mrs. Hayes
emerges with the kind of force and leverage that other Congressional aides crave
but rarely achieve.

'Legwork' and 'Talking Points'

Because Central America is the most controversial foreign policy issue facing
the Reagan Administration, and because the Foreign Relations Committee is key to
approving the Administration's economic and military funds for the region, Mrs.
Hayes plays a pivotal role not only in terms of the panel but, in a broader
sense, in terms of the programs shaped at the White House and State Department.

On one level, the 39-year-old aide performs what she calls ''legwork'' for the
senators - writing background papers, preparing for hearings and arranging
witness lists, responding to questions from constituents who ask about the
fairness of last year's El Salvador elections, about the status of the case
involving the murders of four American churchwomen and about the fate of the
more than 20 Americans imprisoned in Cuba.

On another level though, Mrs. Hayes may offer ''talking points'' to senators on
the kinds of questions to be raised at hearings on El Slavador. ''This is a very
delicate kind of relationship,'' she said. ''The senators ultimately make the
decision on how they want to call the shots. Very frequently, they will listen
to their staff and say, 'I'm not comfortable with that.' In most cases it
depends on the individual senator and his relationship with his staff.''

Supports the Administration

Talking over a ham sandwich lunch in a restaurant near her office, Mrs. Hayes
said, ''Look, I don't have a sense that I should have a policy. On some issues,
Senator Percy and the committee will have a position and it's my job to support
that position and argue that position. I try to keep my own views as low key as
possible.''

Although reluctant to discuss those views, Mrs. Hayes makes it plain that she
essentially supports the Administration. ''I don't think the political process
going on in El Salvador, the wheeling and dealing, are as well understood as
some of the more bizarre events,'' she said. ''This helps create the sense that
El Salvador is about to fall apart when it might be a lot more tenacious than it
seems.''

''Certainly Vietnam is the underlying worry,'' she added.  ''Everyone here wants
to make sure that we are not propelled down that path.''

Asked about the power of Congressional staff aides, who sometimes thrust
speeches and questions into a senator's hand moments before a hearing and who
sometimes speak in the name of a senator, Mrs. Hayes shrugged. ''It depends on
the staffer,'' she said. ''It depends on the relationship between the staffer
and the senator. The potential is there.''

Although Mrs. Hayes, who is a linguist and a specialist in Brazil, tends to
downplay her role, members of the committee say that she, like any staff aide,
automatically assumes increased leverage when an issue like El Salvador
dominates the attention of the committee.

''Margaret is very strong, very competent, a tough bargainer,'' said Senator
Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat who is a vocal opponent of
Administration policy in El Salvador. ''She's certainly not hawkish, but
politically she wants to protect Senator Percy and keep him as close to the
Administration's line as possible. She's very protective of him.''

'We Struck a Bargain'

Senator Dodd noted that, in recent committee meetings involving the
Administration's requested $136.3 million in military aid to El Salvador, Mrs.
Hayes fought hard to remove the strongest language from a committee measure
linking aid to a political solution to the crisis. ''We traded words, we struck
a bargain,'' said Mr. Dodd.

On the Republican side, Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas, who has taken
a lead in Central American issues, said, ''Margaret epitomizes the assets of a
truly successful staff person. She doesn't push her views, but tries to present
the chairman's views to the committee and to present the Administration's views
to the chairman.  She has a role pulling this together. Obviously she has
thoughts of her own which she articultates very, very well when you ask her.''

Mrs. Hayes, who is paid about $43,000 a year, grew up in LaGrange, Ill.,
attended Northwestern University, received a master's degree in Spanish
literature from the University of Madrid and a Ph.D in political science at
Indiana University. She and her husband, Richard E. Hayes, who is also a
political scientist, came to Washington in 1974 because they were both offered
jobs at a consulting firm.

In 1978, Mrs. Hayes, who is a weekend scuba diver, was appointed associate
director of the Center for Brazilian Studies at the John Hopkins School of
Advanced Internationl Studies. Three years later, seeking to ''do something
different,'' Mrs. Hayes sent her resume to the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee.

''I came here with my Rolodex and my Defense Department and State Department
phone books,'' she said. ''I was pretty much on my own after that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Margaret Daly Hayes

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 16, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS PRODUCER SUSPENDED FOR SECRET TAPING

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


CBS News today suspended George Crile, the producer of a January 1982
documentary about the Vietnam War that is the subject of a major libel suit, for
tape-recording telephone interviews with former Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara and others in 1981 without their authorization.

Mr. Crile violated a written CBS News policy against taping interviews without
the consent of the interviewee or ''the express permission of the president of
CBS News or his designee,'' David Boies, a lawyer representing the network in
the libel suit, said today.

''He has been suspended from editorial responsibilities,'' Mr.  Boiess said, for
an indefinite period, with pay. The lawyer said that the network viewed the
suspension ''as serious disciplinary reaction,'' but that Mr. Crile, who has
been working on a documentary about the conflict in Nicaragua, was not being
dismissed.

Mr. Boies told a Federal judge late Tuesday that this week, for tthe first time,
Mr. Crile had found the tapes he made of telephone interviews with Mr. McNamara
and others in preparing the Vietnam broadcast. Mr. Crile had told his lawyers
that they had been lost or erased.

Westmoreland Has Sued

The libel suit was brought by Gen. William C. Westmoreland against CBS, Mr.
Crile and others involved in preparing the broadcast, which accused the General
of conspiring to falsify enemy troop strength figures during the Vietnam War.
The suit seeks $120 million in damages.

General Westmoreland was commander of United States forces in Vietnam, and Mr.
McNamara was Defense Secretary during the late 1960's.

Dan M. Burt, the general's lawyer, has accused CBS and its lawyers of improperly
concealing - until Friday - the fact that Mr. McNamara had been taped. Mr. Boies
today reiterated his denials of this charge, which he has called a
''smokescreen'' to cover what he says has been improper concealment of evidence
by Mr. Burt.

Mr. Crile said this evening that he had not been aware at the time of the
interviews that taping them without consent was a violation of CBS News policy.
''I knew that it was legal and a reasonably widespread practice,'' he said.

Other Interviews Recorded

He said that while preparing the Vietnam documentary he also recorded telephone
interviews with George W. Ball, a former Under Secretary of State; General
Matthew B. Ridgway, a former Army Chief of Staff; Arthur J. Goldberg, a former
United States delegate to the U.N., and others. He said that in Mr. Goldberg's
case, ''I may well have asked for permission.''

Asked why he had recorded Mr. McNamara without telling him, Mr.  Crile said, ''I
was simply trying to get as accurate a record of his remarks as possible.'' He
added that he had feared ''it might have been inhibiting'' to disclose that he
was recording the conversation.

Mr. Crile denied a suggestion by Mr. Burt that he may have carried a concealed
tape recorder during a subsequent in-person interview with Mr. McNamara. Neither
interview was used directly in the Vietnam broadcast.

Mr. McNamara said earlier this week that he thought it was ''entirely
unethical'' of Mr. Crile to tape him without his knowledge. He said he had told
Mr. Crile he would only talk ''off the record.''

CBS Has Apologized

CBS News released a statement through Mr. Boies this evening saying it had
apologized to ''a number of individuals whose telephone interviews'' with Mr.
Crile had been ''tape-recorded without their knowledge and consent.''

''While the appropriateness of such taping is debated within the journalistic
community,'' the statement continued, ''it is forbidden by CBS News policy
unless specifically authorized by the president of CBS News or his designee. In
these instances such authorization was neither sought nor given.''

''Mr. Crile located the tapes at his residence only this week and informed CBS
News management for the first time that these interviews were recorded without
permission of the individuals,'' the statement continued. ''CBS has produced the
tapes to plaintiff and has asked the court and General Westmoreland's counsel
not to make public the contents of the tapes without the permission of the
individuals recorded.''

CBS added that it ''is vigorously contesting'' the libel suit ''and believes
that it will prevail.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Grand Jury Charges 3 In Movie Copter Deaths

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 254 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 16


John Landis, the director, and two other men who worked on ''Twilight Zone: The
Movie'' have been indicted by a grand jury on criminal charges in the deaths of
the actor Vic Morrow and two children, lawyers said today. The actor and
children were killed when a damaged helicopter crashed on them while the film
was being made.

The director and the other men face arraignment in Superior Court on June 24,
the day the movie is to open nationwide. It was shown last weekend in Rod
Serling's hometown, Binghamton, N.Y. Mr. Serling created the television series.

The Los Angeles County grand jury handed up indictments Wednesday against Mr.
Landis, his assistant, George Folsey Jr., and the unit production manager, Dan
Allingham, according to Mr. Folsey's lawyer, Roger Rosen.

''I was notified through a representative of the District Attorney's office,''
Mr. Rosen said. He said he did not know the specific charges against anyone and
added, ''I think when the dust settles and we get through this thing, Mr. Folsey
is going to be totally exonerated.''

Mr. Landis's lawyer, Harland Braun, said the director would be absolved of any
wrongdoing in the deaths last July 23 of Mr. Morrow, 53 years old, and two
Vietnamese-born children, Renee Chen, 7 and Myca Dinh Le, 6. They were running
across a set of a Vietnam village near Newhall, 40 miles northwest of Los
Angeles, when the helicopter fell on them. Its tail rotor had been damaged.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LIMITS IN AIDING SALVADOR

BYLINE: By Murat W. Williams

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: MADISON MILLS, Va.


''Give me one regiment of my old First Division and I can clean up all Central
America.'' Those were the words of a United States Army adviser in El Salvador
35 years ago - in 1948, after he had spent some months on duty as director of
the Salvadoran military academy.

I listened with respect because he had had a spectacular war record with the
First Division of the United States Army in Europe. Since then, I have often
wondered whether he was among the Pentagon planners who recommended sending
troops to Vietnam, first in modest numbers and then in hundreds of thousands.

I have wondered more recently whether one of his like-minded successors is
making plans now to reinforce the American advisers in El Salvador and whether
he will ultimately feel that perhaps two regiments of the ''Big Red 1,'' the old
First Division, or the Marine Corps will suffice to ''clean up'' Central
America.

If so, I hope they will hesitate long enough to review the military record of
the uniformed forces in El Salvador whom we have grappled to our bosoms as
gallant democratic allies. Those of us who have known these forces have rarely
been impressed by the Salvadoran Army's military skills. Even the troops most
recently trained seem to find invincible opponents in the outnumbered guerrillas
whom they have met in jungles and dusty village streets.

It may prove too much to build an effective army out of the young conscripts,
pressed into service to fight for a system that has done them little good, under
officers who have been steadily maligned by their countrymen. The Salvadoran
chief of staff convicted in New York in 1976 for trying to sell $2.5 million
worth of machine guns to gangsters demonstrated the kind of corruption that our
advisers may still have to confront.

The Reagan Administration proposes to increase the number of advisers in El
Salvador and the volume of military aid. Whom will the Americans advise and who
will use the weapons we supply? The same military establishment that has been
receiving our advice and advisers for at least 37 years. (We sent our first Air
Force mission to El Salvador in 1948 and an American officer was director of the
military academy as far back as 1946.) Our advisers have been good men. Our
missions have been skillful. But during almost the entire time we have advised,
trained and supplied the Salvadoran military forces, the main preoccupation of
the leaders of those forces has been with their own domestic politics.

One need not labor the point that the military officers generally worked to help
the wealthy landowning class maintain an oligarchical system. Despite occasional
efforts for reform, especially in the early years of the Alliance for Progress,
more often than not the military officers served the landed families - and
received ample rewards. In the past decade or so, many officers began to ask why
they should serve the landed families and not themselves. Today, most of the old
landowners are dispersed abroad and military officers have increasingly become
landowners.

Never has the system brought notable benefits to the rank-and-file soldiers.
Seldom in this century have the higher aspirations of patriotism motivated the
troops. Teen-aged youths, seized by press gangs and marched off to barracks with
their thumbs tied behind their backs, could scarcely know what they would fight
for if the time came to use the guns we have provided.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Murat W. Williams was the desk officer for El Salvador in the State Department
in 1946-47, deputy chief of mission at the embassy in El Salvador from 1947 to
1949 and Ambassador to El Salvador from 1961 to 1964. Our training has many
limits. Salvadoran country boys often do not have the minimum literacy to
qualify for United States training camps. City boys may have the qualifications,
but on their return they find life in the jungles harsh and unfamiliar.
Two-thirds of the American-trained conscripts have not re-enlisted for further
service. Youths from the upper classes have been conspicuously and completely
absent from the army rank-and-file. The boys in uniform come almost entirely
from families with no stake in the system and nothing to lose - with nothing to
fight for. These are the troops upon whom President Reagan risks our honor. He
should consider the lesson we should have learned long ago - in many countries -
that advice, training and military materiel are not enough to make military
success. It will be a disaster if we let our commitment of advice and supply go
so far that, when it proves inadequate, we must inevitably follow it up with a
regiment, or two, or three, of our own best troops. It will be unpardonable if
under the illusion of ''not losing El Salvador,'' we should send American troops
to Central America in an intervention that could ''lose'' the whole of Latin
America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REPAIRING CHINA TIES

BYLINE: By Stephen J. Solarz

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


After a decade of steady progress, there has been a sharp deterioration in
relations between China and the United States. Unless this decline is reversed,
it could have adverse consequences not only for the peace and prosperity of Asia
but the world.  Therefore, it is important to understand what has gone wrong and
what needs to be done about it.

The deterioration of Washington-Peking relations has almost nothing to do with
any change in the direction of American policy and almost everything to do with
the Administration's political insensitivity and diplomatic bungling. From the
outset of the rapprochement between Washington and Peking, complete agreement
was impossible. Both sides, for example, agreed to disagree on arm sales to
Taiwan. Nonetheless, close and cooperative relations developed. It was only with
the nomination and election of Ronald Reagan that limited but previously
acceptable irritants began to poison the relationship.

The problem first emerged when Presidential candidate Reagan criticized
normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China and said he would
restore official relations with Taipei. Since America's decision to make its
relationship with Taipei unofficial had been a cornerstone of normalized
Washington-Peking relations, China's leaders inevitably worried that Mr. Reagan
would renege on agreements with them.

By the time President Reagan reaffirmed those agreements, serious doubts about
his reliability had grown in Peking. Mr. Reagan further exacerbated the problem
by publicly considering for many months the sale of advanced combat aircraft to
Taipei -in spite of previous American pledges to Peking that the Washington
would restrict itself to the sale of limited quantities of defensive weapons.

Peking's concerns about Washington's reliability intensified after China's Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister both met with Mr. Reagan without being able to
carry away any good news. Now, having been burned politically back home because
high-level discussions achieved nothing, Chinese leaders no longer seek the
summit meetings needed to maintain momentum in relations between the two
countries.

Mr. Reagan seemed ready to restore confidence in the relationship when, last
August, the United States committed itself to reducing arms sales to Taipei as
long as Peking con-
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of New York, is chairman of the House Subcommittee
on Asian and Pacific Affairs. tinued its peaceful policy in the region. But Mr.
Reagan almost immediately seemed to repudiate the agreement when he declared
that it would have no effect on American arms sales to Taiwan and proceeded to
offer Taipei its biggest two-year arms sales ever. Actually, there is a big
difference between Mr. Reagan's campaign rhetoric and his performance in office.
No official relations have been established with Taipei and no advanced weapons
have been sold to Taiwan. Furthermore, not only has an agreement been achieved
to reduce arms sales to Taipei, but Mr.  Reagan has even taken the lead in
strengthening America's economic relations with the People's Republic. But
because of his rhetoric and backtracking, Chinese leaders fear that ultimately
he will betray them. It is important that the Administration re-establish mutual
confidence in relations with China. At a time when Soviet forces remain in
Afghanistan and Vietnam continues to occupy Cambodia, not only do Washington and
Peking share significant strategic interests, but America's other friends in
Asia find that friendly relations between Washington and Peking strengthen their
security. Nor is China merely a piece on a chess board of strategic competition.
It is intrinsically important that America build friendly relations with a
country whose population constitutes a quarter of the human race and from which
we benefit through exchanges in commerce, energy, agriculture, science, culture
and sports. China must do its share to improve relations. When Peking refuses
high-level visits and harangues the United States, misunderstandings inevitably
fester.  When the People's Republic contends that the United States and the
Soviet Union are equal dangers to world peace, many Americans begin to back off.
They, too, fear they will be burned politically. For our part, Mr. Reagan has to
restore confidence that Washington will keep its commitments. This means
treating China as a friendly nation -by relaxing restrictions on the sale of
technology and keeping our pledge on reduced arm sales to Taipei. If inevitable
irritants are not to dominate the relationship that Mr. Reagan has endangered,
the United States and China should resume a broad-ranging strategic dialogue on
the larger considerations that brought us together in the first place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FAREWELL CALL TO NATION ON ARMED FORCES POLICY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


After fighting in two wars and then leading the United States Army out of the
valley of disorder and turmoil into which it stumbled after Vietnam, Gen. Edward
C. Meyer is on the verge of stepping down as Chief of Staff.

The 54-year-old general, who took over what he called a ''hollow army'' in 1979,
is credited with guiding the service into new doctrines, new equipment, new
education for officers and sergeants, and especially with reviving an esprit
with new personnel policies.  But General Meyer, who is nicknamed Shy as a
chubby man might be called Slim, is not departing for retirement without
sounding a last bugle call.

In a farewell interview today, he delivered an informal valedictory that added
up to an indictment of the way the nation provides for military security. Asked
for his thoughts on American military philosophy and practices, the general
declared:

''If we were trying to convince an enemy that we were able to go to war with a
system that works like this, he would laugh.''

Assertions on Armed Forces

General Meyer, who will leave the service at the end of the month, also made
these assertions:

- The Reagan Administration and Congress lack a basic agreement on missions for
the armed forces, thus precluding a rational approach to decisions on military
policy.

- Congress is out of control in the military arena, focusing on individual
weapons programs instead of debating broad issues of the budget, national
strategy and effective spending.

- Few Americans, in or out of government, understand the lesson of military
history, particularly from the Vietnam War, which teaches that there must be a
clear link between the people and the Army.  ''Soldiers should not go off to war
without having the nation behind them,'' he said.

Among the reforms the general advocated would be military budgets approved for
two years at a time, instead of the current yearly wrangle. That would give
Congress a year to examine issues and to inspect forces in the field before
voting, he contended.

He urged Congressional committees to revise their roles. Gesturing toward
Capitol Hill from his office in the Pentagon, General Meyer said: ''I think that
they have to sort out their missions over there as to who is in charge of
what.''

As for the link between the Army and the people, he advocated a return to the
draft. ''I have great concern about the future of a nation in which there is no
responsibility for service placed upon the people,'' he said.

General Meyer, who was a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the senior
military advisers to the President and the Secretary of Defense, said, ''There
is a total, absolute disconnect between the Administration and the Congress as
to what the armed forces are to do and as to whether or not they are the right
forces.''

''If you start out with nobody having any general agreement as to what the
forces are supposed to do,'' he continued, ''it's no wonder that we don't have a
rational approach.''

The general was particularly scathing in his indictment of Congress. With a
chuckle, he said that ''this is Meyer's personal view but I don't mind telling
Congress how to do business since they've been telling me how to do business for
the last few years.''

''Every one of those committees is looking at individual weapons systems to cut,
to stretch out, to do something,'' he said. ''There is no continuity in
programs, there is no stability, there is no incentive to industry. Nobody in
Congress looks at what the purposes of the forces are.''

In both the Senate and the House, General Meyer said, the Budget Committees
should look at how much money is available to the nation and what portion of
that money can logically be allocated to defense. ''Just numbers,'' he added.
''They shouldn't be getting into details.''

He said the Armed Services Committees ''ought to be in this policy issue'' and
''ought to be the experts in the Congress on the strategy and the types and
kinds of forces that are necessary to support that strategy.''

''The Appropriations Committees are charged with looking at whether or not we
are doing efficiently and effectively what it is that we are charged with and
authorized to do,'' the general said. ''They ought to be the watchdogs.''

General Meyer said recently that most senior military officers would oppose the
dispatch of American troops to Central America without a clear declaration of
political purpose and military objectives, partly because the American people
would not support that move.

Lesson of Vietnam Stressed

Expanding on the thoughts underlying that statement, General Meyer said that
from an assessment of the Vietnam experience, ''it became quite clear that the
will of the people, the resources of the nation, and the Army weren't clearly
linked in that war.''

Referring to the teachings of military history from Sun Tzu to Clausewitz,
General Meyer said: ''I believe we lose track of that around here. We start to
ask armies to go off to do things where its not been thought how they fit into
the national purpose, where there is not the link between purpose and people and
army.''

''I don't think the American public understands that at all,'' the general
lamented.  He continued: ''I don't think most of the people who deal in the
national security area, both inside and outside the government, understand the
criticality of this, of the way in which we go about approaching national
security issues.''

General Meyer said that given the philosophy that a connection between the
people, the government and the army is vital, ''then it is absolutely essential
that the representatives of the people in the Congress, those responsible for
running the nation in the executive branch, and the defense forces have the same
clear linkage.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edward C. Meyer

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IF IT'S SUMMER, IT'S TIME TO CATCH A FILM FESTIVAL

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1491 words


ONE of the joys of summer is slinking into a cool, dark movie house and being
transported away from eye-blinding sun, hot sidewalks and soggy clothes into a
world where only the flickering screen images suffer. Which may be why film
festivals particularly thrive at this time of year.

No fewer than six festivals await this weekend and beyond for New York's wilted
souls: in Chinatown, at the Museum of Modern Art, in the Queens Museum, at the
Japan Society, in TriBeCa and at a pair of theaters in Greenwich Village and on
the Upper West Side.

The sixth Asian American International Film Festival opens at 7 tonight at the
new Rosemary Theater, 133 Canal Street, just off the Bowery, with the United
States premiere of ''Turumba,'' a Philippine feature by Kidlat Tahimik, and
''The Silence,'' a short from Japan by Michael Toshiyuki Uno. Mr. Tahimik tells
a sardonic tale about the effects of the Munich Olympics and Western
commercialism on a Filipino village. ''The Silence,'' which was nominated for an
Academy Award for best live-action short, has been compared to Kon Ichikawa's
''Burmese Harp'' in its exploration of life and death in the Vietnam War.

At 9:30 tonight a retrospective on the late James Wong Howe begins with a
documentary on the pioneering Chinese-American cinematographer, who shot 120
feature-length films over a 50-year career. One of his finest was ''Hud,'' the
Martin Ritt classic starring Paul Newman, which won Mr. Howe an Oscar. It will
follow the documentary on tonight's program.

The program tomorrow at 6:30 P.M. offers an exotic potpourri: ''Re-Assemblage,''
a film about Senegal by Trinh Minh-ha, a Vietnamese-American; ''Spirit of the
Dream House'' by Fu-Ding Cheng, a Chinese American; ''Playland'' by Edmund
Cheung, a Chinese-American, and ''Fools' Dance'' by Robert Nakamura, a
Japanese-American, all produced in the United States, and ''A Time to Rise,''
from British Columbia, by Anan Patwardan, of India, and Jim Monroe, a Canadian.
''Fools' Dance'' stars the actor Mako as a gloriously goofy Buddhist who spouts
Shakespeare and turns a moribund California home for the elderly named Dewdrop
World into a dancing, drumming celebration of life. Among those who fall under
his spell is Esther Rolle of ''The Jeffersons,'' playing a social worker whose
icicle heart melts in Mako's sunny ambience.

Tomorrow at 9, two films from Japan will be shown. They are Toshio Matsumoto's
short ''Shift'' and Kei Kumai's ''Willful Murder.'' A dramatization of the
Shimoyama incident, a case that rocked Japan in 1949, ''Willful Murder'' is the
story of a reporter's investigation of the death of the president of the Japan
National Railways, who was found on a railroad track after having laid off tens
of thousands of workers. Was it a suicide of shame or murder? The intrepid
reporter ultimately unravels the tangled mystery. This intensely political movie
was compared by a Los Angeles critic to Costa-Gavras's ''Missing.''

The festival continues next Friday and Saturday evening, with films shot in
China, India, South Korea, Hong Kong and the United States.  Foreign movies have
English subtitles and voice-over English narrations. The number for further
information is 925-8685.

'Happy Birthday, New Day'

Uptown, beginning today, the Museum of Modern Art, 18 West 54th Street, is
wishing ''Happy Birthday, New Day Films.'' Through next Tuesday, in the Roy and
Niuta Titus Theater 2, the museum will show 21 works from New Day Films, a group
of independent movie makers that began in 1972 as a distribution cooperative for
feminist films. From its four founding feminists, New Day has expanded both its
membership - to 29 film makers, 7 of them men - and its range of subjects: among
them, growing up, growing old, labor history, civil rights, sex roles,
alcoholism, the environment and creativity.

The series begins at 6 P.M. today with a program introduced by Joanne Grant,
whose ''Fundi: The Story of Ella Baker,'' a 63-minute portrait of the
civil-rights organizer, will be shown along with Felicia Lowe's ''China: Land of
My Father'' and ''Quilts in Women's Lives'' by Pat Ferrero.

At noon tomorrow, New Day will present films of interest to adolescents,
including Liane Brandon's ''Once Upon a Choice'' and ''Anything You Want to
Be;'' Bonnie Friedman's ''Flashettes,'' and ''Am I Normal?'' by Debra Franco and
David Shepard. The program runs 67 minutes, and will be shown again at noon on
Sunday.

At 2:30 P.M. tomorrow, women and men are the motifs with Kristine Samuelson's
''2 A.M. Feeding,'' on adjusting to life with baby; ''Joyce at 34,'' by Joyce
Chopra and Claudia Weill, where a woman faces the conflict between work and
family, and ''Men's Lives,'' by Josh Hanig and Will Roberts, which focuses on
the pressures, competition and conditioning of American men and which was
nominated for an Academy Award.

Union Organizing in the 30's

At 5 P.M. tomorrow, ''Union Maids,'' about women organizing in the 1930's, will
be shown. This 48-minute documentary by Julia Reichert, James Klein and Miles
Mogulescu was also nominated for an Oscar.  ''Great Grand Mother'' by Anne
Wheeler and Lorna Rasmussen and ''Possum Living'' by Nancy Schreiber round out
this program.

Sunday films, beginning at 2:30 P.M., include ''Love It Like a Fool,'' a
documentary by Susan Wengraf on the songwriter-activist Malvina Reynolds at
work, and ''In Our Water,'' a study of the chemical pollution of the country's
drinking water made by Meg Switzgable. At 5 P.M., it's ''Outskirts of Hope'' by
David Davis ''With Babies and Banners'' by Lorraine Gray.

The final film in the festival is ''The Last to Know'' by Bonnie Friedman. It
was acclaimed at the 1981 New York Film Festival and has won many prizes for
what the national magazine Alcoholism called a ''gritty, intimate documentary''
of four women addicted to prescription drugs and alcohol. Three in recovery and
one still drinking and using drugs, they share their struggles, the magazine
said, ''with a generous and uncompromising honesty rarely seen on film.'' It
will be shown on the 6 P.M. program Tuesday. The number for further information
is 708-9400.

Golden Era in Astoria

''Films Made in Queens: The Golden Era of the Astoria Motion Picture Studios''
celebrates just that, but in Corona-Flushing Meadows Park, at the Queens Museum
in the New York City Building.  Some of the great films of the 1920's and 30's
are being shown there every Saturday at 2 P.M. through July 9. Tomorrow's movie
is the 1934 melodrama ''Crime Without Passion,'' directed by Ben Hecht and
Charles MacArthur. Claude Rains stars as a cynical lawyer driven to commit
murder. Next Saturday's offering by the same directors, who also wrote the
script, is ''The Scoundrel,'' starring Noel Coward.  Coming on on subsequent
Saturdays will be W.C. Fields in ''Running Wild'' and the Marx Brothers in
''Animal Crackers.'' The Queens Museum's information number is 592-5555.

In a continuing festival at the Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street, tonight's
film will be the 190-minute Part Three of ''The Human Condition,'' the
monumental work directed by Masaki Kobayashi.  It is the last episode in a
nine-and-a-half-hour work on the nature of war and its destruction of human
values. The movie begins at 7:30. The box office number is 752-3015;
information: 752-0824. The festival runs through next Friday.

Rare Films in TriBeCa

Tomorrow night at 8, the Collective for Living Cinema, at 52 White Street in
TriBeCa, will present an evening of rare films featuring the Japanese actor
Sessue Hayakawa. They are ''The Cheat'' (1915), produced and directed by Cecil
B. De Mille, and ''The Last of the Line'' (1914), produced by Thomas Ince.
Hayakawa's extraordinary career spanned 50 years. His best known role was that
of Colonel Saito in David Lean's ''Bridge on the River Kwai'' in 1957. The
collective's program is being given in conjunction with Asian Cine-Vision, which
is presenting the Asian American festival in Chinatown. The telephone number is
925-2111.

Last but hardly least, that superb French zany, Jacques Tati, is back in the
second Tati retrospective in New York this year. ''Mr.  Hulot's Holiday'' is now
running both at the Greenwich Twin 2, Greenwich Avenue and Bank Street
(929-3350), and at the Embassy 72d Street Twin on 72d Street and Broadway
(724-6745). More information on the festival, sponsored by Films Incorporated
with Janus Films, can be obtained from Films Incorporated, 889-7910.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of scenes from movies at summer film festivals

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIAN ASSURES U.S. ON USE OF JOINT BASES

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


Prime Minister Robert Hawke of Australia, ending a visit to the United States,
has reaffirmed his country's determination to maintain joint military
installations with the United States on Australian territory, even though this
entails risk.

''We are part of the United States system of alliances,'' Mr. Hawke said in an
interview in New York. ''We acknowledge that the fact that we host these joint
facilities does entail possible risk in the event of nuclear conflict.''

''Our judgment is that the advantages involved in the deterrent capacities of
the United States of which these facilities form a part, outweigh the possible
risks that are involved,'' the Australian leader added.

Mr. Hawke was in New York as the last stop on his five-day visit.  After his
election in March as Australia's first Labor Prime Minister since 1975, there
was concern he might be pressed by his party's left wing to depart in some areas
from the firm support of the United States given by the former Conservative
Government.

Before the election, William G. Hayden, Foreign Minister under Mr.  Hawke, said
Australia needed to be ''more assertive and more independent'' in foreign
policy.

Pains to Assure the U.S.

But Mr. Hawke, whose visit included meetings with President Reagan and Secretary
of State George P. Shultz, seemed to take pains to reaffirm his Government's
unwavering commitment to the Western alliance.

Mr. Hawke said that he had told Mr. Reagan and Mr. Shultz that ''they will not
find a firmer ally and alliance partner than us.'' ''I emphasized,'' he added,
''that if points arose where we perceived that our interests were perhaps being
prejudiced by some actions of the United States we'd say so, and that's how
friends should behave.''

The United States and Australia, allied with New Zealand in the Anzus treaty,
jointly maintain radar and communications installations in Australia that help
monitor Soviet ship and air movements in the Southern Hemisphere. The
installations have been criticized by some in Australia, including members of
the Labor Party, for making the country a possible target of a nuclear attack.

'An Exercise in Delusion'

Acknowledging that there were some in Australia who wanted the bases closed, Mr.
Hawke said in the interview: ''I believe I have a clear perception of global
realities, and I would regard it as an exercise in delusion to think that we can
engage in some unilateral processes of disarmament and detachment from the
alliances of the West.''

''One has to say,'' he went on, ''that on all the evidence the Soviet Union is
an expansionary power and is prepared to use, either directly or through its
surrogates, force of arms.''

''One looks at Afghanistan,'' the Prime Minister continued. ''One looks at what
the Soviet Union is prepared to do in Poland. One looks in Africa. One looks at
the build-up of its capacities at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam. One looks at the
supply of arms in Central America.  These are not concocted ideas. These are
indisputable facts.''

Labor Pledged Aid to Vietnam

On other issues, Mr. Hawke seemed to put to rest the concern voiced immediately
after his election that, on some issues, the policies of the Labor Government
would depart from those of the United States. The Labor Party platform pledged
the party to give economic aid to Vietnam and to withdraw its contingent from
the multinational peacekeeping forces in the Sinai Peninsula.

In the interview Mr. Hawke said there was no serious difference with Washington
over Vietnam. ''It is the view of the Labor Party that it is appropriate that
Vietnam shouldn't be isolated but should be brought back into the family of
nations,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
2 More Indicted in Crash That Killed Actors

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 18


A helicopter pilot and the effects specialist in the ''Twilight Zone'' film crew
have been indicted by a grand jury investigating the helicopter's fatal crash on
a movie set last July, their attorneys said.

Dorcey Wingo, 35 years old, trained as a helicopter pilot in Vietnam, and Paul
Stewart, the special effects coordinator, were those named in the indictments,
to be unsealed Friday.

John Landis, the director; his assistant, George Folsey Jr., and Dan Allingham,
the unit production manager, were also named in indictments, their attorney,
Roger Rosen, said Thursday.

Mr. Stewart's attorney, Howard Swainston, declined to speculate on the charges
against his client, but lawyers for others have said they believed their clients
are accused of involuntary manslaughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SKETCHES OF THE FOUR MEN OF THE CHALLENGER'S CREW

BYLINE: By BRYCE NELSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


Robert Crippen

Capt. Robert L. Crippen of the Navy is the first astronaut to fly aboard an
American shuttle twice. This time he got a promotion. After almost 14 years as
an astronaut, the pilot of the Columbia's first flight in April 1981 has
achieved his desire to command a space flight.

The flight commander is clearly overshadowed in public attention by Sally K.
Ride, but when a reporter told him Texans did not think a woman could do an
astronaut's job, Captain Crippen, a native Texan, bristled.

''I've found that all the women in the astronaut office have carried their share
and more,'' he said. ''We work together as a unit, but the fact that one is male
and one is female, I haven't found made one bit of difference.''

George Abbey, director of flight operations at the astronaut training base. said
of Captain Crippen, ''He's capable of some horseplay and he keeps the crew in a
pretty good mood.''

Captain Crippen was born 45 years ago in in a crossroads community north of
Houston. He attended the University of Texas, where he received a bachelor of
science degree in 1960 before entering the Navy.

He flew Navy jets from a carrier, and in 198l he helped land the first space
shuttle at Edwards Air Force Base. ''What a way to come to California,'' he said
at the time.

He is married to the former Virgina E. Hill, a Texan he met at the university.
They have three daughters. On weekend mornings, he cooks waffles or onion-potato
omelets.
Norman Thagard

The mission of Dr. Norman E. Thagard is to study the problem of space sickness,
which has afflicted almost half the United States astronauts.

''I don't have to come up with a solution, fortunately, but there is pressure to
get good data, and I feel real keen about doing that,'' he said. He will also be
responsible for any emergency spacewalk. For amusement, he plans to listen to a
tape of the rock group Devo and classical music including Gustav Holst's ''The
Planets.''

While he was an intern, his wife, the former Rex Kirby Johnson of Atlanta,
learned that NASA was looking for a mission specialist and sent in his
application. He was accepted in 1978.

Norman Thagard was born in Florida 37 years ago and considers Jacksonville,
where he attended high school, his hometown. He received bachelor's and master's
degrees in engineering science from Florida State University before entering the
Marine Corps in 1966.

He became a captain and flew l63 missions over Vietnam in 1969 and 1970. After
military service he entered the University of Texas Southwestern Medical School
where he completed his medical training in 1977. He has written articles on
small computers' design.

John Fabian

Col. John M. Fabian of the Air Force, 6 feet 1 inch tall, feared he would never
be an astronaut, but in 1977 NASA changed its height limit to 6 feet 4 inches
from 5 feet 11 inches. Colonel Fabian, who was teaching at the Air Force
Academy, was selected in January 1978.

He helped develop the mechanical arm that moves objects from the shuttle's cargo
bay. Dr. Ride was his supervisor. Now they are to launch and retrieve a West
German satellite with the arm. ''Anything can put stuff into space,'' he said,
''but only with the shuttle can you bring it home.''

Of Dr. Ride, he said, ''I don't think anybody in the crew feels the slightest
pang of jealousy because Sally is getting all the exposure. I'm not speaking for
my mother.''

Colonel Fabian, 44 years old, was born in Goosecreek, Tex., the son of a Houston
police officer. He received a bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering in
1962 from Washington State University and, in 1974, a doctorate in aeronautics
and astronautics from the University of Washington.

As a pilot he won several medals, including the Vietnam Cross of Gallantry. He
is married to the former Donna Kay Buboltz of Spokane.  They have two children.
He jogs, skis and collects foreign stamps.
Frederick Hauck

Capt. Frederick H. (Rick) Hauck of the Navy, the co-pilot, wanted to be a
scientist much of his life. He never thought much about flying.

He took to physics at St. Alban's School in Washington, D.C., received a
bachelor's degree in physics at Tufts University in 1962 and, after he joined
the Navy, a master's in nuclear physics in 1966 at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

He is the son and grandson of Navy men, and had served two years on destroyers
when he began his work for his master's. He decided nuclear physics was not
really his field; the Navy then gave him a chance to fly. ''I was glad I had the
opportunity at the fairly old age of 25 to get into aviation,'' he said.

Captain Hauck flew 114 missions in Vietnam and won nine Air Medals. In 1972, he
was named the Navy's outstanding test pilot. He was selected for the astronaut
program in January of 1978.

He is 42 years old and married to the former Dolly Bowman of Washington, D.C.
They have two children. He says his pastime is to serve on the ''backup crew''
of a refurbished 1951 pickup truck he has given his 18-year-old son Stephen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the Challenger lifting off photo of Ride,
Fabian, Crippen, Thagard, Hauck

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
'TRADING PLACES' BRINGS 30'S COMEDY INTO THE 80'S

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1558 words


In addition to being the funniest American movie comedy of the year to date,
John Landis's ''Trading Places'' has several other things going for it. It
establishes Eddie Murphy, who made his big-screen debut late last year in Walter
Hill's ''48 Hrs.,'' as the brightest young comic actor to hit Hollywood in a
decade. The screenplay, by Timothy Harris and Herschel Weingrod, rediscovers and
brings up to date a kind of social awareness that was so important to such
comedies of the 30's and 40's as ''My Man Godfrey'' and ''Sullivan's Travels.''
And it demonstrates that Mr. Landis (''The National Lampoon's Animal House,''
''The Blues Brothers'') is capable of directing a comedy of precise style as
well as those that are accumulations of gargantuan, often messy effects.

As Janet Maslin has already pointed out, the basic situation of ''Trading
Paces'' is one that might have appealed to Preston Sturges. Indeed, it seems
such a likely gimmick for a 30's comedy that I'm not at all sure it wasn't,
though I can't think of the title.

It's quite appropriate that, behind the opening credits of ''Trading Places,''
we hear the overture from ''The Marriage of Figaro,'' since all that follows has
a certain Mozartian balance to it. Here is a comedy about role-changing and
disguises. It's also about lifetime circumstances miraculously altered for
either good or bad, and about a couple of suave, nasty old codgers who have the
money and the power to play God and to effect those miracles.

Even in its casting, ''Trading Places'' recalls the Hollywood of the long-ago in
that it presents Ralph Bellamy (''The Awful Truth,'' ''His Girl Friday'') and
Don Ameche (''In Old Chicago,'' ''Alexander Graham Bell'') as a pair of
ferocious, mannerly, multimillionaire-brothers who, to settle a bet, nearly
wreck the lives of two innocents.

Randolph Duke (Mr. Bellamy) and Mortimer Duke (Mr. Ameche) are the real powers
behind the prestigious Philadelphia brokerage house of Duke & Duke, which is
nominally run by their protege, a WASPy, Harvard-educated numbskull named Louis
Winthorpe III (Dan Aykroyd).  When Randolph and Mortimer are not arguing about
investments, they are arguing about the nature of man. Mortimer is convinced
that genes are everything, that good bloodlines will triumph over all adversity.
Randolph holds to the theory that man is what his environment makes him.

To put their conflicting theories to the test, they arrange to disgrace poor
Louis Winthorpe III, the sort of fellow who has never put toothpaste on his own
toothbrush, and to send him out into the world without even his innocuous
reputation. They will then replace him as the head of Duke & Duke with a
small-time, black con artist named Billy Ray Valentine (Mr. Murphy) who, when
first seen, has gotten himself dressed up as a legless, blind, Vietnam vet to
panhandle outside Randolph and Mortimer's club.

It is Randolph's conviction that Louis, once deprived of his job, his money and
his social position, will turn to a life of crime and degradation and that Billy
Ray, late of the ghetto, will rise to meet the challenges of his exalted
responsibilities at Duke & Duke.

Initially all seems to go as Randolph has predicted. Louis's fall from grace is
made even worse when his former mentors frame him as a drug-dealer in front of
his beautiful, snobbish fiancee, Penelope (Kristin Holby). His old school chums
drop him. Even his valet, Coleman (Denholm Elliott), professes not to know him.
He buys a gun.  He drinks too much. He begins to wear clothes of the cheapest
fabrics that never match. Then he does the unpardonable thing of showing up at
the Duke & Duke Christmas party, dressed in a seedy Santa Claus suit and
behaving in a thoroughly disorderly manner.

Randolph and Mortimer, however, haven't reckoned on the love of the good woman
who saves Louis from the pits. She is Ophelia, a bighearted hooker who wears the
tiniest of miniskirts, and who is played with marvelous good humor by Jamie Lee
Curtis, in her first solid role in a nonhorror movie.

Billy Ray adjusts to his position as a commodities wizard with somewhat more
ease. After one big blowout at which he entertains his former barroom pals at
his town house, Billy Ray becomes propertyproud. He doesn't want slobs around
who put drink glasses on polished wooden table tops and who stub out cigarettes
on the Persian carpets. He also settles in happily as a wheeling and dealing
capitalist.

According to ''Trading Paces,'' a ritzy environment may not tell the entire
story of one's success, but it sure helps. That, however, is only part of the
film's story.

Though the premise of ''Trading Paces'' recalls the kind of social comedies made
by Sturges, Frank Capra and Gregory La Cava, its point of view is very much of
the existentially hip, rootless 80's. When Billy Ray Valentine and Louis
Winthorpe eventually join forces to teach Randolph and Mortimer a lesson, their
idea is not to expose the corruption of the system, but to expose only Randolph
and Mortimer and, subsequently, to get their own sizable piece of the action.

That the film's final sequence is the least successful suggests an odd truth:
that the moral certitudes that were reflected in the comedies of 40 years ago,
which usually ended in the pious realization that money isn't everything, gave
those comedies a satisfactory dramatic shape that's often lacking today. There's
great pleasure in seeing a couple of big-time con artists like Randolph and
Mortimer brought low, but that pleasure is short-lived, not on moral grounds but
because Louis and Billy Ray appear to have taught them such a small lesson.

That may be to take ''Trading Places'' far more seriously than necessary. The
film's pleasures are unequivocal, beginning with the lithe, graceful, uproarious
performance of Mr. Murphy. His is an infinitely resourceful comic presence in a
role that is not much different from the one he played in ''48 Hrs.'' However,
Mr. Landis and the writers have also given him the opportunity to do a couple of
the burlesque turns of the sort for which he gained his fame originally, on
television's ''Saturday Night Live.'' A terrific career is in store.

As the woefully naive Louis Winthorpe III, Mr. Aykroyd gives the best
performance in his film career, which, for a while anyway, seemed inextricably
bound up with that of John Belushi. He has some very funny sequences in ''Dr.
Detroit,'' though that performance suffers from the character's identity crisis.
Louis is a much more cohesive, cleanly defined role - he is the ultimate
WASP-boob, but an ultimate WASP-boob who, given a reasonable amount of time, is
able to wise up.

I'm not sure that in their younger days Mr. Bellamy and Mr. Ameche ever appeared
to be the comic artists they are in ''Trading Places,'' but then in their
younger days they seldom received comedy roles as sharply written as those of
Randolph and Mortimer Duke. On the screen Mr. Bellamy has had a long and rich
career as a character actor, but this is one of the few times, aside from Ernst
Lubitsch's ''Heaven Can Wait,'' that Mr. Ameche has been as funny as he is meant
to be.  When, in response to Randolph's accusation, ''Mother always said you
were greedy,'' Mr. Ameche says, ''She meant it as a compliment,'' the line is
pure Jack Benny.

Not quite in the same league as ''Trading Places,'' though full of mad flights
of fancy that are almost surreal, is Carl Reiner's ''The Man With Two Brains,''
written to the particular measure of its star, Steve Martin, by Mr. Reiner, Mr.
Martin and George Gipe, who earlier collaborated on ''Dead Men Don't Wear
Plaid.''

If ''Trading Places'' has connections to old-time Hollywood social comedies,
''The Man with Two Brains'' has its connections to the sort of star-comic
vehicles that once were tailored to fit the specific talents of Jerry Lewis and
Bob Hope, though, for me, Mr. Martin's screen personality isn't easily defined.
This is because he is always playing someone who, within the film, has won
recognition for some achievement or another, though the audience is invited to
see him mostly as a jerk, as in ''The Jerk,'' which was also directed by Mr.
Reiner.

This leads to a certain amount of confusion. We laugh at the situations more
often than we laugh at or with the star himself. He seems to function as the
center of a comic universe, in which the comedy revolves around him without his
being seriously involved. He's certainly not a straight man but, as a comedian,
he is an invisible comic force.

In ''The Man with Two Brains,'' Mr. Martin plays the world's most brilliant
surgeon, a fellow who is to brains what Dr. DeBakey is to hearts. The funniest
character in the film, however, is not the nutty doctor, in whose operating room
cats are always running rampant, but Dolores Benedict (Kathleen Turner), the
beautiful, predatory woman he marries under the wrongheaded impression that she
is just slightly less pure than Orphan Annie. Miss Turner is splendidly farcical
in a role that is a send-up of the character she played with such steamy effect
in ''Body Heat.''

Mr. Martin is one of our oddest screen personalities. He's obviously
intelligent, witty, talented, engaging, and he makes his living trying
desperately to make a fool of himself. The results are disorienting as often as
they are funny.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robin Williams and Walter Matthau photo of
Louise Brooks photo of Kathleen Quinlan

TYPE: REV

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EVEN THE UPRIGHT FED CAN SOMETIMES NOD TO POLITICS

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It was late in 1965, and defense spending was rising after years of quiescence,
and with it inflation was bubbling up again. Concerned, the governors of the
Federal Reserve Board jacked up the discount rate, the interest that it charges
banks for loans from the Fed. It was only half a percentage point but an action,
nevertheless, that many believed would cool a hyperactive economy by forcing up
interest rates everywhere.

In retrospect, William McChesney Martin, the Fed's chairman then, may have acted
too late. President Johnson's accelerating spending for the war in Vietnam,
without tax increases or restraints on his Great Society programs, had already
set the country spinning in an inflationary orbit.

Paul A. Volcker cannot be charged with such delay. He had been chairman of the
Fed just two months on Oct. 6, 1979, when to the eventual chagrin of President
Carter he took a wrench to inflation, then running at about 14 percent, by
tightening the money supply. He let up a bit in early 1980, igniting a brief
recovery, then squeezed again and kept on squeezing until last summer.

Only a month ago, Mr. Volcker seemed destined to be dispatched.  But yesterday
Mr. Reagan announced that he was nominating him for another four-year term even
though some of the President's aides had argued that such a move could cost the
White House the 1984 election, especially if Mr. Volcker's policies helped
provoke another recession.

The White House allows Mr. Volcker some credit for the inflation rate's slide to
its current level of 4 or 5 percent, but what is believed to have finally swung
the President was fear of a new crisis among the developing world's big
borrowers that have amassed $600 billion in debts. Those fears arose first last
summer and abated only after Mr. Volcker led Western banks in rearranging
Mexico's debts.

Conflict between Presidents and Fed chairmen is inherent in the system because
the Fed is a largely independent agency, even though the President names its
chairman as well as his six fellow board members. It is also a creature of
Congress; twice a year, the Fed chairman must testify on his policies. But
governors are appointed for 14 years, which insulates them from political whims,
and the Fed is self-supporting (making handsome profits on the Government
securities that it sells and buys from banks).

In addition, the President, with Congress, controls only one of the instruments
of economic management - the fiscal policy devices of taxation and spending. The
Fed controls the other, monetary policy - interest rates and the money supply.
The Administration uses its tools to manage inflation, unemployment and growth,
sometimes in harmony with Federal Reserve policy and sometimes not - often not,
when embarked on national elections. The Fed more often uses monetary policy to
try construct a sound economy, sometimes with little regard for the tenure of
the occupants of the White House.

Rarely, however, does the Fed depart wildly from the interests of the White
House for very long. Mr. Volcker's Fed gave in to President Carter's four-month
experiment with controls on consumer borrowing in 1980, which the Fed thought
was excessive. And last July, the Fed's decision to let the money supply begin
growing again, and, as a result, to let interest rates ease, was widely
understood to be partly a response to the Administration's months of insistence
that the battle against inflation had been won and it was time to loosen up and
make room for the recovery.

The Fed had been concerned that budget deficits would rekindle inflation. But
economists dispute whether deficits actually cause prices to rise, and so far at
least they appear not to have done so.  Perhaps they will in a year or two. The
Fed reported last week a large, $5.6 billion surge in the money supply, a signal
that inflation might be reviving.

The Fed's independence grates some experts, on both political and philosophical
grounds. Stuart E. Eizenstat, who was President Carter's domestic counselor,
attributes Mr. Carter's defeat in 1980 in part to the perilous state of the
economy then and says the Administration was unprepared for the nature of Mr.
Volcker's assault on inflation. ''At the time he was appointed,'' Mr.  Eizenstat
said of Mr. Volcker, ''he was known to be conservative but it was not clear that
he had a monetarist background'' - a bias toward relying on management of the
money supply, rather than interest rates, to deal with the economy. ''A couple
of months later,'' Mr. Eizenstat said, ''he informed the White House, the
Treasury and the Council of Economic Advisers that he was going to adopt a
change in policy, controlling the money supply. We were all concerned that the
policy would lead to too much uncertainty in interest rates. That view was
communicated to the Fed to no avail, and the rest is history.''

Mr. Eizenstat suggests that the Secretary of the Treasury, as a member of the
Administration, be allowed to join the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee,
the policy-making board made up of the chairman, his six fellow governors and
the presidents of five of the Fed's 12 regional banks. In that way, he said, the
views of the Administration would at least get a better hearing than they do
now.

Through much of last year, Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan suggested that
such changes be considered and ordered a study of the question that, he said
last week, will be completed in two months.

However, a vital constituency -Wall Street - opposes attempts to compromise the
Fed's independence. Henry Kaufman, the economist at Salomon Brothers who has
sent the stock and bond markets on some of its sharpest slides after pessimistic
readings of Government economic policy, sees in Mr. Volcker's record for
independence assurance of protection against political meddling. ''We have a
chairman who is perceived to be quasi-autonomous, who looks at the economy
through objective eyes,'' he said, ''not through those of Republicans or
Democrats.''

Peter G. Peterson, chairman of the investment banking firm of Lehman Brothers,
Kuhn Loeb and a Secretary of Commerce under President Nixon added, ''Without his
tightening of the monetary brakes, where would we be against public enemy No. 1
- inflation? I think this is a case where history will show that the
independence of the Fed made a longterm contribution to the strength of the
economy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Volcker

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOUR NEW GOVERNORS STRIVE TO MASTER THE POLITICS OF DECLINE;
LINCOLN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


THE last four years have been hard on governors, whether liberal or
conservative, Democrat or Republican. With rare exceptions their work has been
circumscribed by rising deficits and decreasing services and by an electorate
that is snappish about any suggestion of new taxes. Voters in economically
depressed farm and industrial states of the Middle West have been throwing out
incumbents and trying something new.

There are some in Nebraska who believe this conservative but populist state may
have gone too far last November in turning out the stolid Republican Charles
Thone, who fit the traditional mold for Corn Belt political leaders, and taking
on an unconventional Vietnam veteran making his first run at state-wide politics
by expressing some unconventional ideas.

The traditionalists have had six months to push Gov. Bob Kerry about. At times,
observers here say, he seems a little dazed. But there are signs he is settling
into the only kind of leadership role that seems to work in the current climate.
First, he has bowed to the notion that Democratic governors in Nebraska have to
adopt a conservative stance. He has pushed through some marginal tax increases
to help offset the persistent deficit dominating politics.

''I believe we should view this fiscal situation,'' he said, ''not so much as an
overwhelming or overriding preoccupation, but a golden opportunity to streamline
and strengthen state government.'' That is the usual approach of governors
facing sizable deficits and strong resistance to new taxes. But having taken
that position, he has gone on to lead people into new ways of thinking.

Public opinion polls have shown that governors, whatever their powers from state
to state, are the most visible public officials.  Some state leaders, such as
former Gov. Bob Ray of Iowa and Gov.  William Winter of Mississippi have used
this visibility to turn hard times into increased support for their programs,
usually by convincing the public that they were personally concerned about
unemployment and were using whatever innovations were available to improve the
economy. But some, such as Al Quie of Minnesota, failed to master the politics
of decline. Mr. Kerry seems to be seeking desperately to avoid that fate.

His election last year was a major upset. An active demonstrator against the war
in Vietnam who later prospered as a restaurant owner, he was able to move
campaign debate off abortion, the death penalty and the state's right-to-work
law and on to the economy, attacking the Governor for insisting there was little
he could do about unemployment and farm foreclosures. ''The Governor can't bring
down interest rates,'' Mr. Kerry said, ''but I can make people mad about them.''

Stirring public reaction may have been Mr. Kerry's major achievement in his
first six months in office. His life style has increased his visibility. A film
crew has been shooting a movie in Lincoln, to be called ''Terms of Endearment.''
It stars Jack Nicholson, Shirley MacLaine and Debra Winger. If that were not
enough to attract attention, Mr. Kerry had a weekend date with Miss Winger, who
won acclaim for her role in ''An Officer and a Gentleman.''

He turns back suggestions of being another Jerry Brown of California by saying,
''I'm a fiscally conservative businessman.'' One recent evening after a day of
tussling with Nebraska's conservative unicameral Legislature, Mr. Kerry settled
behind his desk and talked about innovations he was undertaking that would
require wide public support: reform of the education system, a venture capital
program for attracting new industries and reordering of job training and health
care services.

At the heart of his plans are continuing efforts to educate his constituents on
the need for government action. ''A businessman came to me to complain about
taxes,'' he said. ''I said, 'Look, you are in the top income bracket. If you
were smart you must have taken advantage of every tax shelter there is. The
trouble is everyone wants the government benefits cut for others but not for
themselves.' '' -JOHN HERBERS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph of Nebraska's 1984 budget

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN IS ONLY NEW JERSEY'S LATEST ENVIRONMENTAL HEADACHE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1293 words


TO the litany of Newark's many urban ills was recently added an environmental
one: dioxin contamination. The byproduct of the manufacture of herbicides,
dioxin is one of the deadliest chemicals known to man. Readings of one part per
billion are considered hazardous to health. On the three-acre grounds of a
Newark factory that produced the defoliant Agent Orange during the Vietnam War,
dioxin ranging up to 1,200 parts per billion was found earlier this month. A
chemical waste treatment plant next door had levels between 3.7 parts per
billion and 15 parts per billion. In a check of homes in the surrounding
Ironbound neighborhood, however, a level of 0.2 parts per billion - considered
too low to be alarming - was recorded in dust in a vacuum cleaner bag. Traces of
dioxin were also discovered in a defunct Edison herbicide plant and yesterday,
Governor Kean reported that more of the chemical had been found at a Clifton
fragrance plant employing 300 people and located near a grammar school in a
residential neighborhood. The Governor said the Diamond Shamrock Company,
successor to the company which operated the Newark factory, would pay for
tarpaulins to be spread across the site to prevent further exposure to the
chemical. Still, seven people, including two former employees, and two food
distributors forced to curtail operations in the area have filed what might be
the first of many lawsuits over the chemical. And of course, dioxin is just one
of a series of vexing environmental problems that have cropped up in the
nation's most densely populated state in recent years. Robert Hanley, who covers
New Jersey for The New York Times, reports on some of the major ones.
Atlantic City Gamble The Federal Environmental Protection Agency has promised to
start digging nine new wells in Atlantic City this month to replace 10 old ones
threatened by cancer-causing benzene and vinyl chloride leaching from an old
toxic waste dump called Price's Pit. ''I've got my fingers crossed, my toes
crossed and my elbows crossed,'' said Neil Goldfine, head of the city's water
department. A delay wouldn't surprise him, though. The E.P.A. began a six month
study of the wells in December 1981 and only finished this spring. Four 100-foot
wells have already been closed; six deeper ones will be shut when the new wells
are finished.
Coastal Caution Fishing off North Jersey is a favorite pasttime for thousands.
Eating the catch is another matter. In December the state warned fishermen not
to consume striped bass, bluefish, white perch, white catfish and eels more than
once a week if caught in the Atlantic from Barnegat Light to Upper New York Bay
and the tidal portions of the Hudson, Hackensack, Passaic and Raritan Rivers. It
also forbade the sale of striped bass and eels from the rivers. The problem is
PCB's, chemicals linked to cancer and once used as electrical insulators. A
six-year study of thousands of fish found that 11.1 percent had high PCB levels.

Unfinished Business Three years ago, more than 45,000 barrels of chemicals
stored in and around the Chemical Control Corporation warehouse in Elizabeth
exploded in a thunderous fireball that burned for 10 hours.  Afterward, about
$26 million was spent to haul off the debris, but the State Attorney General
later accused the Department of Environmental Protection of shoddy bookkeeping
and poor oversight of the contractors. Even now, the work isn't done. About 200
cylinders, contents unknown, wait to be taken away. Storm sewers are still
contaminated, and the Arthur Kill, the waterway between Elizabeth and Staten
Island, has yet to be checked for any drums hurled into it by the blast.
Chemical Dumps Burnt Fly Bog and Lone Pine are the rustic names of two of the
state's worst chemical dumps. The former is a string of toxic lagoons atop the
Englishtown aquifer, the water source for 150,000 people.  The E.P.A. is
readying reclamation plans, but Monmouth County health officer Lester Jargowsky
is angry the adjacent Westerly Wetlands will be bypassed. ''Nothing is living
there,'' he said. Lone Pine lies near the Manasquan River, 15 miles upstream
from the site of a proposed reservoir. A plant may be built to dispose of liquid
wastes, which are leaking into the river and two aquifers, but for now 50,000
buried chemical drums will remain.
Radioactive Waters Like many small streams, Sheffield Brook in Wayne has long
been a magnet for children at play. Unfortunately, it is also perhaps the more
serious example of radioactive contamination in New Jersey.  Thorium and other
isotopes processed from 1948 to 1971 at a plant owned by the W.R. Grace Company
have been found in the brook and on its banks along its half-mile path from the
plant to the Pompton River. Records suggest that the radiation has been there
since at least 1957, but the Nuclear Regulatory Commission didn't document its
presence until last year. Last week, the Senate Appropriations Committee voted
to spent $2 million to start cleaning it up.
Cars, Cars, Cars ''New Jersey has the highest density of autos in the country,''
said Dr. Ronald Harkov of the state's Office of Science and Research. Two years
ago, his staff began a study of their impact on the air in three cities -
Camden, Elizabeth and Newark - and the rural environs of Ringwood in Passaic
County. Their surveys found several poisonous chemicals including benzene, a
byproduct of gasoline combustion and a known cause of leukemia. Further studies
need to be analyzed before recommendations for tougher air pollution laws or
stricter vehicle emissions standards can be made, Dr. Harkov said. Meanwhile, no
one can estimate the health risks posed by the state's air.
Marshes of Mercury Five football fields from Giants Stadium in the Hackensack
Meadowlands is a marsh full of mercury. Berry's Creek, which flows through it,
is also brimming with mercury, as are the wetlands along the stream's meandering
course. The contamination, discovered in 1972, was traced to a processing plant
that had been operating since 1937. Although it has been declared the world's
worst case of mercury pollution, a $3.7 million cleanup is stalled. The state
sued the factory's owners in 1976 and won three years later, but the case is now
before the State Supreme Court. Said one state official: ''Everything's moving
at a snail's pace.''
Dishing It Out Before the era of orbiting satellites and instant global
communication, Vernon Valley knew only rolling farmland. Now the landscape is
punctuated by three huge ''dishes'' aimed skyward to transmit and receive
microwave signals. RCA and Western Union chose the locale because it had less
interference than any other in the region. There's plenty of static on the
ground, though. An anti-dish group, Citizens Against the Tower, says it has
proof of 44 recent cases of birth defects within 1.5 miles of the facility. The
industry says radiation is well below allowable limits and is not to blame. A
state study of birth records is under way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of New Jersey

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
Troublesome Tapes

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


Former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara said he was talking ''off the
record'' when George Crile, a producer for CBS News, interviewed him in 1981.
Unknowingly, however, he was talking on the recorder. Mr. Crile, who secretly
tape-recorded that interview and others for a 1982 documentary on the Vietnam
War, was among those named in a $120 million libel suit by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, whose lawyers demanded that CBS produce the McNamara tape. Mr.
Crile, who had said the tapes were lost or erased, said he found them last week.
CBS, saying secret taping violated company policy, suspended him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Crile

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISGUIDED CRITICISM OF DEMOCRATIC REFORMS: A MYTH IN POINT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


To the Editor:

For more than a decade I have watched a small band of journalists and academics
construct a myth about my 1972 nomination as the Democratic candidate for
President and my subsequent defeat by Richard Nixon. Nelson Polsby restated the
myth in his June 7 Op-Ed article, ''Nominating Reforms Warrant Unreforming.''
ccording to the myth, I captured the nomination by clever use of reform rules I
helped to write. Since no one was for me except a band of misguided fanatics, I
was then overwhelmingly rejected by mainstream voters with common sense who
understood that Nixon and Agnew were more dependable.

Mr. Polsby's enlargement of the myth is that recent party reforms have
encouraged an increase in primary elections, which in turn increases the power
of voters and decreases that of state political brokers. With the wisdom of the
party brokers replaced by the ignorance of voters, the resulting nominee, he
says, may be ''somebody utterly unacceptable to most Democrats or most voters in
the general election - like George Wallace or George McGovern.''

Governor Wallace is capable of speaking for himself. As for me, I have always
considered myself a mainstream Democrat. The voters of South Dakota -
historically a conservative Republican state - elected me to high office for
nearly a quarter of a century. In addition to rank-and-file support from both
Democrats and Republicans, I always had the endorsement of the party leaders,
and, indeed, prior to seeking elective office, I played a central role in
building South Dakota's Democratic Party.

I understand that the American political process depends on a balance of forces,
a compromise of interests and a certain measure of amiability and tolerance.
Although I do not share Mr. Polsby's perception of it as a miracle cure, the
''system of primaries and caucuses'' he speaks of was recommended by a rules
commission of which I was briefly chairman in 1969 and 1970.

But I did not win the nomination because of reform rules or because a small
faction captured it for me. I won by essentially the same strategy that John
Kennedy used in 1960: addressing issues of greatest concern and winning more
caucuses and primaries than others.

I lost heavily to President Nixon because of the following factors:

* The four-year Nixon-Agnew ''Southern strategy'' captured the Wallace vote
after the shooting of Governor Wallace. Had he run as an independent, he would
have taken 10 million to 15 million votes away from Nixon, and that would have
created a close contest between Nixon and me.

* The confusion and enormous attention resulting from the revelation of a
history of mental illness on the part of my running mate, Senator Eagleton, was
a body blow from which we never recovered.

* President Nixon was riding a crest of successes: the mission that opened up
mainland China; the SALT I treaty; the ''peace (in Vietnam) is at hand''
announcement, and a comparatively prosperous economy.

* He spent unprecedented amounts of money distorting my positions while engaging
in a massive coverup of wrongdoing that came to be known as Watergate.

One further thought. If I were Mr. Polsby, I would not count too heavily on the
old methods, including the state party bosses, to elevate our politics
dramatically.

Prior to our nation's two most serious crises - the Civil War and the Great
Depression/World War II era - the system he so admires gave us Millard Fillmore,
Franklin Pierce and James Buchanan in the first instance, and Warren G. Harding,
Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover in the second.

We've also had a few great Presidents, including my two favorites, who led us
out of those two great crises: Abraham Lincoln and Franklin Roosevelt. But maybe
the fates, or the times, or the luck of the draw had as much to do with it -
good or bad - as the nominating rules.

I agree with Mr. Polsby on one item: we've had too much ''tinkering'' with the
rules.  GEORGE MCGOVERN Washington, June 9, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNDERSTANDING MONDALE

BYLINE: By David Harris; David Harris is a frequent contributor to this
magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 9996 words


THE PLACE IS JACKSON, Miss., and former Vice President Walter F.  Mondale is
here to deliver a speech from the front steps of the Mississippi Governor's
mansion. His performance is not unlike those he has given in 100 cities in 26
states between January and June of this year. A sprinkling of national press has
come along to watch, and Mondale exhibits guarded ease. He is 55 years old and
has no illusions about the process he must go through to win the Presidency. The
reporters have come to examine his soft spots, and neither he nor they need to
be told that the last two decades of Democratic Party history have been littered
with the mistake-plagued wreckage of early front-runners.

On the other hand, not making mistakes is one of Walter Mondale's strong suits.
Aside from the mistakes he does not make, his speech in Jackson is most notable
for all the things Walter Mondale does not say about himself. It is typically
well-delivered and just as typically unrevealing. He laments the collapse of the
farm economy, but tells no stories about his father, the farming prairie
preacher who lost everything in the 1920 farm-price collapse. He warns about the
escalation of health-care costs for the elderly, but reveals nothing about how
his mother's insurance company dropped her coverage when her cancer was
discovered and how her three sons bore the costs of her prolonged treatment. As
he stands on the front porch of the mansion, his profile is dominated by the
almost right angle his nose makes after emerging from his face, but few people
in this footballplaying state will learn that the shape of his nose is a scar
from the constant breakage it endured during his career as ''Crazylegs''
Mondale, the shifty iron-man halfback of the Elmore, Minn., high school varsity.

Walter Mondale is ashamed of none of those things, but he nonetheless does not
bring them up on his own. He resists packaging his person, despite the potential
political benefits, and his performance in Jackson reveals no sudden breaks in
that resistance.

Mississippi is a state dominated by small towns, but Mondale gives only several
phrases in passing to having grown up in Ceylon, Heron Lake and Elmore, Minn.,
the largest of which had a population of 950. It strikes no one watching him
that he is reportedly a direct descendant of a seventh-century Viking warlord.
He mentions he is a ''minister's kid,'' but does not mention, as he does in
private, that ''being a minister's kid was a free ticket for everyone to beat
you up.'' Nor is there any indication that he was the kind of minister's kid who
once organized his playmates to build a bridge using hymnals purloined from his
father's church and is still possessed of a broad, if private, streak of
mischief. And his manner does not suggest the kind of politician who once
disguised himself as a farm worker to investigate conditions among migrant
laborers.

All those parts of Walter Mondale are a vacuum in his public presence. He offers
few clues to the facts that as a teen-ager he sang at weddings and sold
vegetables door to door during the Great Depression. He promises the crowd in
Jackson that if he is elected President, everyone's children will have the
possibility of a college education, but makes no mention of the heavy debt he
assumed as a young man putting himself through college. That he is intelligent
is apparent, but that he rereads the works of William Shakespeare every few
years is not apparent at all.

He extols the virtues of family life and calls families ''the basis of a strong
nation,'' but even with his wife, Joan, standing behind him on the Mississippi
mansion porch and smiling, he does not personalize the issue. That they mean a
lot to each other and have been married 27 years remains unsaid. That their
three children are a former dirt-bike racer, an aspiring actress and an
undergraduate fluent enough in Spanish to translate on Vice-Presidential
missions, all goes unsaid as well. Choosing between their privacy and his image,
Mondale has always chosen their privacy. Joan does their family grocery shopping
through a neighborhood buying club and takes a regular trip to the Washington
farmers market as part of the Mondales' membership, but consumers struggling
with food prices will not learn that information from Walter Mondale.

This is an election in which Democrats will belabor ''the rich,'' but Mondale
does not point out that his own net personal worth when he left the Vice
Presidency was a meager and palpably uncompromised $15,000. Similarly, he uses
the words ''strong'' or ''strengthen'' 17 times in 12 minutes but offers no
descriptions of how, as a stand-in head of state, he faced down President
Ferdinand E. Marcos in the Philippines, wrangled with Prime Minister John
Vorster over South Africa, or softened up Prime Minister Menachem Begin at Camp
David.  He instinctively shies away from any talk that might sound too much like
bragging on himself.

When Mondale finishes his speech in Jackson, the audience is impressed and the
national press contingent agrees that he deserves his growing reputation as the
best speechmaker of the Democratic pack, but his oratory, though enormously
improved, is still a far cry from charisma. Few of the issues he addresses
attach to his person.  In image-maker's terms, he lacks ''projection.''

The modern Presidency is won with visceral characterizations and personified
emotions, yet the absence of such images and associations from the presence of
Walter Mondale is striking. There is indeed a person behind his candidacy, but
Mondale resists revealing himself.  That tendency in turn frames the ground
where Walter Mondale's political and personal dilemmas overlap. By his own
choice, he is at the same time a formidable enough commodity to be considered a
political fixture, yet as a person so unknown as to be effectively
indistinguishable from his circumstances.

At this writing, Walter Mondale leads the Democratic Presidential race in
national polls, money raised and straw votes won. His campaign organization and
strategy are commonly thought the most professional in the six-man field (see
box Page 54). His closest competitor, Senator John H. Glenn of Ohio, the former
astronaut, is considered to be a serious threat to win the prize of the party's
nomination.

Not surprisingly, then, the first question asked about Walter Mondale is whether
he is really as boring as his coverage makes him seem.

The only answer is a character portrait that is much more complex than the
stereotype ''boring'' implies.

WALTER MON-dale, to start with, is Norwegian. According to those around him, his
often overlooked ethnicity is central to who he is and how he presents himself.
Mondale is the Anglicization of Mundal, the village on the shores of Sogne Fjord
where his great-grandfather lived before immigrating to southern Minnesota in
1856. The winters are desolate and lonely in Ceylon, Heron Lake and Elmore, and
the broad prairie around them was consequently settled by a patchwork of Swedes,
Danes and Norwegians whose culture is still among the nation's most distinct, if
least visible, ethnic enclaves. Its orthodoxy is politically liberal and
personally conservative, though ''conservative'' does not capture the scope of
the Scandinavian emphasis on privacy, self discipline and emotional containment.
''There is a restraint against feeling in general,'' one Minnesota writer
observes. ''There is a restraint against enthusiasm ... there is restraint in
grief, and always, always restraint in showing your feelings.'' The Minnesota
subculture that nurtured Walter Mondale is very likely the most intense outpost
of personal reticence left in modern America.

Mondale smiles as his press secretary, Maxine Isaacs, tells an illustrative
Norwegian story. They, several staff people and two reporters are flying in a
chartered eight seater to the Quad Cities Airport after a 7:30 speech in
Dubuque, Iowa, on Jan. 28. The story is about a Minnesota reception Vice
President Mondale appeared at during the 1978 Congressional campaign in one of
the farm towns out on the prairie. Twenty people attended. When Mondale entered,
the crowd issued several claps and then everyone stood where they were while
Mondale patiently approached each and initiated conversation.  No one approached
him on their own or gave his inquiries more than a one-sentence answer.
Meanwhile, the local Norwegian organizer of the event, obviously thrilled by the
crowd response, approached Mondale's press secretary. ''Quite a fanfare, isn't
it?'' he exulted in all seriousness. Mondale breaks into chuckles at the punch
line.

Though by this point in his life Walter Mondale has evolved into a positively
flashy figure by the standards of his native subculture, its expectations of
reserve are ingrained in his personality.

During the question period at the Land o'Lakes Co-op's annual meeting in the
Minneapolis Civic Auditorium, Mondale is asked if he thinks he would be a good
President. ''I have trouble answering that,'' he confesses. ''If my father had
ever heard me tell him that I would make a good President, I would have been
taken directly to the woodshed.'' The audience laughs, knowing exactly what he
means.

''The whole idea of talking in terms of me or I is foreign to the culture,''
Mondale explains. It is March 26 and he is riding in a rented car, traveling
from Portsmouth, N.H., to the Boston airport. There, he will start a series of
flights that will land him in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, for a 3 P.M. press conference.
''Talking in terms of me or I just wasn't done,'' he continues. ''In my family,
the two things you were sure to get spanked for were lying or bragging about
yourself.  Both were equally unacceptable.'' He and a reporter are sharing the
back seat and Mondale answers most questions while staring ahead at the road.
''Now, of course,'' he offers, looking the reporter in the face, ''I have to
talk about myself and I do.'' The answer is, not surprisingly, less than
revelatory. According to his staff, Mondale still assumes, in an instinctively
Norwegian way, that personal promotion is demeaning and that who he is will be
apparent without being hyped. Both assumptions may prove crucial in an election
that could be decided on television.

The second thread in Walter Mondale that parallels his stereotype is his
caution. It is a Norwegian character trait that has been buttressed by the
unique mechanics of his 23 years in public life.  Attorney General of Minnesota,
United States Senator, Vice President, Mondale's career is extraordinary for the
fact that he has never officially entered any political contest in which he was
not either the front-runner or the incumbent. That unusual experience has
entrenched his caution, and the most formative step in the process was the
first. In 1960, when he was 32 years old, less than five years out of law
school, and already an experienced Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party operative, he
was appointed by Gov.  Orville Freeman to fill the state Attorney General's
office vacated by resignation. Out of nowhere, Mondale held the second most
powerful elective office in the state. His predecessor, Miles Lord, had been
something of a controversial showboat, but Mondale went in the opposite
direction.

''I am young and start with no base at all,'' he told a friend. He knew his best
option was to play his role extremely close to the vest. ''I'm not even going to
smile,'' he explained. And he didn't.  He also never allowed himself to be
photographed with a drink in his hand or be seen talking to an ''unattached
woman.'' He went to work early and stayed late. Later in 1960, he comfortably
won ''reelection.'' Mondale's caution bred a style that is inoffensive,
deferential and thorough, and those virtues in turn made Walter Mondale a very
successful, if relatively colorless, politician. In 1964, Gov. Karl Rolvaag of
Minnesota appointed him to the Senate seat vacated by Hubert H. Humphrey upon
his election to Vice President, and Mondale won election on his own in 1966 and
1972. In 1976, Jimmy Carter elevated Mondale to the Vice Presidency. ''The thing
that is most evident about Mondale,'' Humphrey once explained, ''is that he's
nonabrasive. He was not a polarizer. He coupled all this with what was obvious
talent: He was young, he was articulate, he was intelligent, and clean-cut. He
kept filling the bill. It's most amazing.'' A less cautious man might not have
been so acceptable to all con-Page 31 cerned and Mondale has made remarkably few
enemies in 20 years of holding offices.

Thus far, Walter Mondale seems most cautious about the issue of Jimmy Carter.
Carter's 1980 defeat is a disaster Mondale must distance himself from, yet he
must do so without seeming to be disloyal or denying his own history. Indeed,
Mondale wants his Vice Presidency remembered as much as he wants Jimmy Carter
forgotten. It is a tricky balancing act. Questions about Mondale's attitude
toward his former boss come up everywhere. At Mondale's March 7 press conference
in Jackson, he gives his standard answer. He has recently been chided in several
national columns for his remarks in an interview published under the headline
''Mondale, no more a loyal defender, chiding unfair, he knows better than to
whine to the press about the coverage he's getting. ''I was proud to serve as
Mr.  Carter's Vice President,'' he says instead. ''There was much that we did
that's going to look very good in American history. We had some problems, we had
some bad breaks. That's the way it is. Now I'm running for President.''

The answer is one reporters call ''surefooted.'' Mondale's caution is, of
course, political wisdom when the issue is how to avoid giving offense, but when
the issue is ''boring,'' it works against him. He provokes little heat either
pro or con and consequently makes bland copy. It is one of the reasons analysts
describe his support in the polls as ''shallow.'' Having always run from the
passive posture of either defending an office or defending a lead, he has never
had to seize the public imagination and run with it, as most challengers must.
Whether he can or not is, after 23 years, still an open question.

The final element in the character behind Walter Mondale's stereotype is his
inwardness. Though now one of the most charming elbow-rubbers and handshakers in
the Democratic Party, when he first took the Minnesota attorney generalship he
entered his office every day by a private door to avoid having to make small
talk with the secretarial help. He is a private person and not instinctively
convivial. He can entertain himself by staring out a window and is most at ease
with just himself in the room. Though he talks little about his own psychology,
Mondale admits that he has ritualized his need to drop everything and look
inward in the form of regular fishing trips and that they are central to his
inner workings. At an Iowa City Foreign Relations Council meeting he jokes about
them. ''I was once asked why I fished,'' he says, ''and I said it was cheaper
than a psychiatrist.''

For the last 25 years, Mondale's partner in this emotional therapy has been Fran
Befera, a Duluth television station owner. The two men angle for trout and
wall-eyed pike in the Minnesota lakes reachable only by seaplane. In winter,
they chop holes in the ice and do the same thing. Often Befera's sons come along
and the trips usually last five or six days. They stay in Befera's fishing
shack, take along canned tuna in case nothing is biting, and what talking they
do is just ''camp talk.'' No issues, no campaigns, no public-opinion polls. Just
understated male phrases about fish, the weather, and more fish. Most of the
time, Mondale sits with his line in the water and says nothing. ''Your system is
driven by the sport to calm down,'' he explains. ''That's what it's all about.
After about the fourth day, I start to get my perspective back -the little
irritations and anxieties disappear. I can think about the big picture again.''

He finds sustenance and focus in being nobody with nothing much to say and his
therapy amounts to long, silent hours adrift, watching how the light lifts off
the water and the ripples scatter toward the shore. Where others might be bored,
Walter Mondale is rejuvenated.

PUT ON THE CAM-paign trail, being interviewed in the back seat of his rented
car, Mondale differs strongly with all the attention paid to his stereotype.
''Maybe I am boring,'' he says, ''I don't know. I read about it but I don't
think my audiences are bored. You've seen them; are they bored?'' The reporter
allows that most of the people who come out to see Mondale seem to enjoy what he
has to say.  ''Sure,'' Mondale continues, ''I lay an egg once in a while just
like anyone. But I think there's pack journalism operating here, too. If one of
the bureaus writes a story that I'm boring, then all the rest do. What's really
interesting is that for 18 months I was on the road and none of the national
press was there, but they were all writing stories about how boring I was. It
always fascinated me how they knew.''

Deserved or not, Mondale's stereotype has obscured some attractive attributes:
He is bright and, by politicians' standards, enormously literate. A friend, the
historian Barbara Tuchman, supplies him with reading lists, and his favorite
book is George Trevelyan's biography of Garibaldi. For fun, he hunts quotations
in the Shakespeare concordance Joan gave him for Christmas. On the few occasions
when he watches television, he sticks to old movies. His home life with Joan has
an updated Ozzie and Harriet flavor. The Mondales live on Lowell Street in
northwest Washington and, on his occasional days off, Mondale can be seen in
chino pants, jogging shoes and an old purple letterman's jacket walking Digger,
his daughter's dog, in Cleveland Park.

Joan campaigns, does volunteer work for the arts and makes pots in her pottery
studio. Mondale likes to sit up in the evenings and read. He is the son of a
Methodist minister, she is the daughter of a Presbyterian minister, and today
they are Presbyterians who don't get to church very often. He plays tennis and
takes medication for what he describes as a ''managed, controlled, modest''
blood-pressure condition. Joan calls him Fritz and he calls her Joan. Mondale's
staff calls him Mondale or sir. He obliges everyone who recognizes him in
airport lounges with conversations and says he enjoys doing so. Most of them
call him Mr. Vice President or Mr. Mondale. He drinks one light scotch and water
a day and chews three or four long, thick cigars. The cigars disgust Joan and
she jokingly gripes about having to empty his ashtrays.

At home, they eat their dinners at the dining-room table and, following her
lead, circulate on the culture circuit. They rarely entertain these days, but
when they do it is mostly with Senators and their wives, some of whom live in
the neighborhood. Since the Vice Presidency, he has earned a ''six-figure''
income as a Washington lawyer with Winston & Strawn, but the only signs of his
new wealth are the car and driver provided by the campaign and the recently
purchased home in Minnesota where the Mondales plan to retire someday.
''Decent'' and ''unpretentious'' are two words all Mondale's friends use to
describe him.  The most visible of Mondale's personal attributes is his sense of
humor.  On the evening of Jan. 28, he is speaking to a gathering of 125 Iowa
Democrats in the Fleur de Lis room of Dubuque's Julien Motor Inn. The room's
glitter ceiling is lit with orange and yellow lights. Dubuque County has the
second heaviest concentration of Democrats in the state, and doing well here is
a key to carrying the caucuses next February. Ten minutes into his performance,
he delivers one of the set jokes he salts throughout his standard Iowa stump
speech. ''This is a country where everybody can run for office,'' Mondale
observes in his driest twang, ''and, as you know, in the Democratic Party,
everybody does.'' The audience laughs. ''Usually for President,'' Mondale adds.
The audience laughs even harder.

Weeks later, he is at the solar-heated headquarters of the Society for the
Protection of New Hampshire Forests in Concord. Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, a
rival for the nomination, has been here the week before, drawing an audience of
50. Mondale draws 85. In the question-and-answer period, Mondale makes a point
about ''the pursuit of happiness'' as a national goal, using an off-the-cuff
oneliner. ''Did you ever see a picture of the Politburo?'' he asks rhetorically.
''They all look like morticians who weren't paid for the last funeral.''

At a Washington convention of the United Automobile Workers political arm, the
Community Action Program, Mondale is one of the featured speakers. He is brought
in to a standing ovation and introduced with effusive praise. The banner behind
him reads: ''Forging Coalitions to Advance Workers Goals.'' Mondale opens by
recognizing most of the union's officers individually and then comes out with
one of the standard lines he uses to josh his political friends. ''I know how
these U.A.W. conventions work,'' Mondale begins, tongue-in-cheek. ''You figure
out who you'd really like to hear and then, when he turns you down, you ask old
Walter Mondale if he has a new speech yet.''

If he holds the lead, Walter Mondale will be the most quick-witted Democrat to
head the ticket since John F. Kennedy. He will also be the most politically
experienced since Lyndon B. Johnson. Walter Mondale held high public offices for
20 continuous years from 1960 to 1980. The 12 years spent in the Senate have
left him completely familiar with the legislative process. His four as Vice
President are generally agreed to have included more direct and influential
involvement in the daily workings of the executive branch than any Vice
President in history. The breadth of his experience is one point Mondale makes
about himself with no reticence at all.

On the evening of March 7, Walter Mondale's tour of three southern states has
reached Chattanooga, Tenn., where he addresses a reception sponsored by
Chattanoogans for Mondale in the Sheraton Downtown Hotel. Some 250 Democrats
attend, making heavy use of the cash bar. It is one of those audiences Mondale
describes as ''raw meat,'' and he works them determinedly. His face flushes and,
as the words come out more and more rapidly, they shape themselves into a
rhythmic cadence. The register of his voice rises and becomes increasingly
nasal. ''I am running for President,'' he declares.  ''I'm going to give it all
I've got. I know state government, I know the Senate, I know the White House, I
know the world. I know what I'm doing. And that's the final point: We need a
President who knows what he's doing!''

The Chattanoogans applaud boisterously and sweat trickles down the side of
Walter Mondale's face.  When he is lathering up a crowd like the one in
Chattanooga, Mondale sounds a lot like Humphrey, and the resemblance is no
accident. Mondale refers to the late Senator from Minnesota often, usually as
''my old friend, Hubert'' or ''my mentor, Hubert Humphrey,'' a ''source of
public inspiration and a deep, deep friend.'' Their relationship began as
college student to United States Senator, became aspiring politician to
established power, and then, when Mondale came to the Senate and Humphrey
assumed the Vice Presidency, junior public official to senior. It was while
Humphrey was Vice President that Mondale, at least partly out of loyalty to his
mentor, supported Johnson's Vietnam policy, a stance he now calls ''the worst
mistake of my public life.'' When Humphrey left office in January 1969, Mondale
came out against the war.

Despite their long association, it was not until 1971, when Humphrey returned to
Washington as the junior Minnesota Senator to Mondale's senior, that what one of
Humphrey's aides would later call ''a special communication'' developed between
the two men. As Humphrey's health ebbed, he increasingly saw Mondale as the
political heir who might succeed in attaining the Presidency where Humphrey
himself had failed. According to Mondale, by 1978, when Humphrey lay in the
hospital dying, their friendship ''had blossomed into something very, very
deep.'' The last time the two men saw each other, Humphrey talked at length
about how much Mondale's career meant to him. ''Keep it up,'' Humphrey said. A
friend of both men described Mondale as ''anguished'' over Humphrey's death.

Ironically, it was Humphrey who first raised the doubts about Walter Mondale's
staying power that have plagued Mondale's Presidential aspirations for the last
10 years. In a newspaper interview in 1973, Humphrey wondered pointedly whether
Mondale had ''the fire in the belly'' it takes to become President. The question
has been asked about Mondale ever since.

Humphrey's remark was made in the course of the stillborn 1974 exception to
Mondale's pattern of front-running, a sequence remembered now as ''the last time
Walter Mondale ran for President.'' Humphrey set the process in motion on
election night in November 1972. Mondale had just easily carried his second
Senate re-election in the face of a Republican sweep, and Humphrey, ebullient,
dragged him in front of the national television cameras and proclaimed him
Presidential material. When Mondale was slow to take advantage of the opening,
Humphery uttered his ''fire in the belly'' remark. In January 1974, Mondale
finally announced that he was ''actively exploring the possibility of running''
and spent the next year on the Democratic rubber-chicken hustings. At the end of
that year, Mondale stood at 3 percent in the polls. ''I was two points behind
Don't Know and wanted to challenge him to a debate,'' he now jokes, ''but Don't
Know wouldn't debate me.'' In November 1974, Mondale called Humphrey.
''Humphrey,'' he said, ''I'm getting out of this thing.''

On Nov. 21, 1974, Mondale announced that he would not be a candidate for
President in 1976. Until he called his press conference, both Joan and his staff
expected he would run. Instead, Mondale joked to the press that he didn't want
to spend the rest of his life in Holiday Inns, and then issued a brutal
assessment of himself. ''I do not have the overwhelming desire to be President
which is essential for the kind of campaign that is required,'' he announced.
''I admire those with the determination to do what is required to seek the
Presidency but I have found that I am not among them.''

Now, eight and a half years later, Mondale is talking about 1974 on his way to
the Boston airport. He has spent the previous night in the Portsmouth, N.H.,
Holiday Inn, the latest of dozens of such Holiday Inns he has stayed in since
1974. By now, Mondale is used to being asked if he is sufficiently driven to be
President. He is chewing on a cigar when the subject comes up. ''In 1974,''
Mondale explains, ''I tried to run on a part-time basis for a year and it became
obvious that you have to run full time. I was a Senator, I loved being one, and
I didn't want to give up being one. Deep down, I wasn't ready and I knew it. The
more I thought about it, the more I asked myself, 'O.K. Mondale, what do you
really want to do? What is it that you think makes all of this so important to
the country?' I couldn't answer it.

Now, with the experience of the White House, without the conflict of two jobs, I
feel ready. I'm convinced I can run that Government. I've got a clear vision. I
believe I can be a very good President.''

When he finishes, the cigar is out of Walter Mondale's mouth and he is looking
off toward the countryside.  The persistence of doubts about Mondale's
drivenness is, among other things, a reflection of how little he is truly known.
His considerable political skills are, to a great extent, the result of the
diligent long-term exercise of his will to improve and he has, through
determined effort, elevated himself from running behind Don't Know in 1974 to
running ahead of everybody in 1983. (At this writing, Gallup and Harris polls of
Democrats show him ahead of the other candidates for the nomination.) Both
developments bespeak the activity of someone who wants something very much. His
schedule looks driven as well. In the 1982 elections, Mondale campaigned on
behalf of 95 House, 15 Senate and 18 gubernatorial candidates. Thus far in 1983,
he has been on the road three weeks out of every four, working 12-and 18-hour
days. He exhibits little ambivalence about his task.  Perhaps the more relevant
question is not whether Walter Mondale is driven, but what is doing the driving.
As one of his aides has pointed out, he is not ''the kind of guy who wakes up in
the morning with 'Hail to the Chief' ringing in his ears.'' The human being most
responsible for the shape and intensity of Mondale's motivation was his father,
Theodore. If will were a matter of genetic inheritance, there would be no
question about Walter Mondale's. Theodore, a stutterer, made himself into a
preacher with a six-month course at Minnesota's Red Wing Seminary. After
contracting lockjaw in a kitchen-table tonsillectomy during the early 1920's,
Theodore regained the full use of his mouth by spending a year jamming a piece
of wood between his jaws and slowly prying them open. He was 52 years old when
his son Walter was born. Theodore had lost the last of his farms by then and the
Mondales were living on the meager proceeds of rural Minnesota ministerial
postings in the likes of Jeffers, St. James, Ceylon, Heron Lake and Elmore.
Walter was the second son of Theodore Mondale's second family. Theodore's first
wife had died after 18 years of marriage and their children were grown when he
married Walter's mother, Claribel Cowan. (There are six children altogether from
the two marriages.) Claribel gave music lessons and led the choir in each of
Theodore's succeeding parishes.  She and Walter were close, but, by all
accounts, the dominant presence in Walter Mondale's childhood was his father,
the minister.

''Being a minister's child is similar to being a public official's child,'' Joan
Mondale explains. She is sitting in the Mondales' living room on Lowell Street.
The house has two stories and is tastefully decorated. The neighborhood outside
is leafy and uppermiddle-class. Her husband, home for five days after several
weeks of travel, is walking the dog. She is winding up the interview before
rushing to a hairdresser's appointment. ''As a minister's child,'' she
continues, ''what you say and do will be remembered. You have to be careful.
What you say will be repeated. You aren't necessarily welcome when you move into
a community. You have to think again about what you say and you have to prove
yourself -prove that you're one of the gang -over and over. Fritz grew up with
that.''

The minister's son must prove himself to his father ''over and over'' as well.
Theodore Mondale was a no-nonsense disciplinarian who administered the switch to
Walter on more than one occasion, but they were deeply bonded. Theodore had high
standards and young Walter apparently lived up to them. He was a passable
student, a school leader and a local athletic hero. Theodore Mondale's passion
was politics and Minnesota's home-grown Farmer-Labor party and this, too, he
inculcated in Walter. ''Dad was basically the politician of the family,''
Mondale explains. ''He was a devout Christian, a believer in the social gospel,
a Farmer-Laborite. He believed Christ taught a sense of social mission and this
was heavily given to me throughout my childhood. He came out of the progressive
Scandinavian tradition.  We always discussed politics. My dad stuttered and
wasn't a man of letters, never really more than a farm kid all his life. Often,
I'd hear people ridicule him. He wasn't as smooth as he was supposed to be, I
guess. But he had a lot to do with me going into political life. I wanted to
fight for the things my father believed in.''

The Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party Theodore Mondale taught his son to admire was a
powerful force in the early 1930's but then waned until merging with Minnesota's
Democratic Party into the modern D.F.L. in 1944. A number of future national
politicians rose out of that merger, all of them led by Hubert Humphrey, the
exciting young Mayor of Minneapolis. When Walter Mondale, 20 years old and a
Macalester College undergraduate, en-listed in the ranks of Humphrey's 1948
Senate campaign, it was the kind of thing he had been raised to do.  Reportedly,
Mondale's proudest moment of that campaign was when he introduced Humphrey to
his 72-year-old father. Theodore Mondale's approval continued to mean a lot to
Walter, and Theodore approved of Humphrey enormously. Theodore died six weeks
after Humphrey won his 1948 Senate election. To this day, his father's
expectations seem to be strung quite tightly inside Walter Mondale. He remains,
at his core, a minister's kid who, having proved himself again and again, still
has something left to prove.

''Proof'' this early in the campaign has centered on joint appearances by all
the candidates that Mondale calls the Democratic Party Traveling Gong Show. The
first was in California in January.  Each candidate addressed a party convention
and Mondale drew raves from press and delegates as ''the most impressive.'' The
second was in Massachusetts in February, and Mondale received the most
enthusiastic reception.

On March 8, the Democratic Party Gong Show comes to Atlanta's World Congress
Center to play in front of the Georgia state party's Jefferson-Jackson Day
Dinner. Twenty five hundred Democrats from all over Georgia attend in black ties
and evening gowns. The music is provided by Dean Hudson and his orchestra.
Dancing is planned for after the speeches. Dinner costs $150 a person and the
party will net a quarter of a million dollars. There is a dais, but no head
table, just enough individual 12-seat arrangements to cover the floor of a
cavernous convention center decorated to resemble an upscale dinner club. Dozens
of reporters and cameramen mill around near the podium and at the bar. Bert
Lance, former Carter Administration Director of the Office of Management and
Budget, who was forced to resign and now is the state party chairman, is the
evening's master of ceremonies.

Lance solves the only backstage controversy of the evening by arranging a group
photo when all the candidates come to the dais.  Mondale missed the group photo
in California ''for scheduling reasons'' and did the same thing for the same
reason in Massachusetts. Some national press photographers wonder if Mondale is
ducking, and his press secretary has been assuring them all week that he will
pose. He does so, smiling. Afterward, the candidates go at it in alphabetical
order. In California and Massachusetts, Mondale spoke first for ''scheduling
reasons.'' Tonight, he speaks last. As each speaker is at the rostrum, the rest
sit behind a long table. All of them stare into a spotlight whose glare obscures
everything but the first row of press photographers two feet away.

Reubin O. Askew of Florida has a gray suit and a nervous tick in his right
eyelid. Senator Dale Bumpers of Arkansas also wears gray and will be out of the
race in less than a month. Alan Cranston of California has sent his son as a
stand-in, effectively ceding the evening but paying his respects. Senator Glenn
tells a Walter Mondale joke: ''Fritz Mondale spent the week listing his
differences with the President,'' says Glenn, pausing for effect. ''Fortunately,
President Carter didn't take it personally.'' The line draws laughs, Glenn is
applauded, but the applauders stay in their seats. Next, Senator Hart proclaims
himself the dark horse in a relatively dark and wooden way, and then Senator
Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina drawls through the longest speech of the
night. Mondale listens with alternating airs of indifference, bemusement and
distraction. He doesn't seem nervous, yet it is apparent that he is just waiting
his turn.

When he reaches the podium, last in line, Mondale starts slowly. He mentions all
the party notables present, tells a funny story about ''old Hubert,'' and
reminds the audience that Walter Mondale ''helped elect the first Southern
President in 120 years.'' Mondale does not, however, mention Jimmy Carter by
name and will be the only one of the candidates not to do so. Mondale next talks
about how the values at one end of the Mississippi River are the same as at the
other. ''I learned to believe in God, to obey the law, to tell the truth, work
hard, and to do my duty,'' he says. From that point on, Mondale steadily
quickens the tempo. He is the only candidate who senses the raw meat in the
audience and plays to it. They want stimulation, and his voice rises and the
words pile out in bursts. He evokes ''the values of the family'' and Democrats
as ''the party of caring.'' It is a performance one of the more cynical of the
reporters present describes as ''Walter Mondale sings Hubert Humphrey's Greatest
Hits.'' For the last two minutes, Mondale's chest is thrust against the podium,
while he speaks in a half shout and thumps the air with his arms.  The Georgians
love it and give him a standing ovation. He receives the applause with an
abashed smile. He is genuinely thrilled that all those people could be clapping
for him.

Mondale leaves the World Congress Center through a backstage entrance
accompanied by Joan, several staff members, and several national reporters.

''Hell,'' one of the reporters joshes Mondale, ''if you're gonna be that good,
they'll make you talk last every time.''

There is only the faint hint of a chuckle in Mondale's voice as he answers.
''That was somethin', wasn't it,'' he exclaims.  All candidates must contend
against not only their opponents but also themselves. In this second race,
matched against his own limitations, Walter Mondale has yet to stamp his
identity firmly on the lead he holds, and doing so is essential. He must also
answer at least two significant outstanding doubts about himself.

The first is whether he can come across on television. ''I'm not good on TV,''
Mondale admits. ''It's just not a natural medium for me.'' Part of the reason is
pure cosmetics. A reasonably trim man, Mondale's face invariably looks heavier
than the rest of him and television cameras seem to heighten that jowliness. His
eyes are dark blue and set in deep, permanently smudged sockets. In the
esthetics of television, the lack of contrast translates into two distant dead
spots in the middle of his face. The way his voice rises and goes nasal when
making a point is a drawback as well. More central to his video difficulties,
however, is Walter Mondale's own uneasiness with the medium. He is uncomfortable
assuming the star quality it demands and has difficulty with the idea of
presenting himself unselfconsciously to a box with lights on it. He has thus far
resisted advice to seek coaching. Mondale for President will soon hire the
Austin, Tex., advertising firm of 33-year-old Roy Spence to handle its media.
Spence did similar work for Gov. Mark White's election in Texas but is a
newcomer to national campaigns. He will have his hands full.

The second doubt about Walter Mondale is whether he can keep from being
perceived as no more than the prisoner of his friends.

Mondale was the only Presidential candidate invited to the retirement dinner
given by the United Automobile Workers for their president, Douglas A. Fraser,
in Detroit's Cobo Arena. Autograph hunters swarmed around Mondale's place at the
head table. ''Fritz fits into our plans,'' an officer of Lansing's Local 652
explains.  ''He's a President of the people. It's people programs that make us
go.'' Mondale receives a standing ovation when he is introduced to speak. ''I
want to thank you for making me feel at home,'' he says.  At the end of the
program, Mondale stands and joins hands with the rest of those at the head table
in singing ''Solidarity Forever.''

On Jan. 30, Mondale is the featured speaker at a black-tie fundraiser for the
United Jewish Appeal at the exclusive Jimmy's Restaurant in Beverly Hills,
Calif. More than $5 million will be raised from the 60 couples on the guest
list, half designated for local projects, half for projects in the state of
Israel. Mondale is introduced as someone who ''shares completely the commitments
that bring us together tonight.'' In the course of Mondale's speech, the return
of territory by Israel as part of the Camp David agreements is likened to ''an
American President coming back and saying 'I got peace with the Russians and all
I had to give up was everything west of the Mississippi.' ''

A month later. Mondale meets with a group of 35 farmers in the Hawkinsville,
Ga., public library in rural Pulaski County. The farmers have all been brought
together by a local banker and all of them are deep in debt. ''I will be the
best pro-farm President America has ever had,'' Mondale promises.

On March 25, Mondale stops at Boston's Harriet Tubman House, a Federally funded
community center, and meets with a dozen activists from the Hispanic community.
Mondale takes his coat off and speaks with his hands on his hips. ''I would
appoint Hispanic-Americans to positions of real power,'' he declares flatly. ''I
want to be the President who breaks the ice for Hispanic-Americans.''

Mondale's strategy is both orthodox and risky. He intends, quite simply, to
reunite the fractious Democratic coalition by running as the candidate of each
of its separate pieces, all at the same time.

The issues he emphasizes are appropriately ''mainstream''in the spectrum of
Democratic Pary activists. Hart and Cranston are perceived as slightly to
Mondale's left, Askew, Glenn and Hollings to his right. Mondale regularly opens
his stump litanywith unemployment, a condition he blames on high interest rates,
weak trade policies and the Reagan Administration's enormous deficits. He also
regularly attacks the imbalance of America's international trade posture, the
threat of nuclear war, the ''mishandling'' of Central America, acid rain, James
Watt, and the disintegration of the quality of American education. To deal with
these national problems, he supports ''domestic content'' legislation as a
necessary sign of ''toughness'' in our trade posture and proposes a series of
international negotiations to establish trade ''reciprocity.'' He also calls for
new international monetary agreements in which the net result will be the
devaluation of the American dollar, thereby making American exports more
competitive and foreign imports less so. He has promised to repeal the scheduled
tax cuts for people with incomes over $60,000 a year, to repeal income-tax
indexing and ''put a lid on hospital costs.'' He has endorsed a ''verifiable
nuclear freeze'' and advocates ''scaling the defense budget to reality.'' In the
Middle East, he is pledged to continuing ''the Camp David process,'' and in
Central America he has proposed hemispherewide negotiations to stabilize the
region. In response to the recent highly critical report of the National
Commission on Excellence in Education, Mondale has proposed a new program of $11
billion in Federal aid to local school districts. He also supports even tougher
enforcement of the Voting Rights and Environmental Protection Acts.

The first risk in Mondale's ''mainstream strategy'' is that not all the pieces
of the Democratic puzzle get along easily with one another and the possibility
of getting caught in a political cross fire is large. The second risk is that
pleasing all of those constituencies sufficiently to win the Democratic
nomination might well leave Mondale looking overpromised when the electoral base
widens in the general election.

Mondale dismisses the second of those risks. ''I want everybody to repair to my
cause,'' he says, ''the labor movement, minorities, the Jewish community,
farmers, students, everybody. I'm trying to get all the support I can get. I
don't think there's anything tawdry or sinister about it. There's a new theory I
hear that the only way I can justify my position is to spend the next year
offending people who would like to support me. That's a theory of politics I
don't intend to participate in.''

The first of those risks, however, has already ceased being speculation and has
become a prominent early chapter in Mondale-for-President history. The place is
Chicago and the date March 27, Palm Sunday. Mondale is here campaigning with the
black Democratic mayoral candidate Harold Washington. In the primary election,
Mondale backed Richard M. Daley, one of Washington's white opponents, and when
Mondale first called to offer his help in the general election, Washington took
eight days to return the call.  Their campaign staffs eventually arranged
today's half-day of joint appearances.

Everything goes as planned until Mondale's and Washington's 11:30 A.M. drop-in
at the Palm Sunday services of St. Pascal's, on the city's largely Polish
northwest side. It is the kind of white working-class neighborhood where Mondale
is thought to be strong and Washington is known to be worse than weak. When
their campaign caravan stops 100 yards up the street from St. Pascal's, 150
demonstrators favoring Bernard Epton, a millionaire lawyer and businessman, and
carrying ''EPTON'' posters are waiting on the church's front steps. The next 15
minutes provide the raw material for a 15-second film clip that will run over
and over again during the following week as the Chicago election becomes a lead
story on the evening news. All of it features Walter Mondale, trapped in a
political no-man's land between two warring factions, both of whose votes he
hopes to corner.

The clip begins with Mondale and Washington making their way between angry
demonstrators in the company of the parish priest.  Shouts of ''baby killers''
and ''not in our church'' are drowned on the sound track by chants of ''Epton,
Epton, Epton.'' In St. Pascal's outer lobby, Mondale and Washington are shown
huddling while their campaign aides decide whether to go inside - thereby
disrupting the service - or simply backtrack to their cars and leave. Off
camera, a teen-age girl 10 feet from Mondale is shouting at him. She has run in
from the church's Easter pageant rehearsal and is dressed in a fluffy, pink
head-to-toe bunny costume, complete with floppy pink ears. ''This is a church,''
she screams. ''This is a church.'' The final sequence in the next week's film
clip is shot from the front and shows Mondale and Washington, having decided to
leave, descending the church steps with the taunting crowd massed on all sides.
As he has throughout, Mondale appears contained, jowly, tired and dignified.

After the camera is off, Washington and Mondale walk on opposite sides of the
cars. Most of the hubbub follows Washington. For a moment, Mondale is by himself
on the edge of the crowd and he is approached by a middle-aged man identifying
himself as ''a Norwegian.'' The Norwegian is furious. ''I'm ashamed of you,
Mondale,'' he shouts. ''What'd Washington's people ever do for us?'' Mondale
ignores the comment. Several seconds later, two younger men step up and address
him as ''Mr. Vice President.'' They want to shake his hand and Mondale obliges
before driving off between two lines of bobbing Epton posters.

An hour later, Mondale is at O'Hare Airport, headed for a week's rest back on
Lowell Street and then a push in Massachusetts for the state party convention
straw poll there on April 9. Mondale will win in Massachusetts by a fat margin
and on April 12 Harold Washington will win by a slim one in Chicago. By then, a
dilemma similar to Chicago is brewing in Philadelphia, where a black, W. Wilson
Goode, is running against a white, former Mayor Frank L. Rizzo, in the
Democratic Mayor's primary, which Goode later wins. This time, Mondale made no
endorsement. According to several published reports, his heart was with Goode
but his two principal Philadelphia fund-raisers were backing Rizzo.

It is hard to please all of your friends at once and, leaving Chicago on March
27, Mondale seems relieved to be rid of the obligation for at least the moment.
He is glad to be offstage and headed home. In the airport, a reporter he knows
approaches him, looking for a quote about what happened at St. Pascal's.
''What'd you think?'' the reporter asks, motioning vaguely back in the direction
of the city.

Mondale shakes his head as he answers. ''That was somethin','' he says, ''wasn't
it?'' His response is the same as after the adulation of Atlanta 19 days
earlier, only this time there is no hint of self-satisfaction in his voice.
Chicago has been an object lesson and, despite his folksy nonchalance, Walter
Mondale takes such lessons very seriously. He hears the footsteps behind him,
even if it is too early in the race to tell if they are his own or someone
else's.

SIDEBAR

HE shape of Walter Mondale's campaign for the Democratic Presidential
nomination, like those of his competitors, has been dictated by a series of
mid-term 1982 ''reforms'' drastically reshuffling the political calendar for
1984. The new arrangement is commonly described as ''front loaded'' and the
description is, if anything, an understatement. Between Feb. 27 and the end of
March 1984, nine states plan to hold primaries and 20 binding caucuses, at which
46 percent of the delegates to the national convention are to be chosen.

In 1980, only 2 percent had been. This ''reformed'' calendar rewards the weight
of sheer logistical mass more than any in recent political memory. The
possibilities of a dark horse emerging after early victories are less than
minimal, and Mondale's strategists estimate that those first 10 weeks of 1984
will cost at least $4 million above campaign overhead. It is already considered
far too late to seriously enter the race.

As of March 31, 1983, the $2 million raised by Mondale for President was nearly
twice as much as raised by his nearest competitor. All 50 states have
contributed to him, but New York, California, Minnesota, Florida, Maryland and
the District of Columbia are his leading sources. Full-time fund-raisers are
stationed in New York City, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Minneapolis, Washington
and Boston.

The Mondale campaign projects raising $26 million in contributions and Federal
matching funds over the next 18 months and, when the next Federal Election
Commission reports are filed, on the last day of this month, expects to have a
cumulative total of between $4 million and $4.5 million.

Mondale's net disbursements are also almost twice those of his nearest
competitor, and his campaign currently employs 90 staff members and 10
independent consultants, many of them veterans of the two Carter-Mondale
campaigns or the Mondale Vice Presidency.  Campaign organizers are stationed in
10 states. Though national preference polls mean little this early in the race,
Mondale has led his current competitors in all except one of those published
since December 1982.

Prior to the official formation of Mondale for President early this year, his
campaign in effect existed as the Committee for the Future of America, a
Political Action Committee whose role culminated in the 1982 elections. Though
he now repeatedly denounces the influence of PACs on the political process, in
its two years of existence, Mondale's Committee for the Future of America raised
and spent $2 million, financed much of Mondale's considerable travel, and
contributed $224,000 to 178 Democratic House and Senate candidates.  By virtue
of that 1982 effort and his years of party spadework when Vice President,
Mondale has also started this race with a significant lead in favors owed and
favorable impressions made among the ''party activists'' his campaign sees as
central to the ''leadership process.''

The campaign leadership responsible for Mondale's early lead is full of faces
with which he is by and large very familiar:

JAMES A. JOHNSON, 39, acting campaign chairman, sits at the apex of the
organization. A Minnesotan and a Norwegian, his Public Strategies consulting
firm has its Washington office within those of Winston & Strawn, Mondale's law
firm. Johnson began working for Mondale in 1972 and helped set up the abortive
Presidential effort of 1974. In 1976, he was deputy director of the
Vice-Presidential campaign and then Mondale's executive assistant in the White
House.

RICHARD MOE, 47, counselor and senior political adviser, first worked for
Mondale in 1972 as his Senate administrative assistant. He directed the 1976
Vice Presidential campaign and then served as Mondale's chief of staff in the
White House.

JOHN R. REILLY, 55, counselor and senior political adviser, has, like Moe, no
staff role. He is a senior partner in Winston & Strawn's Washington office. He
and Mondale first met in 1959 when Reilly was working for John Kennedy. Reilly
supported Mondale's 1974 efforts and traveled with him during the 1976 and 1980
general elections.

MICHAEL S. BERMAN, 44, campaign treasurer, has been with Mondale since 1964,
when Mondale was chairman of the Minnesota Johnson-Humphrey campaign. Long
considered Mondale's craftiest political operative, Berman was counsel during
the Vice Presidency.  Like Moe and Johnson, he is from Minnesota.

ROBERT G. BECKEL, 34, campaign manager, is the inner circle's only newcomer. He
ran Texas for Carter in 1980, and in the Carter White House was in charge of
Congressional liaison for State Department issues. He is now the Mondale
campaign's principal daily overseer and nuts-and-bolts man.

MAXINE ISAACS, 35, deputy campaign manager and press secretary, started in
Mondale's Senate office in 1973. She was deputy press secretary for the Vice
Presidency and campaign press secretary in 1980.

REBECCA MCGOWAN, 35, deputy campaign manager and executive assistant, started on
Joan Mondale's staff in 1976 and then became director of scheduling and advance
for the Vice President's office. She now does essentially the same job that
Johnson did for Mondale in the White House.

The strategy developed by Mondale for President to maintain and maximize his
early advantages has six basic tenets:

1. Accelerate the pace of campaigning. Mondale's strategists believe they can
sap the competition by forcing them to spend their resources early and often.
They expect that logistics alone may well make it a two-person race before the
end of the year, certainly by April of 1984. As things currently stand, that
second candidate looks to be John Glenn. Though the Ohio Senator's campaign
apparatus has been slow at putting together the ground floor of a national
effort, Glenn's astronaut past lends his candidacy a celebrity sufficient to
nullify a lot of his organizational shortcomings.

2. Nationalize the contest. Mondale's campaign has sought to make everyone run
all over the country from the outset, thereby dispersing his opponents' efforts
at concentrated organizing and, at the same time, using Mondale's strength in
some very visible states to lever open others.

3. Focus on the future. The Democratic showing in 1980 was a disaster and it was
led by a ticket on which Walter Mondale was No. 2. The less Jimmy Carter is
talked about, the better. The issue the Mondale campaign wants to talk about is
what to do now, not what was done back then.

4. Sharpen Mondale's contrasts with Reagan. It is believed by Mondale's
strategists that Democrats want a clear option to Reagan and that accentuating
those numerous differences is a key to winning.

5. Emphasize the difficulties of the Presidency. Mondale's four years in the
White House under Jimmy Carter have left him with a reservoir of on-the-job
training none of his Democratic competitors can match. The more difficult the
job is perceived to be, the more attractive Walter Mondale's experience will
seem.

6. Underscore the Democratic Party consensus. The Mondale campaign believes that
there is both a fundamental set of agreements underlying the party and that he
is the candidate most naturally suited to represent them. Mondale must run as
the candidate of all of the party and has done so since the beginning.  F all
the various Democratic Party constituencies to which Mondale hopes his
mainstreamness will appeal, none is more strategically positioned this year than
the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Having felt its influence was squandered in previous elections
by mak-ing no endorsement in the primaries, organized labor intends in this
election to endorse a candidate by late this year. Most experts use that
labor-movement endorsement to mark the opening of serious campaigning, and no
one is in a better position to win it than Mondale. Such is Mondale's advantage
with labor that all the other candidates except Alan Cranston seem to be
effectively ceding him the endorsement. Mondale's strongest bloc in the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. is the United Automobile Workers, the largest of its member
unions. To them, ''Fritz'' is ''a known commodity'' who has been ''with us'' for
a long time. The value of labor's endorsement, however, may well be mixed, and
the same may be true for a number of the other interest-group endorsements
Mondale seeks.  Unions are a decided negative among some sections of the
electorate and, in recent years, union leaders have had problems delivering the
vote of their membership in Presidential elections. Mondale wants their support
anyway. ''If I can get organized labor for me,'' he says, ''I'll be proud of it.
I don't see how a President can affect to lead this country without their trust.
I've been fighting for the rights of working men and women all my life. I think
I've got a good argument.''

As popular as Mondale's approach has proven with the U.A.W. and others, it is,
of course, not without its critics. The longest running criticisms of Mondale
focus on his political caution. Perhaps the most angry of those was made by a
Minnesota D.F.L. activist in 1967. When informed that Mondale had had his
appendix removed, the activist hoped out loud that ''they put some guts in
before they sewed him back up.'' In 1974, another D.F.L. official struck
something of the same note. ''We had a lot of tough fights back there,'' he
noted, referring to Minnesota, ''but somehow Fritz always managed to slip out
and disappear ... When the wind is blowing against him, he likes to wait for a
more favorable tide.''

Mondale dismisses such criticism as more concerned with style than substance.
''I'm not suicidal,'' he retorts. ''You can't take on every issue, you have to
husband your resources. At the same time, I challenge anybody to look at my
record over the last 20 years and tell me anybody else who's been in more
controversial issues than I have.'' N the present tense, both Mondale's campaign
and its approach receive criticism as well. Most of it is still given on a
not-for-attribution basis. A typical complaint is voiced by a former staff
member at the Carter White House who is not currently a Mondale supporter. ''You
know,'' he says about Mondale, ''I've watched him over a long period of time and
there is no doubt he's one of the most decent people in politics. At the same
time it's no accident that I chose to work for someone else. I don't think
Mondale understands what has happened in this country. He's a conventional
Democratic politician who still believes the whole is equal to the sum of its
parts. He's the product of an earlier time. He's not capable of disentangling
himself from the ritual dance of nomination. He sees everything in isolated
constituencies.''

All of those criticisms and more will no doubt amplify.  Frontrunners must be
attacked to be beaten. It seems to be Walter Mondale's nomination to lose - at
least until Iowa starts the caucusing process, 254 days from now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Walter Mondale (Pages 30 and 31) photos of
Walter Mondale on campaign trail (Pages 28 and 29) photos of Walter Mondale
photo of Michael Berman (Page 55) photo of Richard Moe (Page 55) photo of John
Reilly (Page 55) photo of James Johnson (Page 55)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR DEBATE SHATTERS CATHOLIC PANEL

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words


HARTFORD FOR the Roman Catholics of America, from the cardinals and bishops to
the faithful in the parishes, these are days of great ferment and debate about
peace, war and nuclear weapons.

But here in the Archdiocese of Hartford, there is a silence. It is not the
silence of the apathetic, but of some of the people most impassioned on such
subjects, the clergy and laity who had composed the archdiocese's Justice and
Peace Commission.

Nine of the 18 members of the voluntary, advisory commission resigned late last
year. The commission has fallen into limbo since then, full of promises, but
without specific plans, for its revival.

And its travails, current and former members say, may foreshadow the ideological
tug-of-war for American Catholics set in motion by the passage on May 3 of the
bishops' pastoral letter. The letter, denouncing nuclear war and calling upon
Catholics to help rid the world of nuclear weapons, is now to be taught and
discussed in churches across the land.

Such a discussion failed here. On one side, its participants were a commission
largely composed of pacifists and on the other, their Archbishop, John F.
Whealon. Archbishop Whealon voted for the pastoral letter, but had earlier
defended certain defensive uses of nuclear weapons. Whether the Archbishop
disliked dissent or whether the commission marched askew from mainstream
Catholic opinion - both arguments are heard often in retrospect - the result was
the demise of the dialogue.

''It was a failure and a public failure,'' Archbishop Whealon said, ''and I
don't relish that. The general Catholic community must realize that we are
pluralistic. We need to have cooperation with one another and understanding of
one another.''

Sister Judith Beaumont, a nun who resigned from the commission, spoke of larger
problems.  ''Every time I speak at a church about peace issues,'' she said, ''I
get two constant rebuttals: 'What about the Soviets?' and 'What about our jobs?'
Those two things are so ingrained. Bringing the Gospel to bear on them is going
to be tough. And I learned that first-hand through the commission.''

Indeed, few areas of the country so compress the range of Catholic thought as
the archdiocese, which serves the 850,000 Catholics in Hartford, New Haven and
Litchfield Counties.

On one hand, the archdiocese is a seat of activism, from Auxiliary Bishop Peter
Rosazza's advocacy of a nuclear-weapons freeze to protests and vandalism of the
Electric Boat shipyard in the adjacent Norwich diocese. Last August, the Rev.
Edmund S. Nadolny, director of the archdiocese's Office of Radio and Television,
was evicted during a speech by President Reagan in Hartford after displaying a
sign calling for a nuclear-weapons freeze.

Yet from the muskets of Eli Whitney to the Trident submarines of Electric Boat,
the Connecticut economy and the paychecks for thousands of households have
depended on defense.

Against such a spectrum of opinion, the Justice and Peace Commission was formed
in 1980 by Christopher Grannis and Arthur Laffin, two laymen with liberal
beliefs. Most of the subsequent nominees to the commission also were activists,
veterans of the antiwar and civil-rights struggles.

Archbishop Whealon approved their nominations - in part, he said, because he
disdained ''giving a political test'' to nominees. But the results soon
displeased him.

''The commission was not balanced from the beginning,'' he said.  ''I received a
commission that was predominantly pacifist and predominantly advancing the
strong convictions the members had and was not willing easily to accept my
teachings.''

A few conservatives named to the commission left in frustration in its first
year.  ''I thought they were in line with the Berrigans,'' said J.F.
Chamberland, a former member. ''I asked if it was a prerequisite for a member to
be arrested before.''

Before resigning, Mr. Chamberland had asked Archbishop Whealon to remove him.
''He just chuckled,'' Mr. Chamberland recalled, ''and said, 'We need someone
like you.' ''

But other commission members remember the difficulty of attracting
conservatives.  ''People who favor nuclear arms and support Reagan's policies in
Central America don't join justice commissions,'' said Sister Ethel Howley, a
nun who remains a member of the commission. ''If the country is moving in the
direction they want it to, they don't join.''

Archbishop Whealon had been unpopular with some of his priests and nuns for his
support of the Vietnam War. But he has also earned a reputation for tolerating
dissent around him, even from those as powerful as Auxilary Bishop Rosazza and
Father Nadolny. And his early problems with the commission resulted not from
intrusions, but from his distance.

The commission never received financing or a paid staff. It spent two years
developing rules and guidelines. Confusion persisted over exactly what it was to
do.

Archbishop Whealon envisioned it as a research organization of sorts, but
members sought a more active role. They held a mass after the death of Dorothy
Day, the Catholic activist, and a prayer vigil for the four Maryknoll nuns slain
in El Salvador. In both cases, commission members say, the Archbishop rebuked
them for acting in the name of the archdiocese without its sanction.

And in 1982, the commission sponsored a program to train draft counselors.
Archbishop Whealon, concerned that the forum would propound only a pacifist
viewpoint, balked at paying for it. He later relented and paid the $600 bill,
but an unpleasant residue remained for both sides - for his part, on the
commission's tendency to act on its own and on the commission's part, for his
after-the-fact opposition.

''We weren't told what our role was,'' said Sister Barbara Jenkins, a nun who
was the commission's chairman before resigning. ''But whenever we did something,
we were told it wasn't in our role or it hadn't worked before.''

Archbishop Whealon, however, said he could not closely monitor only one
commission out of 50 active in the archdiocese. ''I must pick good people and
trust them,'' he said. He said he continues to wonder why the trust system
failed in this case.

But one element involved the bishops' letter on nuclear war. The commission
suggested the Archbishop push for a statement calling the manufacture of all
weapons immoral - a clearly volatile stand in what is known as the ''Provision
State'' because of its defense contractors. The Archbishop, in his own public
letter on the weapons race, supported deterrence and some defensive use of
nuclear weapons. (Ironically, after the commission was moribund, the Archbishop
altered his stand to oppose any use of nuclear weapons.)

The commission and the archbishop further - and finally - parted on the issue of
civil disobedience. On July 5, 1982, Sister Beaumont was one of nine people
arrested for breaking into the Electric Boat shipyard and denting nuclear
warheads with a hammer. She was convicted of trespassing.

Told of the arrest, Archbishop Whealon canceled a public ceremony installing the
commission members. And he turned down the renomination of Sister Beaumont to
the commission for its 1983 term.

''Laws are to be obeyed,'' he said, ''and the church ought to give good examples
of that. And I regard a member of an archdiocesan commission as being a
representative of the church.''

''Normally,'' Sister Beaumont said. ''I would agree. But we acted in obedience
to divine law, to 'Thou shalt not kill,' to Isaiah saying, 'Beat swords into
plowshares.' That law transcends the law of the State of Connecticut.''

With that issue still simmering, nine members of the commission resigned on Dec.
10, 1982. The commission has not met since.  Archbishop Whealon said he would
like to revive the commission ''when things have settled down nicely.'' In the
mean time, he has sent letters to all the past members asking how the commission
could be improved.

''I have to admit I'm still trying to write back,'' said Sister Jenkins. ''I've
got six hand-written pages now. There's a need for a Justice and Peace
Commission and if you can't have one, it says something about the archdiocese.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev. Edmund Nadolny (page 16) photo of Sister
Judith Beaumont (page 16)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. GENERALS ARE LEERY OF LATIN INTERVENTION

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


With unusual unanimity, senior generals of the United States Army say they
oppose any American military intervention in Central America without the clear,
unequivocal support of Congress and the people.

This message is being conveyed by some in public and by others in conversations
with politicians, academic figures and journalists.  The point has been made
publicly by Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and
by Gen. Edward C. Meyer, who is to retire soon as Army Chief of Staff. Similar
views have been expressed in interviews by Gen. Wallace Nutting, former head of
the Southern Command in Panama; Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, NATO's Supreme Commander
in Europe, and Gen. William C. Westmoreland, now retired, who was the American
commander in Vietnam.

All these generals, and many more who gave their views but did not want to be
identified, served in Vietnam, and their attitude reflects the scars the Vietnam
experience left on the Army.

As in other cases, when the Army smashed the Tet offensive, the military gain
was outweighed by the widespread belief that the offensive had been a triumph
for the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong.

Worries About Morale

In addition, the Vietnam intervention seriously harmed morale in what was by
1970 mainly a draft army. Except in frontline battalions, morale eroded.

Today the Army is a volunteer force with a high degree of professionalism. The
generals ask how long that professionalism would stand up under a barrage of
criticism from politicians and repudiation by public opinion.

All the generals see danger in any victory for leftist elements in El Salvador
or in the expansion of Nicaraguan military power throughout the region. General
Vessey said recently, ''We already have too many Soviet-supported Communist
Governments in this hemisphere, and we don't need any more.''

He added that neither he nor the civilian leaders in the Defense Department
''advocate introducing United States combat forces to try to implement an
American military solution to the problems of Central America.''

The generals and staff officers in the Pentagon do not see the Central American
situation as a peculiarly military one. Rather they stress that the region's
problems are economic, political, social and military.

In some countries, they say, the military problem is the least important. In
others, El Salvador at the moment, they view it as reflecting underlying
economic and social strains.

Local Support Is Doubted

In such situations, the generals say, wholehearted support of the local
populations for United States intervention would be questionable. Some officers
suggested that the appearance of even one American brigade in El Salvador would
push the peasants toward the leftist insurgents, who would call the arrival of
the troops another example of ''Yankee imperialism.''

The generals say that any military intervention should be considered only after
the Administration has identified the political goals and stated the military
objectives. At the same time, they say, the public must understand the cost to
the country in military manpower, money and time.

General Westmoreland said any Congressional resolution supporting intervention,
such as the Gulf of Tonkin resolution in the Vietnam War, should be renewed
annually after careful scrutiny of the situation by political and military
leaders.

To General Meyer, sending the 82d Airborne Division to El Salvador would not be
a solution.  The solution he and other generals see is continued, intensive
training of El Salvador's army and a revitalization of its general staff. They
said the 55 advisers assigned to El Salvador were not enough. They suggested
that the assignment of 100 more to Honduras to train Salvadorans and Hondurans
would give some ground for confidence in the future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VETERAN PLEADS CASE TO CONGRESSMEN

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 20


A Vietnam War veteran honored for valor by President Reagan denounced the
Administration today for cutting off his Social Security disability benefits and
said his plight typified the experience of many Americans.

Testifying before the House Select Committee on Aging, Roy P.  Benavidez, a
retired master sergeant who was awarded the Medal of Honor by Mr. Reagan in
February 1981, said, ''The Administration that put this medal around my neck is
curtailing my benefits.''

Mr. Benavidez said Social Security officials had concluded that he was able to
work even though he had two pieces of shrapnel in his heart, both arms and legs
were ''severely impaired,'' one lung was punctured and he had ''constant pain.''
Mr. Benavidez was wounded when he ventured into a dense jungle, under heavy
gunfire, to rescue eight comrades in the Army Special Forces near Loc Ninh,
Vietnam, in 1968.

He Talks of 'Insult'

The citation with his medal said Mr. Benavidez, of El Campo, Tex., had performed
''daring and extremely valorous actions'' while wounded in the face, head,
stomach, back, leg and thigh.

Referring to other people who had lost disability benefits in the Federal effort
to remove ineligible people from the rolls, Mr.  Benavidez said: ''I and 350,000
others have been insulted. We feel like third-class citizens.''

Paul B. Simmons, Deputy Commissioner of Social Security, defended the
Administration's record at the hearing, but acknowledged that ''mistakes have
been made.'' He said the disability reviews began in March 1981 under the terms
of a law enacted in 1980. ''Lax program administration in the 1970's had
permitted large numbers of ineligible people, as many as one in five of those on
the rolls, to get on, and stay on the rolls of this $18 billion program,'' Mr.
Simmons said.

Mr. Benavidez said he did not consider himself a hero, but hoped his case would
draw attention to the plight of the many people whose benefits had been
terminated by ''what appears to be a callous and unfair review system.''

White House Asked for Review

After reading about Mr. Benavidez's case, White House officials asked Margaret
M. Heckler, Secretary of Health and Human Services, to seek a solution to
problems in the disability program. On June 7, she announced changes that she
said would make the program more ''humane and compassionate.'' But J. Thomas
Burch Jr., a lawyer for Mr.  Benavidez, said the changes would not have helped
his client.

Representative Edward R. Roybal, a California Democrat who is chairman of the
Committee on Aging, said state officials had begun to register ''strong
objections'' to the policies and guidelines established for disability reviews.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, a Democrat, said the Government was giving the
states ''no leeway,'' and he added, ''The administration of this program has
been characterized as reducing abuse, but is little more than a cost-control
program without regard to human consequences.''

State Senator Jack H. Backman of Massachusetts, the chairman of a commission
investigating the Social Security program in that state, said Federal officials
were ''unfairly and illegally cutting benefits to more than 5,000 disabled
citizens of Massachusetts.''

Gov. James B. Hunt Jr. of North Carolina, a Democrat, in a letter to Mr. Roybal,
said benefits should not be halted ''unless a recipient's medical condition has
clearly improved.'' Social Security officials oppose that standard, saying new
medical technology permits some disabled people to work even if their conditions
have not improved.

The Senate last week approved a proposal by Senator John Heinz, Republican of
Pennsylvania, that would bar the halting of benefits to anyone previously
diagnosed as having a mental disability. The moratorium would last at least six
months and would end only when new criteria had been developed to evaluate
mental disorders.

Under the existing criteria, Mr. Heinz said, people with suicidal tendencies,
severe depression and other mental disorders have lost their benefits because
they were able to perform a few simple chores such as boiling an egg or feeding
a pet. Under his proposal, the Government would have to use a qualified
psychiatrist or psychologist when evaluating mental disorders. Congressional
investigators have found that disability decisions were routinely made by people
with little training in psychiatry or psychology.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roy Benavidez

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ALMOST 1,000 ARRESTED IN NUCLEAR WEAPONS PROTEST

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words

DATELINE: LIVERMORE, Calif., June 20


More than 950 people were arrested today while trying to blockade entrances to
the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, where most American nuclear weapons
are developed, in the largest of several demonstrations, coast to coast, for
disarmament.

Thousands of people in at least 18 states demonstrated against the Reagan
Administration's policies on nuclear arms in a coordinated protest called
Disarmament Action Day that was sponsored by a coalition of groups that want the
United States to halt the development and deployment of nuclear weapons.

About 410 demonstrators were arrested in West Milton, N.Y., Groton and New
London, Conn., Burlington, Vt., Kirtland Air Force Base, N.M., Rolling Meadows,
Ill., Madison, Wis., Grants Pass, Ore., and San Diego, Santa Cruz and Point
Mugu, Calif.

Officers Were Usually Waiting

At most of the weapons facilities that were the targets of the demonstration,
law-enforcement agencies had known of the impending demonstration for weeks, and
officers were waiting to arrest those who violated laws by tresspassing,
interfering with traffic or obstructing the authorities.

About 2,500 Californians, from pre-teen-agers to people in their 80's, joined
the protest at Livermore, which at times had the atmosphere of a carnival.

A brass band played ''We Shall Overcome'' to a march tempo, and the crowd
chanted ''The whole world is watching'' and held balloons and anti-war placards
in the air. The demonstrators arrived in groups, sat down in the middle of the
rural roads leading to the weapons laboratory, clasped hands and refused to
allow workers' cars to pass.

Almost as quickly as they sat, they were removed by a force of nearly 1,000
blue-helmeted officers of the California Highway Patrol, Alameda County
sheriff's deputies and officers borrowed from nearby police departments.

Waves of Arrests

Moments after one file of demonstrators was arrested, another took their places,
and they, too, were arrested. The process continued for more than six hours.

''We have to speak up, we have to put our bodies on the line,'' said Lanie
Silver of San Francisco, moments before being handcuffed, searched and led to
one of scores of school buses. The protesters were taken several miles to a
medium-security prison, where several huge red and white tents had been pitched
to await the demonstrators.

''We can make a difference,'' said Marcie Lang, a graduate student who said she
had marched more than a decade in protests against the Vietnam War. ''It took
time, but I think we stopped the war, and I think we can do it again.''

Women appeared to outnumber men among the demonstrators by about 3 to 1. More
than half of those interviewed said they had never before participated in such a
protest. Most said that they had decided to join because their fears of a
nuclear holocaust had increased under the Reagan Administration and because they
felt the Administration was too inflexible in seeking an agreement with the
Soviet Union to control arms.

One year ago today. about 3,000 people demonstrated at the laboratory, and 1,216
were arrested.

One Refuses to Give Name

A group of about 15 demonstrators, whose ages ranged upward from 60, marched
behind a sign that read ''Elders for Survival.'' One member refused to give her
name to arresting officers, saying only that she was ''Jane Doe.'' When she was
asked by a reporter why had refused to give her name and why she had decided to
violate the law, she said:

''Not giving my name is another way I have to show my civil disobedience. I
supported the nuclear freeze amendment in California, but the Administration
paid no attention to us. The United States talks about a survivable, winnable
nuclear war. It's all balderdash.''

In anticipation of the demonstration, many of the 7,400 employees drove to the
laboratory before the demonstrators began their attempt at 6 A.M. to blockade
the center for nuclear weapons development.

Workers Wait for Clear Path

Many of those who came after 6 o'clock sat in their cars, reading paperback
novels or the morning newspaper, until the police cleared a path for them to
enter the center, which is set on more than 600 bucolic acres 50 miles southeast
of San Francisco and surrounded by rolling hills and fields that grow alfalfa
and fine white wine grapes.

Roger Batzel, the director of the laboratory, which is operated for the
Department of Energy by the University of California, said that about 85 percent
of its employees showed up for work before noon today and that the effects of
the demonstration ''had been minimal.''

He and other administrators of the laboratory, whose work is highly classified,
made themselves easily available to reporters and repeatedly said that they had
no moral reservations about working on nuclear weapons.

Asked what effect the presence of the protesters had had on the weapon
designers, he said he suspected that it might make some become more reflective
about the nature on their work. But for most, he said: ''One of the things you
find is that it draws people together. It causes them to re-examine their
position and decide again that what they are doing is important to deter''
nuclear war.

Protests at Several Sites

Two other demonstrations resulted in more than 100 arrests today.  One was at
the Groton, Conn., shipyard operated by the Electric Boat Company, where the
Navy's Trident nuclear missile-launching submarines are built, and the other at
the gates of the General Electric Company in Burlington, Vt.

Besides California, demonstrations took place in Connecticut, Florida, Idaho,
Illinois, Iowa, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, Oregon,
Rhode Island, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Washington and Wisconsin, United Press
International reported.

Dr. Benjamin Spock, the antiwar activist and child-care specialist, who was
among several people who gathered in a quiet protest near the United Nations in
Manhattan, asserted that President Reagan ''disbelieves in disarmament'' and
that Americans ''must impress upon him that he will be less and less supported''
if he continues his present arms policies.

Eighteen arrests were made at Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory, which is operated
by General Electric in West Milton, N.Y.  Other arrests included 37 people at
the Northrop Corporation Defense Systems Division plant in Rolling Meadows,
Ill.; 34 people at the Ballast Point Submarine Base, near San Diego; 33 at a
Lockheed Plant near Santa Cruz, Calif., and 31 at Kirtland Air Force Base, N.M.

Fifteen protesters were arrested in front of an aircraft guidance system plant
in Grants Pass, Ore.; 12 at the Point Mugu Naval Air Station in Ventura County,
Calif., and 12 at the British Trident office in New London, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of antinuclear protestors (page A1) photo of
demostrator being arrested

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, JUNE 21, 1983

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


International

The Pope praised the achievements of the outlawed Solidarity union and declared
that the events it had set in motion were of a ''moral,'' nonviolent nature.
John Paul II, speaking to about a million people in a vast field outside the
Polish city of Katowice, said that ''these events concerned above all the moral
order itself regarding human labor and not only wage increases.'' (Page A1,
Column 6.)

''He has fulfilled his task completely,'' according to a man from Gdansk,
basking in Poznan in the presence of Pope John Paul II. ''He came here and did
good.'' A group of 760 people from Gdansk, where Solidarity was founded,
stressed how pleased they were at the way the Pope's visit had become a
political event. (A1:5.)

National

An accord on a new Federal budget totaling $860 billion was reached by House and
Senate negotiators. The figure has already been denounced by the White House as
''out of line and off base.'' The compromise calls for $12 billion in new taxes
in the first year and $73 billion over three years. Military spending would rise
5 percent after inflation and domestic spending would exceed President Reagan's
requests by about $22 billion. (A1:2.)

The President warned that rejection of his Central American policy could result
in ''a tidal wave of refugees swarming into our country.'' Mr. Reagan spoke in
Jackson, Miss. (A14:1-2.)

The idea of a black aspirant for the Democratic Presidential nomination was
approved by a group of black civil rights and political leaders meeting in
Chicago. But the conferees declined to endorse the Rev. Jesse Jackson and said
they would not support a specific aspirant now. (A1:3-4.)
Thousands protested the arms policy of the Reagan Administration in
demonstrations around the country. More than 830 people were arrested while
trying to blockade entrances to a Livermore, Calif., laboratory where most
United States nuclear weapons are developed. (A14:2-5.)

A Vietnam veteran honored for valor by President Reagan denounced the
Administration for halting his Social Security disability benefits and told a
House committee that his plight typified the experience of many Americans. The
veteran, Roy P. Benavidez, won the Medal of Honor. (A14:1-3.)

The exposure of luggage to a dog trained to detect narcotics is constitutional
but the police may hold the luggage only briefly, the Supreme Court ruled. The
Justices held that taking luggage from a traveler is an ''investigatory
detention'' that is subject to constitutional limitations. (A21:1-3.)

Company medical plans must cover the pregnancies of employees' wives to the same
extent that they cover all other dependents' medical expenses, under a Supreme
Court ruling. The Justices held, 7 to 2, that a failure to provide comparable
coverage for dependents' pregnancies constitutes illegal discrimination.
(A21:1.)

Larry Nelson won the 83d United States Open championship by one shot from Tom
Watson, last year's golf champion. The scores were fourunder-par 280 for Nelson
and 281 for Watson, who missed a 6-foot par putt at 17. (B5:1-6)

The Challenger astronauts switched on and tested scientific experiments on a
West German satellite in the third day of their sixday mission. Flight
controllers said that the health of the space shuttle and its five-person crew
was excellent. (C3:1-6.)

New understanding of stress and how it can precipate heart disease and sudden
death, even in people who seem outwardly calm, has been gleaned by specialists
at the University of Nebraska's Life Stress Simulation Laboratory. Their studies
revealed that the calm exterior of a heart-attack victim belied hidden chaotic
changes in his cardiovascular system whenever he was under stress. (C1:1.)

Metropolitan

An accord in an oil tax dispute was announced by Governor Cuomo. He said New
York State and major oil companies had reached a tentative out-of-court
settlement on a tax that has been in dispute since 1980. Under the agreement,
the oil companies would drop their court challenges to $200 million in taxes
already paid and would pay the state $355 million more over four years, while
the state would revise its taxes on the companies to meet some of their
objections. (A1:1.)

Two cable television companies said they were canceling plans to wire parts of
Brooklyn and Queens, charging that actions by New York City had changed the
basis of negotiations. However, a final contract was to be completed today, and
the city's Director of Franchises suggested that the two companies could change
their position or be replaced. (A1:3-4.)

Safeguards for New Jersey car buyers took effect under a bill signed by Governor
Kean. Under the ''lemon law,'' buyers will receive an equivalent car or a full
refund if the car bought cannot be repaired by the dealer under the warranty.
(B1:6.)

A surfeit of coaching vacancies plagues high schools in New York, New Jersey and
Connecticut each summer. As a result, schools go outside their teaching staffs
for coaches, hire coaches without teaching certificates, operate with fewer
coaches than needed and, increasingly, drop some athletic programs. (A1:1-3.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NELSON WINS OPEN BY 1 ON 62-FOOT BIRDIE PUTT

BYLINE: By GORDON S. WHITE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: OAKMONT, Pa., June 20


Larry Nelson waited patiently for 16 1/2 hours overnight after putting out on
the 15th hole late Sunday afternoon and then sank a 62-foot birdie putt on the
16th green this morning to win the 83d United States Open championship by one
shot over Tom Watson, last year's champion.

The scores were four-under-par 280 for Nelson and 281 for Watson, who missed a
6-foot par putt at 17.  The 35-year-old Nelson, who did not start playing golf
until he was 21, had been tied for the lead with Watson when a severe storm hit
at 5:29 P.M. Sunday. This forced the overnight postponement of the last few
holes for six golfers still on the 6,972-yard Oakmont Country Club course.

When they returned at 10 A.M. today, Nelson's first shot was a 4-wood drive to
the green of the 228-yard, par-3 16th. Watson was back on No.14 at the time.

Thoughts Before Sleeping

''All I thought of last night was getting my 4-wood tee shot onto the green,''
Nelson said. ''I didn't think about anything else in the tournament last
night.''

But even though he put his tee shot on the green, he pulled it, leaving himself
the lengthy downhill putt on what he said was ''the fastest green on the
course.''

''I just wanted to get close for the second putt,'' he said.  Instead, the
Georgian sank the downhill stroke. Then he parred the 17th and, despite three
putts for a bogey at No.18, finished with a final round of four-under-par 67 for
the title worth $72,000. His 132 over the last two rounds established a record
for the final 36 holes of the Open, a 10 under par that was four shots better
than anyone else had ever done.

Fatal Bogey at 17th

Watson failed to meet this challenge after the long delay when he two-putted at
14 for a par 4, parred the 15th and 16th and lost any chance to tie Nelson when
he missed the short putt after blasting out of a bunker at 17. He took a bogey
at that relatively easy, 322-yard, par-4 hole.

''I just pushed the 9-iron into the trap for one mistake and misread the putt
for another,'' Watson said.  Watson, who has seven major championships, finished
by sinking a 50-foot par putt at 18 for a 69. He would have needed to sink a
60-foot chip shot for a birdie with his sand wedge from back of the 18th green
to tie Nelson, who had finished moments earlier. But, unlike his spectacular
sand wedge chip into the cup at the 17th hole to win the 1982 Open, Watson's
last chip today slid way beyond the pin.

Nelson virtually catapulted himself from a tie for 25th spot to victory on one
of the most difficult courses ever used for an Open.  The deep, thick rough made
unusually treacherous by heavy rains twice during the tournament, did not lend
itself to such a record performance.

Credits 'Smart' Golf

But Nelson said: ''I think those were not necessarily the two best rounds I ever
played, but they were the smartest. I avoided the rough, hitting into it only
once in the final round when I hooked a 3-wood tee shot at 11 way back
yesterday. I selected the driving clubs wisely in order to avoid the rough.''

Nelson was seven shots behind the second-round co-leaders, John Mahaffey and
Joey Rassett, before starting his charge on Saturday. He had eight birdies and
two bogeys in the third round and six birdies and two bogeys in the final round.

Gil Morgan, who had to play out the 17th and 18th holes this morning, shot 283
and finished in third place, becoming the only other golfer to break par for the
72 holes.

Calvin Peete fell from one shot off the lead after three rounds and scored 286
to tie Seve Ballesteros of Spain for fourth.

Nelson's Sixth Victory

Nelson gained only his sixth victory since he joined the PGA Tour in 1974, just
six years after he took up golf. He won the Professional Golfers' Association
championship in 1981, and this victory was his first since then.

Hal Sutton was sixth at 287 and Lanny Wadkins seventh at 288.  Sutton had the
best score of those who finished the final round before the Sunday storm. Ray
Floyd, the sixth man on the course at the time of the suspension, finished at
293.

Asked to describe his successor as Open champion, Watson said, ''Larry is a
religious man and a streaky player.'' Nelson said: ''I pray a lot between shots,
yes. But I pray for peace. I don't pray to sink putts or hit to the pin. I pray
for peace so I can make the shot go in.

''I had a lot of peace during the last two rounds and, as a result, I could not
wait to get to the next tee or to get to the next shot to hit it. Some golfers
worry about getting to the next shot. But you don't if you have peace.''

Baseball Dream Goes Awry

Nelson took up golf shortly after a 90-day tour of battle duty as an infantry
sergeant in Vietnam.  ''Three days after I returned, I hurt my arm pitching in a
baseball game,'' Nelson said. ''That ended my baseball, and I took up golf. I
wanted to try to make it as a professional baseball player. I was a pretty good
infielder at short and third.''

Nelson, who is 5 feet 9 inches tall and 155 pounds, is not one of the long
hitters on the PGA Tour, but he is one of the 10 most accurate. He showed it by
staying out of the dangerous rough more than his closest rivals.

Nelson celebrated his 16th wedding anniversary with his wife, Gayle, after the
first round Thursday.  He celebrated again today because of the way he putted at
No.16, after more than 16 hours of waiting in the first United States Open ever
decided before noon on the final day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Larry Nelson photo of Tom Watson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 22, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILES DESTROYED BY A COMPANY TIED TO DIOXIN

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 498 words

DATELINE: UNIONDALE, L.I., June 21


A company that operated a former Newark chemical plant recently found to be
contaminated with dioxin ordered its employees around the country last month to
destroy unneeded company files and records, according to court arguments today.

A spokesman for the company, the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, confirmed that
employees were ordered on May 16 to dispose of documents by May 20, but he said
this related to commercial takeovers and other corporate business and not to any
investigation at the Newark plant. At the time state officials were checking the
site for dioxin.

David J. Deane, a lawyer for a group of Vietnam War veterans who are suing the
company and others in Federal District Court here over illness they say was
caused by the herbicide Agent Orange, said he was ''terribly distressed'' that
some of the documents lost might have dealt with dioxin contamination at the
Newark site and other places.

Denial by Company Spokesman

The spokesman for the company, Charles Yoakum, said it was not aware then of the
Newark inquiry and denied that any records destroyed pertained to it. He also
said that all records on the production of Agent Orange had been turned over to
the court.

''You have to be crazy to try and destroy records,'' Mr. Yoakum said.  But
Diamond Shamrock was asked to provide the court further information.  Sol
Schreiber, a special master appointed by Judge George C. Pratt Jr., asked a
Diamond Shamrock lawyer, Wendell Alcorn, to report back next week with more data
on which documents were destroyed and on when the company first learned of the
inquiry.

Mr. Schreiber said he considered the ''accusation'' against the company by Mr.
Deane ''very serious'' while adding that it remained not proven.

Memo Was Dated May 16

The memo ordering the disposal of the records was dated May 16 and signed by
C.E. Stewart, president of Diamond Shamrock's chemical unit.

It said in part: ''All files and records not needed in the performance of one's
job or required by law to be kept are to be discarded by Friday, May 20, 1983.
Files and records more than two years old are presumably not needed. This
applies to every Diamond Shamrock location (plants, research facilities,
offices.)''

The memo concluded: ''Compliance is mandatory. Overtime and temporary help are
being authorized to complete this assigment.'' It was on June 2, a little more
than two weeks after the recordsdisposal memo, that the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection announced the first results of dioxin tests taken on
April 15 on the grounds of a former Newark plant operated until 1969 by Diamond
Shamrock and a predecessor company, Diamond Alkali.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 22, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A CHAMPION AND HIS MILD MANNERS

BYLINE: By GORDON S. WHITE Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


Larry Nelson has a very calm outward appearance when playing golf, never
displaying the excitement or self-condemnation that players such as Seve
Ballesteros and Craig Stadler show at times of good shots or bad. The
35-year-old Nelson shows even less emotion than Tom Watson, for whom emotion is
usually a big smile.

On Monday morning, though, Nelson slipped out of character on his way to
becoming the United States Open champion in Oakmont, Pa. It happened when Nelson
sank a 62-foot putt on the 16th green at the Oakmont Country Club. As the ball
trickled toward the hole, he began to realize it was on target, and he broke
into a trot, following the ball toward the cup.

''I just couldn't stand there,'' Nelson said.  That putt helped Nelson to beat
Watson by one stroke. But what also may have helped was Nelson's ability to stay
unflustered during the rain-interrupted final round. After being forced to leave
the course after 15 holes Sunday afternoon because of a heavy storm, Nelson had
to sleep on the fact that he and Watson were tied for the lead going into
completion of the round Monday morning. Watson, the defending champion, was on
the 14th green.

''I pray for peace of mind,'' said Nelson, an openly religious man. ''I prayed
Sunday night. And, it was also a matter of faith.''

Unfazed by a Rain Delay

Unfazed by the delay, Nelson returned to tee off at the 16th at 10 A.M. Monday,
appearing just as businesslike as always on a golf course. And over the next
three holes he took care of the business of winning the Open for the first time.

Nelson was born on Sept. 10, 1947, in Fort Payne, Ala., but grew up near
Acworth, Ga. Arnold Palmer was also born on Sept. 10, 18 years earlier, but
unlike Palmer, who virtually grew up with a putter in his hand, Nelson never
gave golf a serious thought for the first 20 years of his life. His real love
was baseball. He was a fine baseball and basketball player at Acworth High
School and in junior college before being drafted into the Army in 1967.

''I was hoping to be a professional baseball player,'' Nelson said. ''I pitched
some but was too small to be a pitcher. I was a good infielder, though, and had
a good eye at the bat. I didn't get a lot of home runs but I didn't strike
out.''

Nelson is 5 feet 9 inches tall and weighs about 155 pounds.

Served in Vietnam

Early in 1968, Nelson was sent into battle as a sergeant of infantry, serving a
tour of duty in Vietnam. ''I was very fortunate over there and happened to come
back,'' he said.

Three days after he returned, Nelson was pitching in a baseball game and injured
his arm. Some time after that, at the age of 21, Nelson went to a driving range.
''I got bitten by the golf bug,'' he said.

He took a job in a Georgia country club pro shop and even tried the mini-tour
for a while. Rarely does a golfer develop as quickly as Nelson did. He earned
his player card for the PGA Tour only four years after he went to the driving
range. He started on the tour in January 1974.

''The first tournament I played on tour was the Andy Williams San Diego Open,''
Nelson said. ''I shot one under par for the first 36 holes and missed the cut by
one shot. That was when I realized it would not be easy out here on the tour. I
just wasn't ready.''

Nelson had been married for seven years when he went on the tour.  He and his
wife, Gayle, have two sons, who were born after Nelson started earning his
living on the tour. It has been a good, if not spectacular, living. He increased
his career earnings to $1.2 million with the $72,000 first prize in the Open. At
the end of 1982, Nelson's earnings were $1,110,982.

First Victory in 1979

Nelson did not gain his first victory until the Jackie Gleason-Inverrary Classic
in 1979. Then he won the Western Open in 1979. He had one victory in 1980 and
two in 1981, including the Professional Golfers' Association championship. He
had not won between the P.G.A. victory and the Open.

''I was a very consistent player between 1979 and 1982,'' he said.  ''But this
year I thought I was mentally gone. I was swinging well but I couldn't score.

''The older I get the more I realize what I can do and what it takes to do it.
My game was there for the Open, but it was really a matter of doing it mentally.
And it was the matter of faith.''

Nelson prefers to be alone with his family instead of making commercial
appearances as many other other golfers do. But he will make appearances that
are to his liking at towns where the PGA Tour stops. He had one of those
speaking engagements last night at a church in Memphis, where the Danny Thomas
Memphis Classic starts Thursday.

''I speak quite a bit to church groups around the country,'' he said. ''I enjoy
it.''

Nearing His Peak

After he won the Open, some observers placed Nelson in the category of champions
such as Lou Graham and Andy North, who won the 1975 and 1978 Opens,
respectively. Graham has only five other victories on the tour. North has not
won since his Open victory, the second of his career.

It may be too early to put such a tag on Nelson, who is only 14 years from his
first golf swing and at 35 is at the age when most golfers reach their peak -
skillfully and mentally. And, like Calvin Peete, Nelson makes up for lack of
distance with deadly accuracy. He ranks among the top 10 for driving down the
middle. Peete has been No.1 for accuracy off the tees for the last two years.

Nelson probably won't win too many tournaments on the big, wide tracks, such as
Augusta National, the Masters site, where length pays big dividends. But he may
win on Open-type courses where distance comes second to hitting it in fairways.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Larry Nelson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY CHIEF WANTED G.I. WEDDED TO HIS UNIT;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 664 words


Gen. Edward C. Meyer, who retires at the end of June after four years as Army
Chief of Staff, is credited by his peers and his subordinates with instituting
some of the most far-reaching changes in recent Army history.

The thrust of these changes was to inculcate greater coherence in individual
Army units up to the regimental level and to increase professionalism. In the
eyes of company, battalion and brigade commanders interviewed over the last six
months, General Meyer has done more than any recent Chief to rid the Army of the
turbulence in personnel that has affected many units since the end of the
Vietnam War.

One of the unfortunate legacies of that war was the constant movement of
officers and senior noncommissioned officers from unit to unit. Their tours of
duty were so short that they had little chance to acquaint themselves with the
men and their professional and personal problems.

The men themselves, from all parts the country, were without common geographical
or cultural backgrounds. ''A company five years ago was just so many men with no
group loyalty to the parent unit,'' a colonel said.

General Meyer's solution was the Cohort program, which led in time to the
revival of the regimental system.  The Cohort program aimed at creating
company-size units of about 120 men who would remain together for three years.
When possible, a company's members were drawn from the same region of the
country.

The last companies in the intial program will be trained in early 1984. By the
end of 1981, 20 Cohort companies had been trained and 11 had been sent overseas,
7 to the Seventh Army in West Germany and 4 to South Korea. Six more are now
being trained.

Though the system accounts for a small percentage of the active Army, it is
continuing and will expand.  General Meyer and his planners then tackled the
problem of unit rotation in the framework of a regimental system. A regiment,
totaling 3,000 men in three battalions of three companies each, is kept together
at home or overseas and returns to the same base in the United States. This
builds contacts with the base and with the civilians living around it. The
system is traditional in the British Army.

''A soldier's loyalty is to the primary group with which he identities and
interacts,'' the Army said. Stabilization in his regiment will ''overcome the
transitory nature of soldiers in units and will provide a solid basis for
cohesion and bonding.''

By June 1981 the Army had moved toward rotation of entire units between overseas
and United States bases. ''The key point,'' the service says, is ''to keep
soldiers together with their units longer, so they can train together, thus
improving combat effectiveness.''

Both the Cohort and regimental programs owe a good deal to the British system,
with its emphasis on geographical recruitment and keeping soldiers together
throughout their career.

That system has its weaknesses, which are exposed when a major unit is destroyed
or captured in war, as the Highland Division was in 1940 in France, resulting in
a shattering blow to civilian morale in Scotland. But it also inculcates a unit
pride that senior officers regard as the basis of battlefield morale.

On a larger scale General Meyer, since he was Deputy Chief of Staff for
Operations, has been one of the strongest advocates of forming the Rapid
Deployment Joint Task Force. His ideas on the force got little attention until
the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 forced the Pentagon to prepare for
possible action in the Persian Gulf.

Under General Meyer, the Army's Forces Command also instituted a system under
which the National Guard and the Reserves are trained with the active Army
command that they would fight with in war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Veterans' Agency Opposing Measures on Toxic Chemical

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


The Veterans Administration today opposed efforts by Vietnam veterans to win
compensation for diseases they believe were caused by Agent Orange, contending
that no link to the herbicide had been proved.

Dorothy Starbuck, the agency's benefits director, told the Senate Veterans
Affairs Committee there was no scientific link between Agent Orange and the
three diseases commonly associated with it: softtissue sarcoma, porphyria
cutanea tarda and chloracne.

She said the Veterans Administration's opposition was not based on potential
cost of three measures the committee was conidering.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 367 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 1983 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'TWILIGHT ZONE' IS ADAPTED TO THE BIG SCREEN

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 874 words


ROD SERLING'S phenomenally successful television series, ''The Twilight Zone,''
which had a five-year network run beginning in 1959 and which seems to have been
in reruns ever since, has now passed through its own twilight zone and become a
flabby, mini-minded behemoth called ''Twilight Zone - the Movie.''

The film, which opens today at the Sutton and other theaters, is composed of a
prologue, written for the movie, plus four separate stories, each of them either
based directly on a script from the television series or suggested by one. A lot
of money and several lives might have been saved if the producers had just
rereleased the original programs.

Of the four stories, the last, directed by George Miller, is tops, meaning that
it's pretty good. This tale, based on ''Nightmare at 20,000 Feet,'' is about a
tense airplane passenger who, during a night flight in a thunderstorm, looks out
his window and becomes convinced that some sort of creature is dismantling the
outboard engine.

Mr. Miller, the Australian director who demonstrated his talent for spectacular
action with ''The Road Warrior,'' does what he can with this limited material,
and John Lithgow is both legitimate and comic as the hysterical passenger.

The film's third segment, based on a tale called ''It's a Good Life,'' contains
a number of wildly eerie possibilities that are never satisfactorily developed.
Kathleen Quinlan plays an innocent young woman who finds herself drawn into a
macabre household whose inhabitants behave like Tom, Jerry, Bugs Bunny and other
cartoon characters that are forever playing on the screens of the house's dozens
of television sets. The master of the house is a sweetlooking, arbitrarily
vicious little boy, Anthony, played by Jeremy Licht.

Joe Dante, the director, never finds a style for the piece, which should somehow
combine the comic, the scary and the satirical. Trivia experts might note that
Billy Mumy, who played Anthony in the original teleplay, has a small role as an
adult in this film version.

Except for the central performance by Scatman Crothers, the film's second
segment, based on the episode called ''Kick the Can,'' is inept in every way. Of
all unlikely people, Steven Spielberg directed this rather ugly, sentimental
comedy set in an old-people's home.

John Landis, currently represented by the stylish ''Trading Places,'' is
responsible for the film's first segment, a muddled antibigotry lesson about a
fellow who hates blacks, Jews and Orientals. Through a series of ''Twilight
Zone'' twists of fate, the fellow finds himself being persecuted as a Jew in
Nazi-occupied France, lynched as a black by Ku Klux Klansmen in the South and
shot at as a Vietnamese by American soldiers in Vietnam.

It was while making this segment that Vic Morrow, who gives a good performance
as the bigot, and two Vietnamese children were killed in a production accident.

Mr. Landis also directed the film's prologue, which features Dan Aykroyd and
Albert Brooks. It's funny and extremely short.

''Twilight Zone - the Movie,'' which has been rated PG (''parental guidance
suggested''), contains some unrefined language.

Beyond Twilight
TWILIGHT ZONE - THE MOVIE, created by Rod Serling; music by Jerry Goldsmith;
produced by Steven Spielberg and John Landis; released by Warner Bros. At RKO
Twin, Broadway and 45th Street; Sutton, Third Avenue and 57th Street; 34th
Street Showplace, near Second Avenue; New York Twin, Second Avenue and 66th
Street and other theaters. Running time: 102 minutes. This film is rated PG.

PROLOGUE AND SEGMENT 1
Written and directed by John Landis; director of photography, Stevan Larner;
film editor, Malcolm Campbell.
Passenger . . . . . Dan Aykroyd
Driver . . . . . Albert Brooks
Bill . . . . . Vic Morrow
Larry . . . . . Doug McGrath
Ray . . . . . Charles Hallahan
Bar Patron . . . . . Steven Williams
French Mother . . . . . Annette Claudier
Vietnamese . . . . . Joseph Hieu, Albert Leong
Charming G.I. . . . . . Stephen Bishop

SEGMENT 2
Directed by Steven Spielberg; screenplay by George Clayton Johnson, Richard
Matheson and Josh Rogan; story by Mr. Johnson; director of photography, Allen
Daviau; film editor, Michael Kahn.
Mr. Bloom . . . . . Scatman Crothers
Mr. Conroy . . . . . Bill Quinn
Mr. Weinstein . . . . . Martin Garner
Mrs. Weinstein . . . . . Selma Diamond
Mrs. Dempsey . . . . . Helen Shaw
Mr. Agee . . . . . Murray Matheson
Mr. Mute . . . . . Peter Brocco
Miss Cox . . . . . Priscilla Pointer

SEGEMENT 3
Directed by Joe Dante; screenplay by Richard Matheson, based on a story by
Jerome Bixby; director of photography, John Hora; film editor, Tina Hirsch.
Helen Foley . . . . . Kathleen Quinlan
Anthony . . . . . Jeremy Licht
Uncle Walt . . . . . Kevin McCarthy
Mother . . . . . Patricia Barry
Father . . . . . William Schallert
Ethel . . . . . Nancy Cartwright

SEGMENT 4 Directed by George Miller; screenplay by Richard Matheson, based on a
story by Richard Matheson; director of photography, Allen Daviau; film editor,
Howard Smith.
Valentine . . . . . John Lithgow
Sr. Stewardess . . . . . Abbe Lane
Jr. Stewardess . . . . . Donna Dixon
Co-Pilot . . . . . John Dennis Johnston
Creature . . . . . Larry Cedar
Sky Marshal . . . . . Charles Knapp
Little Girl . . . . . Christina Nigra
Mother . . . . . Lonna Schwab


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Vic Morrow

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SUPREME COURT, 7-2, RESTRICTS CONGRESS'S RIGHT TO OVERRULE ACTIONS BY EXECUTIVE
BRANCH;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


In its decision today the Supreme Court dramatically altered the relationship
between Congress and the executive branch and created myriad new difficulties in
their struggles to accommodate each other.

Legal and political experts predicted that the decision would lead to renewed
jockeying over prerogatives and a search for new mechanisms allowing Congress to
oversee executive decisions even as it grants the President power to spend
money, wage war or take other actions.

The courts, in turn, are likely to be asked immediately whether certain
executive powers are still valid. These powers were often declared by Presidents
to be inherent in the office in the absence of legislation from Congress. In
response, Congress would specifically grant the authority, reserving the right
to block certain Presidential actions.

For example, does the President have the right to refuse to spend funds
appropriated by Congress, now that the High Court has removed Congress's right
to overturn such a move? May a President keep American troops committed to
hostilities or sell arms overseas now that Congress may no longer veto such
actions?

It is virtually certain that these and other questions affecting 200 statutes
with legislative vetoes will be determined ultimately by Congress and the
President themselves. As they address the matter, two competing historical
forces will be at work.

First is the trend of the last 50 years of Presidents seeking from the Congress
greater and greater power to regulate industry and commerce, to act swiftly in
foreign policy, and to reorganize and run an increasingly complex Federal
Government.

The second trend is the one mounted by both liberals and conservatives in the
past 15 years aimed at curbing the President's power.

Liberals, alarmed by Vietnam and Watergate, have led the fight to limit a
President's ability to commit troops overseas, aid certain countries militarily
and freeze funds already appropriated by Congress, as President Nixon did in the
impoundment controversy of a decade ago.

More recently, conservatives have sought to limit the ability of the Federal
Trade Commission, the Food and Drug Administration and other semi-independent
Federal agencies to impose certain regulations on business.

Indeed, there was a certain irony in today's court decision for President
Reagan. In the 1980 election campaign, Mr. Reagan favored the concept of
legislative veto to curb the power of Federal agencies. As President, he shifted
position and joined the trend of all modern Presidents in opposing the concept.

There were conflicting views today among the experts as to whether the Supreme
Court decision would give the President or the Congress the upper hand.

Some argued that the decision will almost certainly give Mr. Reagan and all
succeeding Presidents more power in certain key areas.  They noted that,
although the Congress will still be able to stymie a President with legislation,
a President may himself veto such legislation. A Presidential veto may be
overridden only by a two-thirds vote of both the Senate and the House of
Representatives.

On the other hand, experts in Congress argued that the Supreme Court decision
will make the lawmakers more reluctant than ever to grant certain powers to the
President in the first place.

''It's going to cripple the things that this President or any President will be
able to do,'' said Representative Elliott H.  Levitas, a Georgia Democrat who is
a leading proponent of the legislative veto. Mr. Levitas added that Congress
will have ''no choice but to severely circumscribe any delegation of authority''
to the President.

New Accommodations Seen

Still others argued today that the court decision would mean cumbersome attempts
to reach new political accommodations between the President and Congress, and
that these accommodations would not be very different from the ones that exist
now. Such a view was voiced by Lloyd Cutler, a White House counsel to President
Carter.

''In the short run, the main effect is going to uphold executive authority in
the foreign affairs field,'' Mr. Cutler said. ''But in time Congress will find
other ways to block Presidential action. It may not be such a cosmic change
after all.''

Even in arguing for rejection of the legislative veto, Reagan Administration
officials noted that Congress has many means at its disposal to frustrate a
President. Some of these were listed by Theodore B. Olson, Assistant Attorney
General and head of the Office of Legal Counsel in late 1981.

Among those he cited were the ability of Congress to place ''specific and
precise limits'' on agencies that issue rules, override such rules with
legislation or authorize a Federal agency to act for a limited period of time,
''forcing the agency to return to Congress'' for new authorization.

Mr. Cutler said he was pleased with the High Court's action today. Like others,
he noted that it will likely force Congress into a more direct role on many
regulatory matters.

Baker Opposes Trend

This, in turn, could involve Congress more and more in specifics just when many
Congressional leaders say it is doing too much already in the day-to-day
business of governing.

Only last week, Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader, gave a speech
that caught the attention of many in Washington, in which he said that
Congressmen had become ''elected bureaucrats'' who had lost contact with the
world beyond Washington.

It would appear that today's Supreme Court decision makes the trend Mr. Baker
deplored all the more inevitable, because the principle of the legislative veto,
which began 50 years ago under Herbert Hoover, is a product of both sides'
trying to find a convenient way to manage competing demands.

Everyone, even the Supreme Court, agrees that scrapping the legislative veto
means getting rid of something that served everybody's purposes for a while.

Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, in his opinion today, acknowledged that the
burdens on the governmental process ''often seem clumsy, inefficient, even
unworkable.'' But he said that ''those hard choices were consciously made by men
who had lived under a form of government that permitted arbitrary governmental
acts to go unchecked.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

UNVEILING OF KENNEDY TAPES ADDS NO REVELATIONS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1320 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 23


Tapes and transcripts of some of President Kennedy's White House meetings and
telephone conversations made public today add a footnote to history but contain
no important revelations.

The release of the materials by the John F. Kennedy Library here is the first
public disclosure of an extensive collection of tapes secretly recorded by
Kennedy. The tapes and transcripts released today involve the integration of the
University of Mississippi in 1962 and discussions of Administration tax policy.

The materials released today account for only about 5 percent of the total.
Altogether, according to library officials, there are 248 hours of tapes
covering 300 meetings in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room and 12 hours of
recordings of 280 telephone conversations.

The existence of the Kennedy tapes was disclosed in 1973, but because public
attention was focused on President Nixon and the Watergate scandal, few people
were aware of the Kennedy material.

'No Sinister Motive'

According to Evelyn Lincoln, Kennedy's personal secretary, the President had
secret recording equipment installed in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room in July
1962 because ''he was a history buff.'' ''There was no sinister motive,'' Mrs.
Lincoln said in an interview from her Maryland home. The President was only
interested in having the recordings to help him write his memoirs, she said.

In the material made public today, Kennedy and his top aides show mounting
concern, frustration and then anger over their conflict with Gov. Ross Barnett
of Mississippi in gaining the admission of James H. Meredith, a black, to the
University of Mississippi. The tapes reveal flashes of Presidential humor in the
integration crisis in September and October 1962, salted with occasional
profanity that the Kennedy Library archivists did not delete.

For example, in a recording made on the evening of Sept. 30, after Federal
marshals had escorted Mr. Meredith onto the campus of the university and a large
crowd of angry whites had gathered, Kennedy repeatedly inquired why two
battalions of Army military police were taking so long to arrive. They had
earlier been sent to Memphis, less than 100 miles from the university in Oxford,
Miss., as a precaution and were under the command of Maj. Gen. Creighton W.
Abrams Jr., then Deputy Chief of Staff for military operations and later
commander of United States forces in Vietnam.

But as the crowd began hurling bottles and shooting at the marshals and hours
passed, Kennedy complained: ''I wonder if it takes this long to get everybody
ready?''

Robert F. Kennedy, the President's brother and Attorney General, muttered:
''Damn Army. They can't even tell if the M.P.'s have left.''

Asked for an Explanation

Later Robert Kennedy called General Abrams by phone in Memphis.  ''What was the
delay in getting them out of Memphis?'' he asked about the soldiers, who
numbered about 1,000.

''They, uh, I don't know the details of it, uh, Mr. Kennedy,'' General Abrams
replied. ''They, uh, this is the best response they could make, apparently,
under the circumstances.''

The soldiers, who were supposed to fly by helicopter, did not arrive in Oxford
until dawn the next morning after two people had been killed and several hundred
marshals injured.

The President was so angry about the situation that he even discussed with
Solicitor General Archibald Cox the possibility of arresting Governor Barnett
and Gen. Edwin A. Walker, a recently retired officer who had commanded the
Federal troops when the schools in Little Rock, Ark., were integrated in 1957.
When the President heard by phone from an aide at the university that General
Walker was urging the crowd to violence, he cursed the general.

But still Kennedy found time to laugh at himself. ''I haven't had such an
interesting time since the Bay of Pigs,'' he told his advisers at one point,
referring to the abortive United Statesbacked attempt to invade Cuba with Cuban
exiles in 1961.

Discussions About Taxes

The bulk of the material released today, covering 450 minutes of recordings and
295 pages of transcript, involves discussions that Kennedy had with his advisers
about reducing taxes. Most of it was reported at the time and the tapes provide
no significant new insights. But the discussions underscore Kennedy's
determination to avoid a recession and to have the economy at peak strength by
the 1964 election.

The tax cut proposed by the Kennedy Administration was important because it was
the first time such a reduction had been offered to stimulate the economy at a
time when the Federal budget was already showing a deficit. Many of the economic
arguments made by the Kennedy advisers were repeated by President Reagan 20
years later in his drive for tax cuts.

But many economists today believe the positions set forth in the taped
conversations by the Kennedy economists bear little relevance to today because
prices then were stable, interest rates were low and the budget deficit was
small.

Many of the conversations on the tapes released today are difficult to
understand and the archivists who transcribed them have noted these places with
the phrase, ''words unintelligible.''

This would often occur when several people talked at once and their voices
overlapped, or when one aide was talking on the phone while others spoke to the
President.

But Mrs. Lincoln, Kennedy's secretary, said another reason was that the hidden
microphone used to record the conversations in the Cabinet Room was placed under
a table. As a result, the recorder often picked up the sounds of people moving
their legs or knocking pipes on ashtrays, garbling conversations.

Mrs. Lincoln said that as far as she was aware, the only people who knew about
the secret taping were the President, his brother Robert and herself. When the
tapes and dictabelts used to record phone calls were full, she said, she stored
them in a small room next to the Oval Office and kept the key herself. Kennedy
never asked to listen to the tapes, she added.

Mrs. Lincoln said she activated the two taping systems, for meetings and phone
calls, when Kennedy pressed a switch on his desk which turned on a light on
hers. Judging by the number of tapes inventoried in the Kennedy Library, Kennedy
recorded only a fraction of the work that went on in his office.

By contrast, the taping system that Mr. Nixon had installed in the Oval Office
in his Presidency was activated automatically any time anyone spoke.

More than 70 reporters were at the gleaming white marble Kennedy Library early
this morning to pick up copies of the tapes after the library announced last
week that the material would become available today. But Dan H. Fenn Jr., the
library's director, refused to say what topics would be covered, and many of the
reporters had assumed, mistakenly, that they would include the Cuban missile
crisis and Vietnam, not just tax cuts and the Mississippi integration fight.

Today Mr. Fenn insisted he had not intended to mislead anyone.  ''I've said for
10 years that 75 percent of the material was classified for national security
reasons,'' he asserted, and therefore would have to be cleared by agencies in
Washington before it could be made public.

Mr. Fenn said he had sent some tapes on the Cuban missile crisis to the National
Security Council more than a year ago for possible declassification but had not
heard from them.

William W. Moss, the archivist in charge of the tapes, said that given the
library's meager manpower resources, it could take from 30 to 90 years at the
current rate to transcribe all the tapes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Kennedy

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOOVER WAS FIRST TO LET CONGRESS VETO PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


When President Hoover sought authority to reorganize the Federal Government in
June 1932, he worked out a deal with a balky Congress. The lawmakers gave him
the reorganization authority, with the proviso that either the House or the
Senate could veto the resulting plan.

Thus began a restructuring of Presidential-Congressional relations that gained
speed in recent years, especially in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and the
Watergate scandal.

More than 200 laws containing more than 350 legislative veto provisions have
been passed in the last half century - more than half of them in the last decade
and about one-third in the last five years.

More than 60 of these laws are still on the books, including the War Powers Act
of 1973, which authorizes Congress by a concurrent resolution to end the use of
United States armed forces in hostilities. Also affected is legislation on arms
sales to foreign governments, executive reorganization, energy policy, public
works, nuclear energy regulation, petroleum allocation, immigration, education,
transportation, community development, space administration, Indian affairs,
watershed protection, Federal employee compensation levels and impoundment of
appropriated funds.

'A Mechanism of Accomodation'

In the last five years, Congress exercised its veto 31 times, usually on minor
issues. Congress has never vetoed an arms sale, although some have narrowly
escaped a legislative veto.

To some on Capitol Hill, such as Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois,
the House minority leader, the legislative veto is ''kind of a cop-out'' because
it enables Congress to evade blame or responsibility for controversial bills.

But others regard the legislative veto as ''a mechanism of accommodation,'' in
the words of Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat. Their theory is that the
legislative veto was a political strategem that enabled the President to extract
more power than Congress wanted to cede. As a quid pro quo, or one thing in
return for another, Congress gave itself the authority to veto what it
considered to be Presidential excesses.

The immigration legislation that figured in today's Supreme Court decision
provides a good example of why Congress chose to delegate authority to the
executive branch, subject to a Congressional veto.

Prior to the legislation, Congress was besieged with private immigration bills
admitting specific people to the United States, with frequent suggestions that
some members of Congress were receiving payments for sponsoring the bills. Under
the law, Congress delegated authority to the Attorney General to permit aliens
to remain in the United States, subject to a veto by either the House or the
Senate.

Most Presidents have opposed legislative vetoes as unconstitutional except in
cases in which they sought extraordinary authority from Congress. In 1979,
Ronald Reagan wrote a newspaper column in which he supported the legislative
veto as a way to make regulators ''more sensitive to the mood of the people.''
He has reversed himself since becoming President, however, and now opposes the
vetoes as an abuse of Congressional power.

Broad Authority Delegated

The legislative veto also helped Congress to paper over divisions in its own
ranks. Instead of drafting specific, unambiguous legislation that could not have
been approved by Congress, the lawmakers often delegated broad authority to
regulatory agencies with the proviso that it could veto the ensuing regulations.

Thus, Congress gave the Federal Trade Commission broad authority to regulate in
the area of consumer protection. But the lawmakers then vetoed regulations
dealing with the sale of used cars, while regulations concerning funerals and
television commercials for children barely survived Congressional scrutiny.

Without the legislative veto, many experts believe that Congress will now fall
back on its more historic powers of the purse and oversight as checks on
executive authority. In addition, they believe that laws will be more strictly
drawn and Congressional authority hoarded.

''It's naive to think that by striking down the legislative veto you're going to
keep Congress out of administration,'' said Louis Fisher, a scholar who has
written extensively on relations between the executive and legislative branches.
''Instead of working aboveboard, Congress will be more subterranean.''

''We're about to get 'veto by telephone,' '' agreed Stanley Brand, counsel to
the Clerk of the House. ''Committee chairmen will call the agencies and tell
them what to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR LAWS WITH VETO PROVISIONS

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


War Powers Resolution of 1973. Under this landmark legislation, Congress could
force a President to remove American forces engaged in hostilities in other
countries. Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974. Under this
law, either the House of Representatives or the Senate could require the
executive branch to spend money on a specific project.  Military Appropriation
Authorization Act of 1975. Under this legislation, a concurrent resolution of
Congress could restrict export of certain military or technological products.
International Security Assistance and Arms Control Act of 1976. This law permits
Congress to override a Presidential decision to sell military equipment to a
foreign nation.  Nuclear Nonproliferation Act of 1978. Congressional action
could end agreements for the storage and disposal of spent nuclear fuel and the
export of nuclear facilities or technology.  Federal Trade Commission
Improvements Act of 1980. Under this law, commission rules could be overturned
by a concurrent resolution. Last year, for example, Congress vetoed a ''used-car
rule'' that would have required such auto dealers to disclose known mechanical
defects and the availability of a warranty.  Federal Land Policy and Management
Act of 1976. This law permits Congress to disapprove sales of public lands
larger than 2,500 acres.

Legislative vetoes have been included in many other statutes, providing Congress
with the power to overturn regulations affecting historic preservation,
coastal-zone management, farm credit, the designation of marine sanctuaries, the
establishment of an oil and gas lease bidding system and the use of
insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of air force plane, troops in Vietnam

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 25, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

KEAN SAYS TESTS SHOW NO DIOXIN PERIL FOR NEIGHBORS OF CLIFTON PLANT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 531 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, June 24


Governor Kean announced today that tests had shown that dioxin outside a large
chemical plant in Clifton had not contaminated a residential area around the
plant.

Dangerous amounts of dioxin, the Governor said at a news conference, are
confined to the plant, which is owned by the Givaudan Corporation, a subsidiary
of Hoffmann-LaRoche, the pharmaceutical company.

Only one test sample showing a detectable level of dioxin has been found in a
check of the perimeter of the plant, Mr. Kean said.  The sample, one of 16 taken
around the outskirts of the plant, showed a dioxin level of 0.86 parts per
billion. ''This problem is confined,'' the Governor said. The Federal
Environmental Protection Agency considers 1 part per billion to be dangerous to
humans.

Mr. Kean also announced that results from four samples taken at a site in
Pequannock, formerly occupied by the Eastern Guardian Chemical Company and now
the site of a print shop, showed no detectable levels of dioxin.

Findings Termed a First

''The Pequannock findings are the first we've had with no detectable levels in
any sample,'' said Robert E. Hughey, the state Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.

The results announced today were far below the dioxin levels found in Newark at
a former manufacturing plant for Agent Orange, a defoliant used by United States
troops in Vietnam, and the levels found at the site of a former insecticide
plant in Edison. Tests showed dioxin levels of up to 55,000 parts per billion at
the Newark site and of 5.1 parts per billion in Edison.

Mr. Hughey said the hexachlorophene manufacturing facilities at the Givaudan
Corporation plant, where samples showing 11 parts per billion have been found,
would remain quarantined. He called the findings of no dioxin contamination
outside the Givaudan plant ''the best news we've had.''

Last Saturday, Mr. Kean announced he had ordered the closing of that portion of
the plant, which employs nearly 700 people.  Hexachlorophene, an antibacterial
agent used in hospitals, is associated with dioxin.

The preliminary results were the highest readings found at an active plant in
New Jersey. Mr. Kean also ordered the contaminated soil at Givaudan covered with
tarpaulin.

Last Saturday, samples were collected from Public School 8, an elementary school
that officials closed Monday, and from airconditioner filters and vacuum cleaner
bags in neighborhood homes.

Mr. Kean said officials of Clifton and the Environmental Protection Agency were
touring the neighborhood of about 100 homes around the Givaudan plant on
Delawanna Avenue today to tell residents of the results.

Mr. Hughey attributed the presence of levels of dioxin ''to a manufacturing
process that ended in 1949 or to the manufacture of hexachlorophene that is
localized.''

Dioxin, a chemical compound that is an unwanted byproduct in the manufacture of
pesticides, has been linked to cancers in laboratory animals. Its effects on
humans have never been conclusively stated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Hughey

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 25, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ETHICS OF TAPING: DEBATE OVER THE GROUND RULES;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words


The telephone and the tape recorder help reporters gather information quickly
and accurately. Using the two technologies together, however, is raising
philosophical questions that neither journalists nor lawmakers have resolved.

One of those questions was pointed up last week when CBS News suspended a
producer, George Crile, for having recorded a telephone conversation he had with
former Secretary of State Robert S. McNamara without Mr. McNamara's knowledge or
permission. Mr. Crile made the tape in the course of producing ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' a 1982 documentary that accused Gen. William C.
Westmoreland and other officers of manipulating figures on enemy troop strength
during the war. Lawyers for General Westmoreland, who is seeking $120 million in
a libel suit against CBS, have demanded that CBS turn over the McNamara tape.

All three networks and some other news organizations have written policies that
state that a reporter who wants to tape phone calls must either tell the
interviewee he is doing so or must clear the action with a senior executive in
advance. The objection to covert taping is both legal - 13 states forbid it -
and ethical, in that it intrudes excessively on people's expectation of privacy.

Mr. Crile said he had not meant to be insubordinate, but that he had not known
about the rule. He also said that the practice was not uncommon and defended
taping as a way of assuring accuracy. And without trying to judge the merits of
his case, some journalists said they believed the practice was neither uncommon
nor illegal and contended that news organizations ought not to set needless
restrictions on themselves.

Editors Divided on Issue

The Bulletin of The American Society of Newspaper Editors addressed the issue
earlier this year and found a division of opinion.  Frederick Taylor, executive
editor of The Wall Street Journal, said the practice was permissible and
unexceptionable. Jan Mittelstadt, the editor of The People's Press, the daily
newspaper in Owatonna, Minn., observed: ''It's not a quantum leap from
scribbling on a matchbook or writing in a notebook to the use of a tape
recorder.  It's all just notes, a collection of words or bleeps or electronic
impulses that a reporter uses to do the job.''

Some editors took issue with this position. ''If you record a conversation to
which you are a party, it is sneaky not to inform the other parties,'' said
Gilbert Cranberg, a former editor of the editorial page of The Des Moines
Register, who teaches journalism at the University of Iowa. Three of his
students queried 150 editors on the issue and found 125 disapproved of secret
taping, primarily for ''ethical'' reasons.

Handwritten notes of an interview are a traditional and generally understood
reportorial method. In face-to-face conversation, the person being interviewed
could generally tell which of his comments were being taken down and thus had
cues about which ideas to refine further. The telephone created a new
convention, however, speeding the transmission of information from source to
reporter, but diminishing the interviewee's knowledge of which statements were
being set down.

A Change in the Balance

The balance was altered again by the development of unobtrusive and reliable
portable tape recorders. Originally, the recorders were used by broadcast
reporters to provide on-air ''actualities,'' the voices of the subjects of news
reports. Many print reporters adopted them, too, first as a backup for their
notes and later as a primary tool to assure accurate quotes.

The next step, to the recording of phone interviews, was short, and it came as
society generally was embracing the technology of recording. The Electronic
Industries Association said more than 20 million portable tape recorders and
players and one million telephone answering devices are sold every year.

Calls to police emergency numbers are taped, for example.  Businesses tape calls
to improve accuracy in filling clients' orders and, in some cases, to monitor
employees' performance. Suspicious spouses tape their mates' phone
conversations, a Federal Communications Commission lawyer noted, adding,
''People ought to realize the phone isn't very private.''

The legalities of taping are somewhat confused. Federal law generally prohibits
a third party from recording a phone conversation without court permission, but
there is no Federal bar to such recordings if one party to the conversation
approves of it, even if the other does not. Thirteen states forbid recordings
without the consent of both parties.

Electronic 'Beep' Required

The American Telephone and Telegraph Company tariffs filed with the F.C.C.
require an electronic ''beep'' every 15 seconds when calls are being taped even
when both parties know about the taping. Some emergency calls are already exempt
from the requirement, and the F.C.C. is considering exempting those calls that
all parties consent to have recorded.

In any event, an A.T.&T. lawyer noted, violations of those laws and tariffs tend
to go unreported and thus prosecutions are rare. A major symposium for press
lawyers last year listed only one case, a 1977 decision, that addressed the
specific issue of covert taping of phone calls. In that case, the Florida
Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the state's law requiring
all-party consent.

Most journalists believe that recorded interviews are fine as long as the
subject knows that a tape is being made. They say recording improves accuracy in
quotations, a goal presumably shared by the person at the other end of the line.
Lawyers sometimes urge reporters working on sensitive investigations to tape
their interviews, creating a record that the subject cannot later deny.

Reporters Explain Position

Some reporters say that most of the people they interview are public officials
or public figures who already know that their every word may be taken down. To
tell a subject that the recorder is running is foolishly inhibiting, these
journalists say. A few also note that the people they interview are not above
either overt or covert recording themselves.

The response from public figures and from the majority of journalists is that
secret recording is a betrayal of trust. Mr.  McNamara called Mr. Crile's action
''entirely unethical.'' Most newspapers, including The New York Times and The
Washington Post, do not have written policies against secret taping. Without
specifically forbidding secret taping, the American Society of Newspaper Editors
statement of principles says, reporters should ''respect the rights of people
involved in the news, observe the common standards of decency.''

The University of Iowa researchers were told by one editor that secret recording
not only breaks down the relationship between the reporter and the interviewee
but also between the news organization and its audience. ''If we expect our
readers to trust us,'' the editor said, ''we have to be honest ourselves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Abigail Homans Is Betrothed

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 48, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


Mr. and Mrs. J. Hampton Barnes of Edgemont, Pa., and Dark Harbor, Me., have
announced the engagement of Mrs. Barnes's daughter, Abigail Homans, to Henry
L.B. Wilder of San Francisco, son of Mr. and Mrs.  F. Fessenden Wilder of Essex,
Conn., and MacMahan Island, Me. An Aug. 27 wedding is planned.

The future bride, a daughter also of the late Robert Homans, is an associate at
McKinsey & Company in San Francisco and is a trustee of the Crystal Springs and
Uplands Schools in Hillsborough, Calif. She graduated cum laude from Radcliffe
College and received a master's degree from the Stanford University Graduate
School of Business, as did her fiance.

Her father was a lawyer with the San Francisco law firm of Morrison, Foerster,
Holloway, Schuman & Clark. Her mother, Mary Aldrich Barnes, is a manager of the
New York Botanical Garden. The future bride is a granddaughter of the late
Winthrop W. Aldrich of New York, who was former chairman of the Chase National
Bank and Ambassador to the Court of St. James's. She is a
great-greatgranddaughter of Senator Nelson W. Aldrich of Providence, R.I., a
founder of the Federal Reserve System, and of Charles Crocker of San Francisco,
who was a founder of the Central Pacific Railroad and the Crocker National Bank.

Mr. Wilder is a partner in the venture-capital firm of Dougery, Jones & Wilder
in San Francisco. He is an alumnus of the Brooks School in North Andover, Mass.,
attended the Schools in Shrewsbury, England, graduated from the United States
Naval Academy and served in Vietnam. His father, who is retired, was senior
master of the Brooks School, where he was professor of English and religion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Abigail Homans

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHARLES KURALT CONTINUES TO WONDER WHAT'S AROUND THE BEND

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1601 words


Studio 44 in the CBS Broadcast Center on West 57th Street clears out fast when
''CBS News Sunday Morning'' is over, especially on a warm, sunny day when some
members of the crew are talking anxiously of getting out to Connecticut and the
Hamptons. ''I've never been to the Hamptons,'' remarked Charles Kuralt, bound
for Sheboygan, Wisc., -and seemingly pleased about it.

One would think he'd had enough of all that by now, of being on the road for
more than one million miles and the better part of 16 years, living in a motor
home, eating chicken-fried God-knows-what and covering the kind of insignificant
stories that would set any selfrespecting reporter for a small weekly newspaper
to typing a resume.

Not Charles Kuralt, who grew up in North Carolina, spending much of his youth on
his grandparents tobacco farm, and who seems most comfortable now back in the
boondocks outside the brie belts between the quiche coasts. ''Not a week goes
by,'' he said, ''when you don't run into something that just makes you say:
'Well, I'll be damned.' ''

Tonight at 8, on the premiere of a 10-week series of half-hour ''On the Road
With Charles Kuralt'' shows, there he'll be again, inside the motor home with
the green grass and the red barns rolling along behind him saying: ''Well, here
we go again.'' On the ''Evening News,'' he's become known for his low-keyed
style and his knack for the off-beat, quirky discovery, where perhaps no one but
himself could scent a story. Now, though his approach may not change, he'll have
a chance to do what he does best at greater length, if not at more leisure.

The shows will open and close with a little ditty sung by a man with a twang in
his voice and set to banjo music. Mr. Kuralt wrote the lyrics: ''All these
years, I've been a-wandering. Just when I think I'm near the end, I always see
the road a-bending. I wonder what's around the bend.''

What's around the bend tonight is typical Kuraltia: a small factory in Blenheim,
S.C., where antiquated machinery prone to break downs bottles ginger ale that
burns Mr. Kuralt's throat and makes his eyes water; three men talking about
their days a half-century ago several hundred feet in the air building the
Golden Gate Bridge, one recalling that ''I got my fingerprints all over that
iron''; and a Belmont, N.C., man who spends several hours each day rebuilding
and repairing discarded bicycles for his lending library so that even the
poorest children in town will always have bikes to ride.

''We keep the stories resolutely unimportant,'' said Mr. Kuralt.  ''If a guy out
there is building a windmill because of high energy costs, we won't do the
story. If one other reporter is there when we drive up, we lose interest.''

He seems not at all defensive about doing stories on canoe makers and the things
people use to hold up their mail boxes. ''I think its all right to recognize
once in a while that the entire country is not in flames, that many people live
in peace with their neighbors, that many are doing interesting, constructive,
even ennobling things.'' Mr. Kuralt, who served as a network correspondent in
the Middle East, Africa, Latin America and Asia, including Vietnam, before going
on the road in a beat-up motor home in 1967, has won two George Foster Peabody
awards and two Emmy awards for his ''On the Road'' segments.

He is is glad to be away from the highly competitive pack journalism, fighting
for quotes from press agents and politicians.  ''Doing this is nice,'' he said.
''You don't have to worry that other reporters are sneaking around getting
information that will make you look bad. You don't have to ask embarrassing
questions and stick your nose in where you're not wanted.''

Mr. Kuralt cringes at the idea of his being some sort of latter day de
Tocqueville in a camper. Yet, in all the years of traveling the back roads of
America, doing stories about ordinary - as opposed to ''Real'' - people and
sticking around for dinner or to spend the night, he has gained a unique and
personal perspective of the country.

Residents of the small towns he visits, a surprisingly large number of whom he
recalls by name, send him letters, announcements of births and graduations in
the family and once in a while requests to give commencement addresses at a
son's or daughter's high school graduation, which he sometimes does. On his
travels, he stops in to see these people, just to say hello. ''People are
astonishly friendly wherever we go,'' he said, ''almost as if they had been
expecting us, as if they knew we would be by one of these days.''

Some of these people live in a special state of grace where they do not even
recognize television personalities - particulalry pudgy and balding ones - and
often mistake the van for the book or blood mobile. One woman in Fort Myers,
Fla., ran out of her house, and as Mr. Kuralt prepared to accept the usual
congratulations for being a media star, she ordered two loaves of rye bread.

The 48-year-old Mr. Kuralt, who is married with two grown children, seems to
favor stories - he still talks of ''writing stories'' rather than ''doing
pieces'' - about enduring values and old-fashioned ways. He said that he has
found in his travels, a country in which young people are drawn to old values
and crafts, a country of good will and of caring for tradition. The stories he
likes best are about people doing something unusual, stubborn, even outrageous
in the face of their neighbors' bemusement. ''There's no shortage of
individuality out there,'' he said, ''quite the contrary. And the country is not
so homogenous after all.

''I don't find a country of self-centered, hostile people either,'' he
continued. ''I don't think anyone who travels around the country very much can
come back discouraged.'' Of others who see a different America, he said: ''They
go too fast.'' He recalled the couple he found stranded for several days in the
middle of Kansas waiting for a part for their broken down automobile ''having
the time of their lives, eating in peoples homes, getting tours of the grain
elevator.

''Something a lot of Americans have lost sight of,'' he added, ''is how the
country has changed for the better, in noticeable ways. Life is profoundly
better for black people in the South than it was before the civil-rights
movement of the 1960's. No town is so small but what life for women has not
changed for the better. Environmentalism has made a difference in cleaner air
and cleaner water. We'd all rather gallop off in search of new problems to
solve, but it seems to me there are grounds for modest self-congratualtions.''

Mr. Kuralt, cameraman Isadore Bleckman and soundman Larry Gianneschi Jr. roam
about in their motor home, as they have done together since 1970. ''We've never
had an assignment,'' Mr. Kuralt said. ''The people in New York literally don't
know where we are.  What has kept us going all these years is that none of us
can think of anything we'd rather do. You see before you a happy man, and that's
a remark from the heart.''

Filling a regular half-hour program (which, following tonight's premiere, will
be shown at 8 P.M. on this and successive Tuesdays) rather than doing segments
for the ''Evening News'' on an irregular basis has added some urgency to their
travels. ''Now we head down the road with a destination firmly in mind,'' he
said, ''but we still sort of hope we won't get there.''

Mr. Kuralt continues to anchor ''CBS News Sunday Morning,'' finding an airport
on a Friday night for return trips to New York. That program and his ''On the
Road'' segments strongly reflect Mr.  Kuralt's own sense of calm, civility and
writing ability. He has no special persona that he affects on-camera. He writes
what he says and selects his own story ideas, garnering many from viewer mail.
''If something interests me,'' he said, ''I figure it interests others. I'm an
ordinary sort of guy.'' On the road and left to his own devices, he wears
neither ties nor makeup on camera. He has no agent, almost unheard of for on-air
''talent.''

Mr. Kuralt was taken off the road in 1980 and '81 to anchor ''Morning'' Monday
through Friday, and for a time was openly bitter when he was relieved of that
post. He had previously lashed out at the new breed of TV news anchorpersons who
''would not recognize a news story if it jumped up and mussed their coiffures.''
Upon being replaced, he broadened the attack, identifying as the greatest threat
to the press those ''weak or greedy or distracted executives of news
organizations who have lost the ancient faith or who never had it.''

''But it gradually dawned on me,'' he said, ''that I could go back on the road,
which is what I really like best. We all know the fun and satisfaction is out
getting stories.

''This is a depressing building,'' he added, making his way through the immense
maze of narrow, stark white corridors of the broadcast center, turning this way
and that until he was finally out the door, on his way to Sheboygan. ''The
building used to be a dairy,'' he said, his face lighting up. ''That explains
the occasional horsefly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Charles Kuralt Photo of Walter Williams who
appears in TV show 'State Against Blacks'

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WORST-CASE PLANS FOR CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


What will the Reagan Administration do if the Salvadoran guerrillas seize
permanent control of a major provincial city? What if Soviet jet fighters are
sent to Nicaragua? How will the United States respond if Nicaraguan forces,
lashing out against American-supported insurgents, attack neighboring Honduras?

These are not idle questions, according to senior Administration officials.
President Reagan and his top aides have repeatedly said American combat forces
will not be sent to Central America. But in private, some of his senior advisers
say the policy Mr. Reagan has set for the region may eventually make it hard not
to use American military power. Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale,
amplifying the fears of Congressional Democrats, said last weekend, ''It is
inevitable that American troops will be sent into Central America'' as a result
of ''failing'' Reagan policies. The President promptly pressed his point.
''There is no excuse for not providing those under attack the weapons they need
to defend themselves,'' he said last week. ''We cannot permit the
Soviet-Cuban-Nicaraguan axis to take over Central America.''

Contingency plans for direct involvement have been resisted by the Joint Chiefs
of Staff in the fear that blueprints would make it easier for policymakers to
trigger intervention. Military leaders say they are willing to send American
forces to Central America if they can use enough muscle to get the job done. But
they are concerned that a partial commitment could lead to a repeat of the
Vietnam experience. Pentagon officials said plans had been developed for
American air strikes against Cuba and Nicaragua and the use of American forces
to ''quarantine'' Nicaragua - if those countries were to dramatically escalate
their military activities. Most contingency plans, however, are drafted for
developments that never occur and these plans, too, cannot be read as a preview
of policy. Also, the possibility could not be excluded that word of such plans
was being leaked to put Managua and Havana off balance.

When the Reagan Administration first staked out Central America as an East-West
battleground in 1981, it stressed the importance of maintaining democratic
governments. Worldwide American security interests, although wrapped into the
policy, were not singled out until President Reagan spoke to a joint session of
Congress in April. ''The national security of all the Americas is at stake in
Central America,'' he said. ''If we cannot defend ourselves there, we cannot
expect to prevail elsewhere. Our credibility would collapse, our alliances would
crumble and the safety of our homeland would be put in jeopardy.''

These interests, however, are defended by governments and military forces that
Administration officials acknowledge may not be up to the task. El Salvador is
governed by a volatile coalition of moderate and extreme-right groups held
together largely by pressure from Washington, which hopes presidential elections
this year will produce a more stable regime. The military, still the prime line
of defense against a leftist takeover, has had to struggle to sustain a
stalemate with the guerrillas. Senior American military officials consider the
Salvadoran military command seriously flawed by corruption, lack of imagination
and lethargy so widespread that many officers return home for weekends as though
the civil war stopped at dusk on Friday.

Given these weaknesses, some national security officials say that the United
States might eventually be forced to increase its involvement, to prevent El
Salvador from ''falling.'' Gen. Wallace H. Nutting, the recently retired
commander of American forces in Latin America, has advocated lifting the ceiling
of 55 military advisers in El Salvador to 300 to 400. Gen. Edward C. Meyer, who
retired last week as Army Chief of Staff, said it might be necessary to send in
American troops if the Salvadoran elections produced turmoil rather than
stability. The White House immediately denied this was under consideration.

Direct American intervention may also become possible in Honduras, some believe.
In Washington recently, the Honduran armed forces chief, Gen. Gustavo Alvarez
Martinez, requested increased military help and said he would not rule out a
request for American forces if Nicaragua attacked his country. Managua recently
claimed Honduras had supported guerrilla activities inside Nicaragua with
artillery fired from the Honduran side of the border. Last week, the Honduran
Army said two American newsmen had been killed in Honduras near the border by a
grenade launched from the Nicaraguan side.

Defense officials say war between Nicaragua and Honduras is unlikely, however,
given Honduras's superiority in air power. But growing dependence on Honduras to
help contain Soviet and Cuban influence has made Washington at least a silent
partner with Tegucigalpa in its conflict with Nicaragua. Under the Rio Treaty of
1947, which the United States and Honduras have signed, countries in the
hemisphere are pledged to defend each other if one is attacked.  Asked last week
about the American response if Nicaragua invaded Honduras, Secretary of State
George P. Shultz said, ''We would take a major outbreak of war there very
seriously and beyond that I don't want to make a comment.''

Another test often mentioned by officials in private would be the arrival of
Soviet combat aircraft in Nicaragua. American intelligence officials have long
expected the delivery of MIG jet fighters to Nicaraguan pilots who, they say,
received training in Bulgaria and Cuba; intelligence officials have said that
Nicaraguan airfields were extended to handle the planes. Arrival of the MIG's
would dramatically change the region's balance of power, Administration
officials say, and call for a swift and forceful American response, even
including a possible air strike to knock out the planes.

The alternative to escalation, of course, is negotiation. Last week President
Reagan authorized his special envoy to Central America, Richard B. Stone, to
explore the possibility of meeting with Salvadoran guerrilla leaders to discuss
ways of getting the insurgents to participate in elections. Mr. Stone has also
offered American support -critics say it is lip service - for efforts by Latin
American countries to ease regional tensions. But Mr. Stone himself has said the
odds are against success for his mission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. military advisers with Salvadoran troops

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE KISSINGER LESSON

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


History will credit Henry Kissinger with great achievements in his years of
power. The Nixon opening to the People's Republic of China could not have
happened without his skill. Whatever hope there is for peace in the Middle East
goes back to the disengagement agreements that he negotiated between Israel and
Egypt, Israel and Syria. There were gains for U.S. interests and those of
international order.

But there was a dark side to the Kissinger years. In the exercise of power he
relied again and again on corrupt means: secrecy, deceit, cynicism, violence.
The means were dangerous in themselves, and they led to some terrible ends.

Corruption in the means of power is the underlying theme of Seymour Hersh's
book, ''The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House.'' It is a
profoundly important theme, and the book marshals evidence that is gripping in
detail and in scale. To read these pages is to understand that Mr. Kissinger's
methods threatened the deepest American values.

Here is Mr. Kissinger, in the summer of 1969, personally picking targets in the
secret B-52 bombing of Cambodia. The planes dropped 110,000 tons of bombs on
Cambodia over a 14-month period, but the strikes were officially recorded as on
Vietnam. When the falsification of records became known in 1973, Mr. Kissinger
told a reporter that the White House knew nothing about it. He added: ''I think
it's deplorable.''

Through it all the aim was to please Mr. Nixon, and thus to secure and retain
power. To that end everyone else had to be cut out of the action and out of
access to the President, the Secretaries of State and Defense among them. But
then there arose a competitor in workaholic Heepishness: Alexander Haig. The
first time Mr. Nixon telephoned General Haig was a day of trauma. The scene
would be funny if it were not so awful.

What one senses is a desperate insecurity in the man. He could never bring
himself to say a simple word of regret even to the aides who had trusted him and
been wiretapped. And an insecure man was the more dangerous working for a
morbidly insecure President.

Mr. Kissinger says in his memoirs that Mr. Nixon wanted to cut Secretary of
State Rogers and his department out, in order to center foreign policy in the
White House, and I see no reason to doubt that. If Mr. Hersh believes that more
could really have been left to the hapless Mr. Rogers, I disagree.

But it hardly follows that Melvin Laird, the able Secretary of Defense, should
have been treated as an enemy. He was so cut out of the chain of military
command that Mr. Kissinger could communicate with field commanders in Vietnam
without his knowledge. Military guards at the most secret Pentagon
communications center were ordered to exclude Mr. Laird from the room. His
military aide was wiretapped.

Nor was there any legitimate reason - only monomania - for Mr.  Kissinger to
take over the arms control problem and do all the real negotiating with the
Soviets himself. Mr. Nixon's official strategic arms negotiator, Gerard C.
Smith, wrote later that ''there were no Verification Panel or National Security
Council discussions. There were no consultations with Congressional committees
or with allies.  It was a one-man stand, a Presidential aide against the
resources of the Soviet leadership.''

One remarkable aspect of Mr. Hersh's book is the effective way it incorporates
material from others, such as Mr. Smith's memoirs - and Mr. Nixon's and Mr.
Kissinger's. I admire Seymour Hersh as the country's premier investigative
reporter. This book reflects not just digging but integration of the published
history of the period: a formidable piece of work.

The other point exemplified by the book's treatment of arms negotiations is the
relationship of means and ends. Not surprisingly, the single-handed Kissinger
method produced flawed agreements. There were many reasons for the subsequent,
disastrous decline in Senate support for arms control. But one was a reaction
against what Henry Kissinger did, and the way he did it.

A heavy price was paid for the view that the end justifies the means. The people
of Chile paid, and Cambodia, and Cyprus. And Vietnam of course: Mr. Hersh
produces important new material on how Henry Kissinger went to Washington saying
that the United States had to be detached with as little damage as possible from
a losing war, and quickly joined his master in trying to win the war by other
means.

But America paid the heaviest price - or will if we ignore the lesson of the
Kissinger years. Giving him credit for accomplishments is one thing. It is quite
another to suggest, as some worshippers seem to, that this country can have an
effective foreign policy only if it uses his methods. There can be no lasting
American leadership in the world if our true vision of ourselves is corrupted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
James Reston is on vacation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

F.D.R.'S COALITION AWAITS A SPARK

BYLINE: By Joseph L. Rauh Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Old New Dealers never die; they just fade away trying to answer the question,
''What ever became of the Roosevelt coalition of the 1930's and 1940's?''

For me, the answer is not difficult: The coalition is alive and restless,
awaiting a spark to ignite it. Oh, sure, the Roosevelt coalition has lost some
of its least congenial components (big city machines now defunct or debilitated
and the states of the old Confederacy), and it may be creaky at the joints for
want of exercise. But the motivating and adhesive force of the Roosevelt
coalition - the desire and need for affirmative government - is as vital today
as it was 50 years ago.

At the heart of the coalition were liberals, labor, blacks, other minorities
including Jews, the unemployed, welfare recipients and other poor and near poor.
The concrete that held it together was dedication to affirmative government
directed toward the goal of a more livable and equitable society. That concrete
still exists and the groups that comprise the coalition are far stronger today
than when Franklin
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Joseph L. Rauh Jr. is a civil rights lawyer active in Democratic Party affairs
since the New Deal. Delano Roosevelt forged the alliance.
Today, 20 million workers belong to labor unions (about one-fifth of the
workforce), compared to barely two million (6 percent of the work force) when
Mr. Roosevelt took office. Blacks account for a larger number and percentage of
voters and Hispanics have become a new, vibrant force in many areas of the
country - both due in no small measure to the Voting Rights Acts. So many women
have joined the affirmative government coalition that the gender gap may yet
prove determinative in 1984. And any list of potentials for the coalition has to
include newly politically conscious groups like senior citizens, handicapped,
gays, small farmers and conservationists. But
even a cockeyed optimist on the liberal side has to concede that there are
tensions and divisions between various groups in the coalition. Blacks and
Hispanics have historic differences. Many Jews differ from others in the
coalition on affirmative action. Labor's hard line on military and foreign
affairs, protectionism and growth at the expense of the environment clashes with
the predominant liberal view on these issues. Abortion and gay rights are
divisive within and between groups. But the ties that bind the coalition
together are far greater than any of these tensions and divisions.
All groups in the coalition agree on one thing: Government can work for the
people from the bottom up, not just from the top down. They long for a society
where everybody who wants to work can have a job;
where the health of each person is properly cared for; where each child has an
opportunity for a decent education and no child goes to bed hungry; where every
family has at least minimum shelter; and where every vestige of discrimination
on grounds of race, creed, color, sex, sexual preference, national origin, age
or handicap is eliminated. These goals combine the special interest of each
component group with the general interest of all. Sadly, no one has yet sought
to arouse the coalition from the cynicism and apathy that set in with Vietnam
and Watergate. Jimmy Carter ran against Washington in both 1976 and 1980 and
summed up his belief on this score in his 1978 State of the Union Message when
he proclaimed that ''Government cannot solve our problems ... Government cannot
eliminate poverty, or provide a bountiful economy, or reduce inflation, or save
our cities, or cure illiteracy, or provide energy.'' Ronald Reagan's 1980
antigovernment campaign outdid even Mr. Carter's, culminating in an inaugural
one-liner about government being part of the problem, notable principally
because he was head of the Government that he called the problem. One would have
thought that front-runner Walter Mondale's record as a Senator made him the
perfect candidate to spark the affirmative government coalition. But it is not
going to be ignited by anyone who is perceived as the candidate of one group in
the coalition, and Mr. Mondale's acceptance of labor's protectionist position
and its military and foreign hard line (as evidenced, for example, by his
criticism of the ''no first strike'' advocates) at least gave that appearance.
Nor is the coalition going to be ignited by almost-front-runner John Glenn,
whose self-described centrist position has a muted antigovernment
tone. The coalition can only be aroused by one who makes each group believe his
or her stand for affirmative government is in the interest of all and that he or
she is the captive of none. F.D.R.  exuded the sincerity, optimism and courage
to instill the coalition with the intensity of dedication necessary for
electoral success. The coalition is out there waiting for the person with the
courage to buck today's conservative conventional wisdom and give the coalition
the leadership for which it yearns.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISH-AND-PERISH CATCH IN DEFENSE RESEARCH

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1144 words


Emanuel Donchin is a scientist at the University of Illinois Cognitive
Psychophysiology Lab. He has been working with Department of Defense support
since 1973, a relationship he describes as being for the most part ''very
enlightened.'' But this year he protested about pre-publication review clauses
in an Air Force contract, and now finds himself minus a potential two-year
project.

Pentagon funding of university science is on the rise after a long post-Vietnam
period of mutual suspicion between the military and academe, and debate about
the effects of this money on the conduct of research is rising as well. Unlike
Vietnam days, however, the question now is not so much whether to spurn the
military's affection. In a climate of fiscal austerity, most universities are
eager for it. Rather, the issue on campus and in Washington is how to reach a
compromise between the scholar's need for free inquiry and the Reagan
Administration's desire to restrict the flow of American technology abroad.

Professor Donchin's research would have been into something he calls ''aircraft
simulator environment,'' or how to measure the mental work load of pilots as
they perform various missions. His part of the project was unclassified, with
the Air Force subcontracting through the General Dynamics Corporation to the
university. Dr. Donchin and the cognitive lab were to supply psychological
expertise, while General Dynamics fit the measuring techniques to real-life
missions (whose details Dr. Donchin was to remain unaware of). He said the
project's funding would have amounted to a ''very small portion'' of the lab's
$600,000 annual support, of which about $400,000 comes from the Defense
Department.

Problems arose when Dr. Donchin discovered wording in his contract that he had
never seen before. ''On perusing the material,'' he said, ''I was shocked to
find a clause requiring prior review of all published material.'' In a letter to
the university's grants and contracts office, he wrote that this would interfere
''with our basic mission as scientists to create and disseminate knowledge.''
Nonetheless, he eventually reached an agreement with General Dynamics and the
Air Force on what needed to be reviewed before release, namely any specific
description of General Dynamics facilities or Air Force missions.

But one sticking point remained, he said. The Air Force insisted on controlling
the duration of the review period. ''I finally said I would accept it,'' Dr.
Donchin said, ''but in a letter to General Dynamics I said there should be
provisions against capriciousness.'' The provisions he laid out, such as
assurance that he could go public with grievances about an unreasonably long
review, proved unacceptable to the Air Force.

''What was always supposed to be a scientific dialogue has been turned over to
legal counsels,'' Dr. Donchin said.  There are currently more than 40 different
Government groups investigating the export control of American technology, a
level of activity that underscores the shift from scientific to legal
considerations perceived by Dr. Donchin. ''People who are not scientifically
trained will tend to say 'stop publishing, close things down,' '' said Leo
Young, director of research and laboratory management at the Pentagon. ''There
is vigorous discussion within the Department of Defense - we are not of one
mind. There are those concerned with security policy, their job being to
minimize leakage.  On the other end are those who generate the technology, who
say the whole enterprise will slow down. I thought the Corson report
('Scientific Communication and National Security,' the 1982 report of a National
Academy of Sciences panel chaired by Cornell president emeritus Dale R. Corson)
was very good, but whenever the going got tough, it waffled.''

The Corson study, which found no ''specific evidence of damage to U.S. national
security caused by information obtained from U.S.  academic sources,'' has
served as the takeoff point for subsequent debate. It recommended restricting
access to university research only when a project's technology met four criteria
simultaneously: rapid development, ''identifiable direct military
applications,'' significant ''near-term'' military benefit to the Soviet Union,
and American uniqueness. The tangle of Federal groups - spread primarily through
the Department of Defense, Department of State, Department of Energy and the
White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy - has been trying to work
out how to implement these and other suggestions. ''No one knows what
'near-term' means, for example,'' Dr. Young said.

While the haggling continues, the Pentagon anticipates growth in its funding of
university science and technology, according to Dr.  Young. Budget analyses by
the American Association for the Advancement of Science show military support
growing by 7.4 percent in current dollars between fiscal 1983 and 1984 to $873
million, for a cumulative growth of 58 percent since 1981.

Most of this money is earmarked by Pentagon budgeters for ''basic'' research,
but specific project areas can sound anything but pure.  According to Bob Park,
professor of physics at the University of Maryland and director of the American
Physical Society's office of public affairs, the following categories appear on
a Defense list of basic research initiatives: self-contained munitions (Army),
electrooptic countermeasures (Navy), low speed takeoff and landing (Air Force).
''I would have a hard time finding a scientist who would define these as
basic,'' Dr. Park said. ''They're funding an awful lot of applied research and
masquerading it as basic.''

David A. Wilson, executive assistant to the president of the University of
California at Berkeley and co-chairman of an export controls panel in the
Department of Defense-University Forum, a group of military and college
officials formed last year, said he did not foresee an ''exponential'' increase
in funding to universities. ''It has been possible to discuss the issue of
controls because the actual number of cases has been small,'' he said.

''In my mind, the fundamental thing remaining to be resolved is how to define
what to control,'' Dr. Wilson said. ''There are the Platonists, who want a
specific list of restricted areas. And there are the Aristotelians, who want
only a set of general characteristics from which to proceed case by case. We are
still some distance from resolution.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of government spending for R&D at colleges

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SIX YEARS FOR THE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By Tom Wickery; Tom Wicker is a columnist and associate editor of The
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4834 words


The idea was debated in the Constitutional Conventiion. Andrew Jackson revived
it 40 years later. Most 19th-century Presidents favored it, and in 1913 Woodrow
Wilson had to intervene personally to stop Congress from approving it. The idea
of electing the President of the United States for only one term of six years
won't die. Now an impressive new National Committee for a Single Six-Year
Presidential Term has brought it out again and is pushing the necessary
constitutional amendment with what may be better-than-usual prospects for
success.

The latest single-term movement is being led by a formidable, bipartisan array
of well-known public servants. In the words of former Secretary of State Cyrus
R. Vance, a liberal Democrat, they ''cover the spectrum from Vance to Simon.''
And that's quite a spectrum, since he was referring to William E. Simon, the
conservative Republican who served Presidents Nixon and Ford as Secretary of the
Treasury.

In Congress, a similar range of supporters has emerged, from Representative John
Conyers Jr. of Michigan - black, liberal and Democratic - to Senator Strom
Thurmond of South Carolina -white, conservative and Republican. Mr. Thurmond is
chairman of the Judiciary Committee, which must approve proposed constitutional
amendments before they go to the Senate floor.

Such varied proponents of change, many of them members of the new national
committee headed by Mr. Vance, Mr. Simon, Dr. Milton S.  Eisenhower and Griffin
B. Bell, the Attorney General in the Carter Administration, also have the
enthusiastic backing of former President Carter himself. He suggested in a
recent telephone interview - as one example of his reasoning - that negotiations
for the release of American hostages in Iran might have been ''concluded
earlier'' in 1980 except that it was an election year.

Now another election year is approaching. Some political observers think
President Reagan's tough stance against raising taxes, despite huge prospective
budget deficits, is an example of re-election pressures already at work upon him
- the kind that the single-term amendment would be partially designed to
prevent.

Mr. Reagan has been noncommittal on the single-term issue, although some backers
of the idea say he favors it in private; his support and lobbying could be a
major factor in Congressional approval. The front-running Democratic challenger,
former Vice President Walter Mondale, has strongly opposed the proposal as ''a
lessening of the fundamental accountability that must be built into our
political system." But there's little chance that whoever is elected in 1984
would be affected; precedent suggests that a President in office when a change
in tenure was ratified would be exempt from its limitations.

Mr. Vance, now a Manhattan lawyer, predicted in an interview that the proposed
constitutional amendment would be debated in the current Congress and draw wide
bipartisan support. He and other members of the new committee, he said, had
found in speaking appearances around the country ''a great deal of resonance and
interest ... a feeling that, yes, something does have to be done.''

Co-chairman Simon is not so optimistic. Interviewed in his Morristown, N.J.,
consultant's office, he expressed devout support for the idea but added: ''I
don't think it's going to happen. I just don't see the steam behind it yet.''

Knowledgeable Congressional sources tend to agree with Mr. Simon.  They say the
stronger immediate push will be for one or more of the ''big three'' proposed
constitutional amendments - the revived equalrights amendment, one to prohibit
abortion and one to permit prayer in the public schools. But single-term
supporters are confident that they can get a vote, perhaps by next year after
hearings this year.

As a matter of hard fact, however, the Gallup Poll, which has taken surveys on
this issue since l936, has never found more than 34 percent of the public in
favor of the single six-year term. That figure was registered in l981, although
in December 1980, the Harris Poll found 43 percent supporting the idea.

Why has this perrenial reform proposal, as old as the Republic and at least as
hearty, refused to go away? Probably because it reflects a view that's just as
persistent - the American conviction that unseemly ''politics'' somehow stands
too often in the way of ''good government'' by pure-souled ''statesmen''
dedicated only to ''the public interest.''

Andrew Jackson was not generally considered in his day such a paragon of
nonpolitical government, but he nevertheless gave Congress in 1830 a resounding
statement of this attitude. He recommended a single term ''in order that (the
President) may ... be placed beyond the reach of any improper influences ... and
that the securities for this independence may be rendered as strong as the
nature of power and the weakness of its possessor will admit.''

But the single-term idea has never prevailed because of an equally strong belief
of similar persistence that such ''good government'' is elitist in concept and
unrealistic in practice, while grubby politics reconciles the necessarily
conflicting interests of a democracy and makes the wheels of government turn,
even if slowly.

More than a century and a quarter after Old Hickory's appeal for purity, former
President Harry S. Truman bluntly stated this opposite point of view: ''A
politician is a man who understands government, and it takes a politician to run
a government.''

And later, to a Congressional hearing on the single-term issue: ''You do not
have to be very smart to know that an officeholder who is not eligible for
re-election loses a lot of influence. So, what have you done? You have taken a
man and put him in the hardest job in the world, and sent him out to fight our
battles in a life-and-death struggle - and you have sent him out to fight with
one hand tied behind his back, because everyone knows he cannot run for
reelection.''

Actually, for all the long history of discussion and debate on the single
six-year term, the proposal has never been submitted by Congress for approval by
three-fourths of the states; not even the resistance to Franklin D. Roosevelt's
four terms pushed it that far.  Instead, before Congress limited Presidents to
two terms with the 22d Amendment in l947, the Senate defeated by 82 to 1 a
single six-year term proposal by Senator W. Lee (Pappy) O'Daniel of Texas.

Approval was more nearly achieved in the lame-duck session of the 62d Congress.
Woodrow Wilson had been elected in 1912 on a Democratic platform calling for a
single six-year term. His Republican opponent, President William H. Taft, had
promised to approve legislation for an amendment and a survey by The New York
World found a big Congressional majority that favored the reform.

On Feb. 13, 1913, the Senate approved the constitutional amendment, 48 to 23,
one vote more than the necessary two-thirds. But Presidentelect Wilson, no doubt
with an early eye on his own prospects for a second term, already had written A.
Mitchell Palmer, a leading member of Congress, to object. The proposed amendment
died quietly when the 62d Congress went out of office on March 3.

Mr. Wilson, a political scientist by profession and one of the keenest
intellects to occupy the White House, made to Representative Palmer what still
is a strong argument against the single six-year Presidency. A four-year term,
he wrote, was ''too long for a President who is not the true spokesman of the
people, who is imposed upon and does not lead. It is too short a term for a
President who is doing or attempting a great work of reform. ...''

Changing to six years, he argued, ''would increase the likelihood of its being
too long, without any assurance that it would, in happy cases, be long enough.''

PROPONENTS OF THE SIX-year Presidency give a variety of reasons for renewing the
fight -the vast growth of the Federal Government, for example, and the complex
role the nation now must play in world affairs. In only four years, a President
can hardly master his difficult job, they point out, yet no President since
Dwight Eisenhower in the 1950's has been elected to and served two full terms.

They say that every President, at least since John F. Kennedy, has been to some
degree a failure -Lyndon B. Johnson driven from office by oppposition to the war
in Vietnam, Richard M. Nixon forced to resign by the prospect of impeachment,
Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter unable to win re-election, Ronald Reagan by no
means sure of doing so.

Save for Mr. Johnson in the mid-1960's and Mr. Reagan in l981, none had the
willing cooperation of Congress. Particularly in foreign affairs, the lack of
continuity brought on by frequent changes at the top has baffled and irritated
foreign governments and made American policy too often ineffective,
misunderstood - or even nonexistent.

Presidents themselves, Cyrus Vance believes, have been failing to face issues,
or dealing with them ''in ways that may look politically attractive'' but are
only superficial. Moreover, many complex issues - he cites a strategic-arms
negotiation -may require more than the four years allowed to recent one-term
Presidents.

''The business of being President,'' he says, ''is so complicated'' that adding
re-election concerns makes it ''more than any human being can take.''

Timothy W. Stanley, president of the International Economic Policy Association,
has been persuaded by his experience as a former Government official that, as
now organized, ''our society and our politics don't seem to be equipped to make
choices involving tradeoffs between the short term and the long term ... .''
Particularly in foreign economic policy, he believes, ''any set of policies
requires more continuity and less uncertainty'' than recent Presidencies have
provided.

Herbert Brownell Jr., President Eisenhower's Attorney General and a member of
the single-term committee, put his finger on what may be an unspoken motive of
some former Government servants actively pushing the single six-year term: ''I
think there has been nothing more discouraging over the years to these
volunteers who are essential to our welfare than to see that their carefully
laid plans on foreign policy or domestic policy or whatever are subordinated so
soon and so fast to overriding political considerations.''

''Overriding political considerations'' are at the heart of the matter. The
basic theory of most who seek to restrict Presidents to one lengthened term is
that the necessity or desire to seek reelection causes political
''considerations'' - winning and keeping the support of interest groups, for
example - to dominate all others in a President's first term. A single six-year
term, it is held, would remove this political pressure and give a President two
more years than he or she can now be sure of to carry out difficult, longterm
plans.

Mr. Simon, a classic ''good government'' advocate who says ruefully that ''the
next battle I win with a President's political advisers will be the first one,''
argues that the present term is not really four years: ''It's a year and a
half.''

The argument that running for re-election takes too much of a President's time
may be the strongest for the single six-year term.  Mr. Vance made the point in
more detail: ''Every President needs eight or nine months to learn his job. Then
he has about one and a half years to feel comfortable in a job he knows. Then
he's running again for 12 to 18 months.'' And, of course, there's a mid-term
Congressional election that no President can afford to ignore.

As for the opposing argument made so strongly by Harry Truman - that a President
who cannot be re-elected becomes an instant lame duck (his coattails, Clark
Clifford, the astute Democratic political adviser, once observed, would be
''permanently in mothballs'') - single-term proponents have a ready answer. If
that's a sound argument, they say, the two-term limitation of the 22d Amendment
already has turned second-term Presidents into lame ducks.

But they also question whether it is a sound argument. Second-term Presidents
were inhibited by tradition - until F.D.R. - from running again; since Harry
Truman, two-term Presidents have been constitutionally barred from running
again. Yet, they say, the skies haven't fallen.

President Carter, in fact, believes that being eligible for reelection actually
damaged his credibility. No matter what he did in the White House, he said in
l979, it was ''colored through the news media and in the minds of the American
people by 'Is this a campaign ploy or is it genuinely done in the best interest
of our country without any sort of personal advantage involved?' ''

General Eisenhower is the only President to have served two full terms since the
22d Amendment took effect, and thus to have suffered whatever lame-duck effect
it may cause. Milton Eisenhower recalls that his brother felt no lame-duck
limitations in his second term.

''He was even more effective as President in his second term than in his
first,'' Dr. Eisenhower said in a telephone interview. ''He faced the complete
control of Congress by the Democrats, but he had no real trouble getting his
programs through. He only had two vetoes overriden in eight years as President;
that's a pretty good relationship with Congress.''

But not everyone agrees that President Eisenhower's second term was successful.
Representative Morris K. Udall of Arizona, writing on the term-limitation issue,
judged that Ike was ''politically emasculated following re-election and could
not control his own Cabinet, much less the Congress.''

Lyndon Johnson was, by definition, a lame duck for nearly 10 months after he
announced on March 31, 1968, that he would not seek reelection. George Reedy -
who served Mr. Johnson in several capacities - wrote of the period in his
respected study ''The Twilight of the Presidency'':

''The erosion of his power became apparent within weeks ... . The last 10 months
of his Administration were marked by frustration on every issue, with the sole
exception of the convening of the Paris conference to discuss ways and means of
ending the Vietnam War.''

Even at Paris, nothing happened until a new President was elected.

MOST PROPONENTS DO not claim the single six-year term would be a cure-all for
whatever ails the Presidency and the country; but they argue, as Mr. Simon does,
that it would be ''a major step in the right direction.'' For one thing, he
thinks, it would help bring into the Government ''people who have the courage to
go in and get things done and get out of there.''

President Carter, citing the ''blatantly'' different policies of his successor
on human rights, nuclear arms control and nuclear proliferation, agrees that the
reform would provide ''much greater stability.'' And a six-year term with no
year taken out for a reelection campaign, he told me, would allow an incoming
President to ''plan for a more coherent term'' and give him more time to get
things done after his learning period.

Mr. Vance insists that the single six-year term would provide ''more stability
for a period within which predictability would be possible,'' thus mollifying
what he said was a major concern of foreign officials with whom he has talked -
a lack of predictability in Washington.

Proponents also claim that more able Presidential candidates would be lured into
the field if they could count on a longer term without the distractions of a
re-election campaign, particularly since none would have to run against a
politically powerful incumbent.

Mr. Carter had a somewhat different reason for urging the removal of incumbents
from Presidential races. Near the end of a first term, he said, when a President
opens a re-election campaign, there is a ''driving pressure'' on his likely
challengers to ''dispute or contradict the President on the issues'' for
strictly political reasons.

This is ''a very distressing thing,'' Mr. Carter said, because on the issues in
question the President may well be acting in the national interest. Then, if
such a challenger is elected, the same national interest will force him to
''reverse himself'' - as President Kennedy did when he found in l961 that there
was no ''missile gap,'' and as President Reagan has had to do on strategic arms
negotiations. A President's credibility and political support can suffer as a
result.  This ''driving pressure'' on challengers to criticize the incumbent's
policies might be lessened, Mr. Carter thinks, if an incumbent could not be a
candidate to succeed him or herself. He recalled how President Ford, seeking
renomination by the Republican Party in 1976, had to ''back off'' from strategic
arms agreements reached with the Soviet Union at the Vladivostok summit and from
seeking ratification of the Panama Canal treaties when both projects came came
under fire from his challenger, Ronald Reagan.

Former Treasury Secretary Simon offers a graphic example of how reelection
pressures worked on Mr. Ford: ''When we prepared the 1976 State of the Union
Message ... I wanted to add a few pages on the two very controversial issues of
tax and welfare reform. After a long debate with the Economic Policy Board I put
the pages in, and when we discussed the State of the Union Message with the
President he said, 'Boy, I agree with this 100 percent. We're going to do it.'
The political advisers' heads snapped around, and he added: 'Next year.' Of
course, 'next year' - January l977 -never came for us.''

Mr. Carter was not immune to such pressures. He withdrew SALT II from Senate
consideration early in 1980, but Mr. Vance thinks ''it would have been
different'' in a nonelection year. ''It's inevitable,'' he says, that a
President will ''draw back or not take political risks'' when facing
re-election, and the consequences can be serious. In the case of SALT II, Mr.
Reagan took office and declared the treaty ''fatally flawed'' and ''dead.''

Mr. Carter said in the telephone interview that he was able to get such
controversial measures as the Alaska Lands Act and the ''superfund'' for
cleaning up toxic waste sites through Congress only after he had been defeated
in the 1980 election, and then only because the Republicans didn't want Mr.
Reagan to have to face these difficult issues the next year.

''I think every public servant is concerned with his re-election,'' former
President Johnson told Walter Cronkite in a television interview in l972, ''and
has to think of that from the day he takes the oath until the time his term
expires. And I think that we're all inclined to put off the hard ones and
postpone them sometimes because we think, 'Well, we'll have another term ... .'
And if a fellow knew from the beginning that he had a definite limitation and
the bell's going to ring at a certain time, he might be able to tackle some of
the problems he's inclined to postpone.''

Mr. Carter went in the other direction when he decided to force through the
unpopular Panama Canal treaties during what he thought would be his first term.
Mr. Carter termed the treaties ''the most difficult political problem I ever had
in my life, including running for President as an unknown in l976.'' Clark
Clifford suggested that so thorny an issue should be reserved for a second term,
when there would be no problem of re-election.

Mr. Vance, who was Secretary of State when the decision to seek the treaties was
made, feels strongly that Mr. Carter had no alternative because there might
otherwise have been a popular uprising in Panama with ''serious consequences in
this hemisphere and far broader consequences elsewhere in the third world.'' He
concedes that deferring such a battle to a second term was ''probably right
politically'' but believes the issue had to be addressed ''when Carter's power
was greatest.''

Probably there would be no such treaties today if Mr. Carter had waited for the
expected second term; Ronald Reagan, the treaties' strongest opponent, was
elected. The former President counts the treaty battle among the major reasons
Mr. Reagan defeated him in l980 and points out that it also helped ruin the
Republican Presidential bid of Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., who incautiously
supported the treaties. Only seven of 16 senators who voted for them and then
had to face the voters in l978 were re-elected.

PRESIDENTS WILSON AND TRU-man, as quoted above, laid out two of the major
arguments against the single six-year term -that such an amendment might shorten
the tenure of a good President and lengthen that of a poor one; and that a
President who cannot be re-elected will be a weakened President - a lame duck
from the start.  These are not views restricted to liberal Democrats. Lyn
Nofziger, for example, Ronald Reagan's hardball political adviser, once
commented that ''the threat of running again and being re-elected is about the
only party discipline we have in this country.''

And among the Founding Fathers, it was Alexander Hamilton - not exactly a mushy
liberal - who most strongly made another point against the single-term
Presidency. A President's eligibility for reelection was essential, Hamilton
argued in ''The Federalist,'' essay 72, ''to enable the people, when they see
reason to approve of his conduct, to continue him in his station, in order to
prolong the utility of his talents and virtues ... .''

When they see reason to approve of his conduct. And when they don't, the remedy
is obvious, as Harry Truman said: ''If he is not a good President, and you do
not want to keep him, you do not have to re-elect him.'' Presidents, Hamilton
and Truman were saying in their different ways, should be accountable to the
people and the only way to hold them accountable is to subject them to the test
of reelection.

If a President must leave office at the end of six years, moreover, he might
have to step out in the middle of a war or some other serious national crisis.
(Under the 22d Amendment, this would also be true of a second-term President, if
we ever have another.)

And it is by no means clear to everyone who has studied the problem that
re-election pressures lead only to crass political decisions, without regard to
national interest. Representative Udall, a Presidential candidate himself in
l976, has pointed out that while the approach of the l972 elections led Richard
Nixon into the Watergate scandals, Mr. Nixon also ''brought American troops home
from Vietnam, slapped on wage and price controls, went to China, and moved
toward detente with the Russians - in each case reversing prior positions. In
short, his greatest achievements grew out of the pressure of an approaching
election.''

In 1968, for another example, Lyndon B. Johnson refused to seek reelection
rather than change his Vietnam policy or risk defeat on that issue. Whatever may
be thought of that policy, Mr. Johnson's withdrawal certainly did not reflect a
desire for re-election above all.

If President Reagan decides to seek re-election, he might be led to make a
compromise agreement with the Russians on limiting intermediate-range missiles
in Europe. Some might debate whether such an agreement would be in the public
interest; but without election pressures, a hard-liner like Mr. Reagan might not
even consider a compromise.

And anyway, most of those who have opposed recurrent proposals for the single
six-year term strongly disagree with the basic ''good government'' reasoning of
its advocates - that the President should be relieved, as far as possible, of
political considerations and freed to act as a statesman in the national
interest.

Those who make this argument, said the late James C. Hagerty, President
Eisenhower's press secretary and political adviser, in his Congressional
testimony, are ''confusing and downgrading the essential political aspect of the
Presidency ... using the word 'politics' in a crude and demeaning manner,
instead of referring to it in its true meaning - the art of government,
accomplishment for the public good through reasonable compromise without
surrender of principle or integrity.''

George Reedy argued in

''The Twilight of the Presidency'' that single-term proposals are ''based on the
belief that a President's authority is somehow separable from his political
leadership. ... The reality is quite different. A President whose political
leadership is unchallenged can do just about anything that he wishes. A
President whose political leadership has suffered from erosion is virtually
helpless.'' Separating him from the pressures of the public, Mr.  Reedy wrote,
would only ''tend to make him an ineffectual voice issuing orders and decrees
... .''

Clark Clifford once said that he found ''the notion that a President should be
above politics inconsistent with our system of government, just as I find the
prospect of a Presidential dictator to be inconceivable under the same system.
... Politics, in the final analysis, is an essential part of democracy. A
President above politics is a President remote from the processes of government
and removed from the thoughts and aspirations of his people.''

Beyond these points against the single six-year term, I would raise several
other arguments and questions: Shouldn't the people have the right to re-elect a
President of whom they approve? And doesn't the 22d Amendment merely limit this
right rather than abolish it, as the single six-year term would do?  A President
would not himself be on the ballot in any of the biennial elections during his
six years in office. Wouldn't this diminish his sense of accountability as well
as the public's ability to influence him?  One-third of the Senate would have to
run in Presidential election years; two-thirds never would have to do so. What
effect would this have on a President's political support?  Given a President's
extraordinary powers as Commander in Chief of the armed forces, isn't it risky
to entrust him with such powers for six full years with no remedy for abuse save
the difficult impeachment process?  Even if a six-year term would be an
improvement on four, is it necessary to insist that an incumbent can't be
re-elected? France, with its seven-year term, has no such limitation. Mexico
does, but it's not apparent that its six-year term provides a more stable
government than the United States' system.  Most supporters of the six-year
proposal also favor term limitations on members of Congress - 12 years for
members of each house. They're too smart to push for that while the Presidential
proposal is pending, but isn't this distant threat likely to deter Congress from
acting, lest it invite efforts for its own restriction next?

The National Committee for a Single Six-Year Presidential Term is looking into
such problems. The committee works in close cooperation with the Foundation for
the Study of Presidential and Congressional Terms, and the two groups share a
Washington office. The former columnist Charles L. Bartlett acts as a consultant
to the committee; the staff organizes speaking engagements and debates for
committee members.

''We have a practical organization now,'' according to Herbert Brownell. ''The
things that have to be done in the way of arousing public opinion and debate are
going to be done.  The talking to Congressmen, senators and state legislatures
which has to be done is going to be done.''

But, as Cyrus Vance acknowledges, the Founding Fathers ''set up a wise, slow
way'' to change the Constitution, requiring the approval of two-thirds of each
house of Congress and of three-fourths of the states. As backers of the original
equal-rights amendment and District of Columbia statehood have recently learned,
that makes it almost impossible to amend the Constitution without overwhelming
public support.

Perhaps the single six-year term, if finally instituted, would prove so
effective a reform that the Presidency would at last be more nearly dominated by
measures than by men, by abstract judgment of the public interest rather than by
the clash and reconciliation of interests. And perhaps that would be a good
thing. Political history, however, encourages neither proposition.

But even if the current drive fails, this ancient issue is unlikely to go away.
The human animal is too persistent in its search for a system or a mechanism
that will somehow overcome its own vagaries and fallibilities. And Americans,
particularly, are too strong in their belief that somehow, someday, they will -
or at least should - be able to purge their Government of politics. We want to
be rescued from ourselves.

''Maybe,'' said Bill Simon the day the National Committee for a Single Six-Year
Presidential Term was announced, ''we'll get some statesmen instead of the
standard brand of politician who is just seeking one thing, his own
re-election.''

Or maybe, as Harry Truman said, ''A statesman is a politician who's been dead 10
or 15 years.'' A lot of people think Mr. Truman himself proves the point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing of Andrew Jackson photo of Harry Truman Drawing
of Woodrow Wilson Drawing of Lyndon Johnson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNDERSTANDING THE REALITIES

BYLINE: By James Fallows; James Fallows is Washington editor of The Atlantic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1524 words


LIVING WITH NUCLEAR WEAPONS By the Harvard Nuclear Study Group: Albert
Carnesale, Paul Doty, Stanley Hoffmann, Samuel P. Huntington, Joseph S. Nye Jr.,
Scott D. Sagan.  With a foreword by Derek Bok.  268 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. Cloth, $12.95. New York: Bantam Books. Paper, $3.95.

THE United States and the Soviet Union have lived under the doctrine of nuclear
deterrence for more than a generation. Yet during the 1970's, deterrence all but
disappeared as a subject for general political debate. Today's disputes over
nuclear policy were foreshadowed by arguments about the MX and Pershing II
ballistic missiles during the Carter Administration. But recently the focus has
moved away from criticism of specific weapons and back to the larger questions
the ban-the-bomb movement raised in the 1950's. As people have reflected on the
precise implications of deterrence, many have yearned for some alternative, some
release from the prospect that civilian populations will eternally be held
hostage.

The antinuclear movement today is superficially similar to the campaigns for
civil rights and against the Vietnam war in the 1960's. But there is a
difference. By the time those earlier crusades were over, laws and policies had
been fundamentally changed. My guess is that the present debate about nuclear
deterrence will have the opposite effect. The farther people are willing to
follow the tangled threads of nuclear policy, the more they may be convinced
that there is no escape from deterrence - except to use such shelter as it
provides to reduce the political tensions that could lead to war.

Such an outcome would accord with the advice of the five professors and one
graduate student who constitute the Harvard Nuclear Study Group. Derek Bok, the
president of Harvard University, introduces ''Living With Nuclear Weapons'' as
part of an attempt to help ''educate the body politic to think more effectively
about important issues facing the country,'' and the book argues that nuclear
deterrence, though unappealing, is for the moment inescapable. ''Deterrence can
be seen as a necessary evil,'' the study says. ''Because it is necessary, one
cannot abandon it carelessly; because it is evil, one must strive to rely on it
less.''

The authors caution against any change in technology or policy that would tempt
Soviet or American leaders to resort to nuclear weapons in time of crisis, such
as the outbreak of war in Europe or the Middle East. They dismiss as wildly
improbable the surprise attack scenarios that have so dominated political
discussion for the past few years.

Therefore, in the part of their prescription that is sure to be most vexing to
the left, they make a technician's case against a nuclear freeze or an
across-the-board reduction in nuclear weaponry.  Not all new weapons or all
increases in nuclear arsenals make the world more dangerous, they say. Some
innovations and modernizations - better-concealed submarines, more secure
command and control systems, a change from multiwarhead missiles back to
single-warhead launchers - might reduce the risk of nuclear war by increasing
each side's confidence that its force would survive, even if attacked first.
Instead of a complete freeze, they suggest that the United States and the Soviet
Union negotiate ''discriminating restraints on weapons technology.'' One such
restraint could be a ceiling on the total number of nuclear warheads, which
would be ''consistent with the simplicity that is the great virtue of the freeze
idea.''

AS for striving to rely on deterrence less, the authors insist that while
nuclear technology has forever changed the risks of war, it will still be
politics and diplomacy -activities within man's control - that determine whether
war takes place. They imply that living with nuclear weapons is like living with
sin: It demands a ceaseless struggle, offering no exit or final victory, but the
difference made by partial victories can be immense. ''There is no reason to
assume that absolute solutions - either holocaust or disarmament - are the only
answers mankind is capable of developing,'' they say. And ''Modest steps
matter.''

They direct their fire at those who throw up their hands and avoid making
choices altogether because they think there are no ''good'' choices about
nuclear weapons. They are particularly cross with Jonathan Schell, the author of
''The Fate of the Earth,'' whose exhortations to ''reinvent politics'' they see
as evidence of an intelligence trying to escape consideration of the real
options. What they see as the counterpart escapism of the right is a dream that
the evil of Soviet Communism might be extirpated or that protective laser beams
or similar technical marvels might have the effect of uninventing the bomb. The
authors of ''Living With Nuclear Weapons'' reply to those dreams, ''Someday,
maybe.'' Until then, they say, we must turn our attention to coexisting with the
Soviet Union, reducing the incentives for South Africans, Israelis and
Pakistanis to use nuclear weapons and finding ways of making deterrence more
stable.

In many ways, this book is valuable. It is clearly written, free of jargon and
almost always good-tempered. It is systematic and thorough; its discussions move
from balance-of-power politics, through the technology of nuclear weapons and
the history of arms control, to the circumstances in which war would be most and
least likely. It explains how the secrecy of Soviet society makes it a black box
to Western observers, while the tumult of American politics constitutes white
noise to the Russians. It emphasizes how little can ever be known about nuclear
warfare until it is too late - that is, until the weapons have been used. Almost
anyone who reads it will come away with a clearer sense of the arguments made on
all sides.

Still, I suspect that the book will have less impact on political debate than
Mr. Bok may have hoped when he established the Study Group. One reason is that
on specific questions of policy, the report often sounds like a compromise
negotiated among dissenting committee members - which, of course, describes its
origins precisely. The book speaks with a firm, magisterial voice about the
challenge of living with nuclear weapons. But it speaks in hedged, uninformative
language about the MX missile, civil defense projects and the deployment of
Pershing II missiles in Europe.

THERE is a greater problem: the tone of the book. For if it is about nuclear
weaponry, ''Living With Nuclear Weapons'' is also about the academy's
involvement in political debate. In his introduction, Mr. Bok describes his
heartfelt concern that the knowledge available in a university should help
citizens steer their way through tangled public issues. His impulse is wholly
admirable; educators at every level should do more to illuminate our public
choices. (Those who wrote this book are at high levels in Harvard, and a few
have been at high levels of government.)

Unfortunately, the language of the book aggravates the impression that Harvard
is herewith rendering its expert judgment to a grateful public. The strain of
addressing the ''concerned citizen'' seems a little too obvious on these pages.
Every historical and literary allusion is explained, and every point is spelled
out. The reader is nudged along with study guide boxes that explain themes to
bear in mind when considering arms control proposals.

NO doubt the authors' intention was to make a difficult subject comprehensible
to nonexperts, but the effect is to patronize the reader rather than engage him
as an equal. Of course, the reader is not an equal when it comes to knowledge of
nuclear strategy. But nearly all books are written by people who know more about
a subject than most of their readers do. The most effective authors present
their evidence and then attempt to persuade the reader, respecting his
independence of mind. This book, unfortunately, has too much of the oracular
tone of some professors, who stand before students to proclaim the truth.
Precisely because some of the authors are known for their previous disputes with
one another (especially Stanley Hoffmann and Samuel P. Huntington), the summary
passages beginning with the formula ''We conclude'' imply that further
disagreement is ruled out. (For example: ''We conclude that the contributions of
airlaunched cruise missiles to deterrrence and crisis stability outweigh the
potential costs of arms control.'')

That is the more unfortunate because the premise of this study is that when the
realities are understood, reasonable people will find significant areas of
agreement. Yet much of the antinuclear protest has come from people who feel
that the ''realities'' as they are seen by leaders of governments and experts do
not include many crucial elements, such as different definitions of national
interest and different conceptions of the balance of power. I happen to agree
with most of the premises of the authors of this book and therefore with most of
their conclusions. I suspect that those who start out in disagreement will end
up where they started too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ENVIRONEWS

BYLINE: By Leo H. Carney

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 25, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 855 words


THE director of the Environmental Sciences Laboratory at the Mount Sinai
Hospital School of Medicine in New York says there is no telling how people who
live near dioxin dumps react to low-level exposures to the chemical over long
periods.

''The information we have on dioxin exposure only comes from highlevel
accidents,'' said the director, Dr. Irving Selikoff, adding that Governor Kean
did the only thing he will be able to do by offering broad protection to
residents of the affected areas.

A byproduct of the manufacture of potent herbicides, dioxin has been found at
chemical plants in Newark, Clifton and Edison. Last week. state officials were
testing some of eight other sites believed to contain significant amounts of the
chemical.

In an interview, Dr. Selikoff, who lives in Bergen County, said that dioxin was
first isolated in Germany in the 1950's. By the 60's, he said, it became better
known to scientists from a number of accidents involving high exposure.

It was found that laboratory animals could develop cancers if exposed to a
minute amount of dioxin, and that birth defects and liver diseases also were
probable at these low levels.

''But accidents are very rare,'' Dr. Selikoff said, ''and the effects of
low-level, recurrent, long-term exposures are not known.  These people may very
likely be well, but we don't know.''

In Newark, dust in the vacuum cleaners of people living near the former site of
a factory owned by the Diamond Shamrock Company showed 0.2 parts of dioxin per
billion.

Scientists say that the maximum exposure rates set by the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, 1 part per billion, is the equivalent of an eyedropper of
liquid in a backyard swimming pool.

Dr. Selikoff, who has been examining people exposed to a dioxin accident in West
Virginia, said that the chemical appeared to cause immuno suppression in the
body, thereby leaving its victims with lowered resistance to infections ''and
all kinds of other illnesses like AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).''

Dioxin has been the subject of much confused debate among those who produce it,
including the Dow Chemical Company; those who have been exposed to it and the
Government agencies that were supposed to have controlled its use. These include
the Department of Agriculture and the Environmental Protection Agency.

Donald G. Barnes, a science adviser on pesticides and toxic chemicals for the
E.P.A. in Washington, has been coordinating the Chlorinated Dioxins Work Group.
Formed in 1979, the group serves as a sounding board for all parties and keeps
track of the latest develoments, exposures, law suits and research.

In an interview, Mr. Barnes said that the data collected on dioxin so far ''say
clearly that it is toxic to animals in rather strange ways.''

''Less than a millionth of a gram can kill a guinea pig,'' he explained. ''The
guinea pig just seems to waste away over a period of weeks.

''But there has been a wide range of reactions among different species, from
accute lethality to the chronic effects.'' Although it has been shown to cause
tumors in laboratory animals that were fed one-billionth of a gram of dioxin in
their food every day for many weeks, Mr. Barnes said, human epidemiological
studies to date ''do not seem to confirm the worst fears -that direct exposure
can cause near-term death in humans.''

Dr. Linus Pauling, twice a Nobel Prize laureate, said in an interview that he
suspected that chemicals in the environment and in the medicine cabinet could be
contributing to the nation's high rate of skin cancers.

''We already know that contact with certain chemicals such as hydrocarbons can
cause cancer,'' he said, ''and so I suspect that other chemicals can be
contributing to cancer, too.''

Dr. Ira H. Gouterman, chief of the division of dermatology at St.  Michael's
Medical Center in Newark, said that arsenic had been shown to cause some skin
cancers. He said this had occured in people who used medications that contained
arsenic, and in veterans who spent four months or more in Vietnam drinking water
that contained arsenic.

To avoid uncertainties over the carcenogenicity of the thousands of chemicals
that have been introduced into society since World War II, Dr. Pauling suggested
that each one be subjected to the Ames test.

Originally an indicator of mutagenicity, the test, Dr. Pauling said, has a very
high correlation to carcenogenicity. Unlike regular cancer tests that cost as
much as $500,000 per substance to determine potential carcenogenicity, the Ames
test costs only a couple of thousand dollars and therefore would be more
practical.

Mr. Barnes said it was doubtful that the scientific community could accept the
Ames test as an absolute, but that the E.P.A. ''would like to have shorter, more
reliable and less-expensive tests than there are now'' to determine a chemical's
carcenogenicity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ CRITICIZES SOVIET REJECTION OF ARMS PROPOSAL

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 26


Secretary of State George P. Shultz criticized the Soviet Union today for its
rejection of interim proposals made last month by the United States at the
Geneva talks on limiting medium-range missiles.

Mr. Shultz, saying the United States offer was ''reasonable,'' added: ''It is up
to the Soviet Union to respond to that, and not simply say we reject it. Try
something else. I think we are owed a responsible answer.''

A senior Reagan Administration official said in Washington on Friday that Soviet
negotiators in Geneva had rejected the latest American offer.

Mr. Shultz made his comments at a news conference in Manila before flying here
for the second stop of a four-nation trip to Asia.  Since the arms reduction
talks resumed on May 17, the Reagan Administration, in a shift from its previous
call for a total ban on such weapons, offered to accept a parity in medium-range
warheads ranging from zero to 450.

Soviet Negotiator 'More Rigid'

The figure is lower than the 572 cruise and Pershing 2 missiles that the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization plans to begin deploying in Western Europe in
December.

The Administration official said Friday that the United States proposal above
the zero level, put forward by the chief American negotiator, Paul H. Nitze,
would include a mix of Pershings and cruise missiles. It does not include the
British and French nuclear arsenals.

The Administration said that Mr. Nitze's counterpart, Yuli A.  Kvitsinsky,
appeared to receive little leeway from his Government to negotiate
substantively, and ''was more rigid in rejecting'' the new American proposal
than he had been earlier in the 21-month-old talks.

Turning to the Middle East, Mr. Shultz sought to play down the importance of
Syria's expulsion last week of Yasir Arafat, the leader of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.

Saying that the expulsion would would ''weaken'' Mr. Arafat's position in the
Middle East and within the P.L.O., Mr. Shultz described Mr. Arafat's troubles as
secondary to the broader issues preventing peace in the area.

''We must focus our attention more and more on the human beings called
Palestinians'' rather than groups representing factions within the Palestinian
community, Mr. Shultz said. He added that the goal of getting all foreign forces
to withdraw from Lebanon remains the ''primary focus'' of American peace efforts
in the Middle East.

Contacts With Filipino Opposition

On another subject, a senior official traveling with Mr. Shultz discussed
statements concerning the future of the Government of President Ferdinand E.
Marcos in the Philippines that were made earlier in the trip by officials in the
Shultz party.

Those officials said that the Reagan Administration was starting to make
contacts with opposition groups in an effort to prepare for political
developments in the Philippines when Mr. Marcos relinquishes power. The
officials said that this action was being taken because of concern that the
United States might lose access to important military bases in the Philippines.

Today, a senior official said that it ''would be foolish not to'' think ahead.
He denied, however, that the United States feared that the Marcos Government
might give way to an anti-American regime.

The official stressed that the United States foresaw no imminent change in the
Philippines Government, and predicted that the improving economy in the United
States would eventually help restore a measure of prosperity to the Philippines,
which has suffered serious economic problems in recent years.

The official's comments appeared to be an effort by members of the Shultz party
to back away from earlier remarks in which they talked about the dangers of
instability in the Philippines when Mr. Marcos gives up power.

Cambodia Issue Discussed

Mr. Shultz, asked about one of the key issues he will face while in Thailand
-the occupation of Cambodia by Vietnamese forces - offered a noncommittal
response to a Thai proposal calling on Vietnam to withdraw it forces 30
kilometers, or about 18 miles, from the border between Cambodia and Thailand in
exchange for a visit to Hanoi by the Thai Foreign Minister.

Mr. Shultz said such a withdrawal would be ''a step in the right direction,''
but said he would not comment further until he had talked with the Thai Foreign
Minister, Air Marshal Siddhi Savetsila, and the Foreign Ministers of the four
other nations that make up the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Aside from Thailand, the member nations are Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and
the Philippines. The five Foreign Ministers, who concluded their annual meeting
here today, endorsed the Thai proposal about Cambodia. Mr. Shultz is scheduled
to met with the Foreign Ministers while he is here, and will also hold
discussions with the Foreign Ministers of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Japan,
and West Germany.

The Foreign Ministers of the Association reviewed the Cambodian situation during
their meeting and reiterated their call for total withdrawal of all foreign
forces from Cambodia. They also expressed concern about ''demographic changes''
being imposed in Cambodia by the Vietnamese, which an American official said was
a reference to the settlement of 400,000 Vietnamese in eastern Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Shultz and Siddhi Savestsila (page A6)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CANADIAN JUDGE WEIGHS KEY DIOXIN CASE

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1904 words

DATELINE: HALIFAX, Nova Scotia


A lawyer for the plaintiffs, in his final argument, called the trial a World
Series of scientific dispute, saying he felt he was in the batter's box in the
ninth inning of the seventh game with the bases loaded. ''No matter what happens
as a result of this hearing, the record will stand for all time,'' Richard
Murtha declared.

The issue is whether the court should grant a request by 15 people and stop the
planned spraying by a pulp and paper company of socalled phenoxy herbicides
containing dioxin. The 15 plaintiffs live near forests where the company plans
to spray.

Testimony in the case in Nova Scotia Supreme Court in Sydney, on Cape Breton
Island, was recently completed after more than a month, and a ruling is expected
by the end of June.

Central Questions Raised

Indeed, the case has struck at some of the central questions of this chemical
age: At a time of accelerating scientific knowledge and heightened public
concern, what is environmental danger and how is it defined? What degree of risk
is acceptable, particularly when that risk must be balanced against other
societal needs and values?

Have some people overreacted and become too frightened of dioxin, as some in the
United States have recently suggested? And what of the question of the legal
system's competence to judge evidence on the frontiers of science, carrying
health implications perhaps as far as a half-century in the future?

Because of the exceedingly technical nature of these questions, Judge Merlin D.
Nunn ruled against a jury trial. But, as he points out, he too is a layman in
such sophisticated scientific issues. So who should decide?

The plaintiffs, a group of farmers, fishermen and Indian chiefs from Cape
Breton, a craggy island northeast of the Nova Scotia mainland, presented
scientific data they say suggests that any quantity of dioxin, no matter how
small, is unsafe and that as little as one molecule coming in contact with one
human cell may cause cancer, birth defects and other maladies. And the
plaintiffs' position presumes that any doubt must be resolved in favor of
safety.

Banned in U.S. but Not Canada

The defendants, Nova Scotia Forest Industries, a subsidiary of Stora Kopparbergs
of Sweden, counter that the herbicide, called 2,4,5-T, is totally safe in the
quantities intended for use. This phenoxy herbicide, which, in a stronger
concentration, was used in Vietnam as a defoliant known as Agent Orange, has
been banned in the United States for forestry and most other uses but is heavily
subsidized by the Canadian Government for forestry applications. It is said to
be needed to protect new softwood seedlings from overgrowth by hardwoods.

''The law does not exist to protect plaintiffs from unfounded fear,'' Harvey
Morrison, a company lawyer, said.  Defense witnesses conceded the extreme
toxicity of dioxin, although they questioned its ability to cause cancer and
other long-term effects. Dr. Frank Dost, a toxicologist from Oregon State
University, said the worse form of dioxin, TCDD, was ''exquisitely toxic.''

But the defense witnesses repeatedly testified that in the herbicides proposed,
the amount of TCDD was too small to have any impact on human health.
Essentially, they argued that many useful chemicals are risky and that the
quantity is what matters. They say the quantity to be sprayed on Nova Scotia
would be thousands of times below the danger level.

Canada Supports Spraying

Such substances as aspirin and caffein, for instance, can be more toxic than
phenoxies in sufficient quantities, they said.  ''I would not be concerned about
an increase in birth defects,'' said F. Clark Fraser, a medical geneticist who
works for the Canadian Government, which supports the spraying plans.

Dr. Kenneth Crump, a biostatistician from Louisiana, argued that 1,000 people
eating phenoxy-contaminated berries generation after generation would expect one
cancer every 7 million years. Dr. Richard Wilson, chairman of the physics
department of Harvard University, testified, ''It is really hard to assess a
risk this low.''

The plaintiffs' lawyers strongly attacked these probabilities, causing Dr. Crump
to admit that in one instance he was off by a factor of 10,000 in one of his
calculations. They also delighted in Dr. Wilson's mention of a specific license
plate number he had seen in the parking lot to illustrate the extremely small
probability of ever seeing a particular number. It turned out to be the judge's.


Science Data Still Evolving

But even the plaintiffs' attorneys said the defense case had a logical tightness
theirs lacked, partly, they said, because science in this area is still
evolving.

Underlying the entire discussion was the fact that phenoxy herbicides have been
used and people have been exposed to them in various places and various degrees
for 40 years all over the world.  Repeatedly, Judge Nunn asked for concrete
evidence of deaths or severe health problems resulting from phenoxy exposure.

''If this stuff is so horrendous, you'd have the evidence,'' the judge said.
The plaintiffs denied that there is no solid evidence against dioxin, and they
called 12 expert witnesses to present their case.

'In a Ball Park by Itself'

For days, their witnesses hammered away on the basic theme that even a very
little can be too much. Dr. David S. Wulfman, a chemistry professor from the
University of Missouri, testified that compared with other cancer-causing
substances ''dioxin is in a ball park by itself'' and that a ''no-effect level''
has not been demonstrated.

Dr. John D. Constable, a Harvard University surgeon, said that ''at the
molecular level'' phenoxy herbicides are enough to cause reproductive changes.
Dr. William McNulty of the Oregon State Primate Research Center said his
experiments with monkeys showed single doses of dioxin in the smallest of
concentrations caused spontaneous abortions.

As part of the dosage argument, several witnesses for the plaintiffs contended
that dioxin exposure is cumulative in the same manner as radiation; even if one
exposure does not cause health problems, it might when combined with later
exposures. In part, this possibility was used to try to controvert an
uncontested defense assertion that much larger amounts of dioxin than those to
be sprayed on Cape Breton have not caused such known dioxin reactions as
chloracne, a stinging skin disease that normally vanishes after a few weeks.

Witnesses also suggested that it is wrong to think of any one carcinogen in
isolation. Rather, known cancer-causing substances interact with unknown ones in
endlessly complicated ways that are exceedingly difficult to prove. ''Rats don't
also smoke,'' Dr. Mikael Eriksson, a Swedish cancer expert, told the court.

Epidemiology Discussed

From a scientific viewpoint, one of the more interesting aspects of the trial
was a discussion of epidemiology, the science of tracing the causes of disease
in human populations.

One type of epidemiological study is to find people with the disease and then
look backward to find common factors they might have experienced. The plaintiffs
presented a Swedish study showing a correlation between phenoxy exposure and the
incidence of a rare form of tissue cancer. ''This connection is widely accepted
by the real authorities in this field,'' Dr. Eriksson said, under sharp attack
from the defense attorneys.

Another type of epidemiological study is to examine people who were exposed to a
common event and then compare their health with others who were not. Dr.
Constable of Harvard testified about a study of 40,000 Vietnamese that, he said,
showed that wives of soldiers exposed to Agent Orange experienced more
miscarriages and birth defects. He said dioxin appeared to be the first human
toxic substance that, when given to a man, may increase his wife's
''reproductive misadventures.''

Statistics are obviously an integral part of epidemiology.  Accordingly, the
plaintiffs presented a statistician, Dr. Theodor D.  Sterling of Simon Fraser
University in British Columbia, partly to argue that no single epidemiological
study should be looked at alone. For instance, the study of miscarriages
experienced by Oregon women after 2,4,5-T spraying that led to the United States
ban is convincing when combined with other evidence, despite many criticisms of
that specific study, he said.

Like Card-Game Statistics

Dr. Sterling agreed with the statement by Judge Nunn that epidemiology is ''not
unlike the statistics of a card game - you may never get that perfect hand.''
The statistician also criticized a study by a Dow Chemical scientist indicating
that there is a level of dioxin exposure below which laboratory rats were not
affected. He did not question an assertion that in five rats, livers and
thalamuses, where dioxin collects, had not much enlarged. But he argued that
five rats were too few to test low levels of exposure.

Clearly, though, his prescription might be difficult to carry out.  ''If you are
going to use a very low dose, ideally you might want 10 million animals,'' he
said.

The trial's outcome could hinge on the simple issue of trespass: The judge could
take a novel position that people should not have to put up with minuscule
amounts of uninvited molecules on their property, anymore than noxious odors.
This would entail the judge's accepting the disputed argument by the plaintiffs
that the chemicals have a good chance of being dispersed, however careful the
applicators.

''I'm not an expert, but I know that water flows downhill and wind blows in all
directions,'' said Charles Mullendore, a plaintiff who is a clergyman and
part-time farmer.

Regulatory System Cited

But if Judge Nunn orders a injunction on the basis of concern over the safety of
phenoxy herbicides, he would be taking a large step the defense lawyers believe
he does not have to take. They say the letter of the law is enough: that 2,4,5-T
has been specifically approved by Canadian regulators, who have not allowed some
herbicides approved by the United States Government. To rule against them would
be ''tantamount to overthrowing the regulatory system,'' George Cooper, one of
the lawyers, said.

There are a number of courses the judge could take other than a straight
yes-or-no decision. Among other things, he could approve spraying of some sites
and not others; approve the use of some herbicides but not 2,4,5-T, or grant an
injunction only for a limited period of time. He could also reject spraying of
all sites on the basis of the two Indian plaintiffs' definition of their native
rights.

In any case, the Judge Nunn's decision is not going to be easy.  ''Can I
possibly absorb all this stuff?'' he asked at the trial.  ''I have a great
problem with a great deal of the evidence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Judge Merlin Nunn

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WOMAN IN THE NEWS;
NEW CIVIL SERVICE CHIEF

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


Two months ago, Governor Cuomo ran into Karen S. Burstein at a luncheon in New
York City.  ''Are you loving what you're doing?'' the Governor asked Miss
Burstein, who was then executive director of the State Consumer Protection
Board.

''Nope,'' she answered.  To her friends, the response was classic Burstein -
straight, honest, to the point and displaying an eagerness to move on.  Late
Saturday night, the 40-year-old Miss Burstein got results.  The Governor
nominated her to be president of the State Civil Service Commission. Within
hours, she was confirmed by the State Senate.

In her new job, which pays $65,700 a year, she will head the central personnel
agency for about 165,000 state jobs. Her decisions will also affect thousands of
municipal employees who are under Civil Service rules in local and county
governments.

A Varied Public Career

It is not easy to wrap up Karen Burstein's public career in a single phrase. She
came to public attention in 1970, when she ran for Congress as an anti-Vietnam
War activist. She has championed feminism, during her five years as a Democratic
member of the State Senate and later as a founder of the Center for Women in
Government, which is affiliated with the State University branch in Albany.

As a member of the State Public Service Commission, she frequently opposed the
utilities' proposed rate increases and sparred with her colleagues over the
approval of new nuclear power plants. She continued her consumer advocacy as
chief of the consumer protection agency.

''I see what I've done as a progression,'' Miss Burstein said yesterday. Her
comment to Mr. Cuomo notwithstanding, she said the consumer job had been
challenging for a while. But after two years, she felt that it was time to move
on.

Supporters and critics of Miss Burstein alike marvel at her energy and
intelligence.  ''She's too damn liberal,'' said Senator Frank Padavan, a Queens
Republican who served with Miss Burstein in the State Senate. ''But she is an
energetic public servant.''

''She gets to the office at 9 and leaves at 9,'' said Evelyn Roth, an aide to
Miss Burstein. ''And she takes three briefcases home with her.''

''She is the smartest person I've ever met,'' said City Council President Carol
Bellamy, who admits to bias because of their long friendship.

How important is public service in Karen Burstein's life? Miss Bellamy was
asked.  ''Other than the three or four books she reads a day, I would say it has
been her essence.'' Karen Sue Burstein was born on July 20, 1942, the oldest of
six children born to Beatrice Burstein, a State Supreme Court justice in Nassau
County, and Herbert Burstein, an administrative lawyer.

A Science-Fiction Enthusiast

She lives in a small, wooden ranch house in Woodmere, L.I., with 6,000 books,
including what Miss Bellamy calls ''the world's greatest science-fiction
library.'' She recently gave up smoking cigarettes and is trying to capitalize
on her clean lungs by regularly exercising her 5-foot-3 frame.

Her marriage to Eric Lane, counsel to the State Senate minority, ended in
divorce. They remain ''very dear friends,'' she said, as was evident by the
party held Saturday night after her appointment. The party was in Mr. Lane's
Capitol office.

Miss Burstein says she expects to prepare for her new job in a characteristic
fashion: by reading.  Beyond that, she plans to meet with the two other members
of the commission, James T. McFarland and Josephine L. Gambino, and with an
array of public-employee union leaders.

New York's Civil Service system was created more than a century ago to transform
a hiring system based on political favors into a merit system.

New Working Situations

''Over time, systems ossify and get arthritic,'' Miss Burstein said. ''What you
thought was appropriate 100 years ago, when a man was the primary one in the
work force and his wife and 2.3 children were at home, may no longer be
appropriate. Now there are different combinations.''

These new family and working situations require new hiring rules, new
examination procedures and new working hours, she suggested.  And what about
Miss Burstein's working situation? How long will she stay in this job? And will
she make another stab at elective office?  ''My political career has been
serendipitous,'' she said. ''I can never rule it out.'' Miss Burstein made a
second run for Congress in 1980, and for the second time made a strong showing
in her overwhelmingly Republican Long Island district. Will she try again in
1990?

''I may do it in decades,'' she responded, ''but I am not a moron.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Karen Burstein

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
'Twilight Zone' Studio and 3 Others Pay Fines

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 159 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 27


Warner Bros. and three people indicted in the deaths of the actor Vic Morrow and
two children in the filming of ''Twilight Zone'' have dropped their appeals of
civil charges and paid $20,000 in fines to the State Labor Commissioner,
officials said today.

The studio, the director John Landis, an associate producer, George Folsey Jr.,
and the unit production manager, Dan Allingham, were found in violation last
July 30 of state rules against exposing minors to a hazardous situation and
against working children after 6 P.M.

The deaths occurred in the filming of a Vietnam War sequence when debris knocked
a rotor off a helicopter and it crashed on Mr. Morrow and Renee Chen, 6, and
My-ca Dinh Le, 7.

The settlement of the civil case has no impact on criminal charges. Criminal
indictments returned on Friday against five people charged involuntary
manslaughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE PEOPLE'S RIGHT IN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATIONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 728 words


To the Editor:

In his June 7 Op-Ed piece, Prof. Nelson Polsby laments that ''primaries have
become a dominant force'' in the selection of delegates to national conventions
and suggests that the system we had ''before we started tinkering wasn't too
bad.''

he whole purpose of what Polsby calls ''tinkering'' was to afford the people a
say in the Presidential nominating process. The reforms instituted by the
Democratic Party were premised on the proposition that the right to nominate is
an integral part of the right to elect and that, in a democracy, that right
belongs to the people.

Polsby erroneously ascribes to the reforms overly long Presidential campaigns as
well as the failed Presidency of Jimmy Carter and the failed candidacy of George
McGovern. He misconnects causes and effects.

Do we really want to go back to the old process? The Democratic Party commission
that studied the pre-1968 process found that whole state delegations were chosen
by single individuals. Twenty states had no written rules at all. And - talk
about long campaigns - the commission found that by the time Lyndon Johnson had
announced his withdrawal from the 1968 race, the nominating process had already
begun in 38 states.

More than 600 delegates were selected by processes commencing over two years
before the convention. In my own state, Connecticut, it was already too late to
enter a slate for Robert Kennedy when he announced his candidacy. Favorite-son
and unit-rule delegations were delivered en masse to the candidate who promised
the most favors.  Above all, only a handful of states accorded enrolled party
members meaningful access to the process. The length of Presidential campaigns
today has little to do with the reforms. Indeed, one of the reforms was to bar
nominating procedures prior to the calendar year of the election. The problem is
that in the age of television, campaigns are so expensive that fund raising, not
delegate selection, must begin almost as soon as the polls close on the last
election.

Contrary to current mythology, George McGovern was nominated in 1972 by a
process not yet significantly affected by the reforms. His nomination, produced
more in the spirit than in the reality of reform, came in rebound from the
mid-campaign murder of Bobby Kennedy and the tormented Chicago convention of
1968. Would Scoop Jackson, the candidate of the politicians, have fared better?

If the Democrats chose the wrong candidates in 1976, it was not because of the
nature of the nominating process but because of a latent national hunger, in the
post-Vietnam, post-Nixon era, for a middle-of-the-road candidate who would
soothe the national pysche.  Jimmy Carter filled that need. He oozed honesty and
tranquillity. He was, in fact, the politician's dream candidate, embodying a
coalition of white Southerners, ghetto blacks, doves, hawks, born-agains, et al.
His subsequent imprisonment by the hostage crisis and our declining economy can
hardly be attributed to the primary process.

The candidacies of both Carter and McGovern reflected the times that spawned
them. It is spurious to scapegoat the primary process for their failures. The
point that the people's judgment should be replaced by that of the party bosses
is not made by wallowing in nostalgia about successful candidates selected in
collective bargaining sessions between party leaders called conventions. Such
nostalgia forgets the failures begotten by that system.

The reforms are comparatively new. Let's give the voters a chance to prove that
they, like the party professionals, can select the Franklin Roosevelts as well
as the Franklin Pierces.

Let us refine the process and work on the problem of campaign financing. But let
us not remove from the people the right to nominate. Without that right,
universal suffrage is sham.  NORA ENGEL Norwalk, Conn., June 10, 1983 The writer
was a member of the 1973-74 Democratic Party Commission on Delegate Selection.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 29, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WIDE G.O.P. ACCESS TO CARTER PAPERS IN '80 IS INDICATED

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1748 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


The White House released sheafs of information today from President Reagan's
1980 campaign files indicating that Reagan advisers had repeated, secret access
to strategy material prepared for President Carter, including debating tactics
and other campaign plans.

President Reagan said tonight at his news conference that he ''never saw
anything of the kind'' in the campaign.  ''It seems strange to me that, since I
was the debater, no one on our side ever mentioned to me anything of this
kind,'' he said, suggesting the materials might have come from a ''disgruntled
worker in the Carter campaign.''

He indicated that the Democrats were now pursuing ''political'' motives in
demanding an investigation of how his campaign aides obtained the material.

A Battery of Questions

The President answered a battery of questions about the surreptitious use of the
Carter material in his 18th formal Presidential news conference. He also said,
with a broad smile, that he found ''profound wisdom'' in the observation of
House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. that even without the secret material Mr.
Reagan would have defeated President Carter.

Copies of a thick pile of three-year-old papers were released this afternoon
after the Reagan Administration sent the originals of the documents to the
Justice Department.

The papers obtained in 1980 by Reagan campaigners included key Democratic debate
and campaign plans that were used by the Reagan team to anticipate President
Carter's political themes and initiatives. There was no full explanation by the
Reagan Administration of how the materials were obtained.

Value of Material Debated

Reagan Administration officials said privately that the release of the
information was intended to clear the air quickly, thus preventing any echo of
the extended secrecy that compounded the Watergate scandal a decade ago.
However, Patrick H. Caddell, President Carter's poll taker and campaign
strategist, contended this evening that a full disclosure had not been made.

''We are obviously struck by the large quantity of information beyond the core
of debate briefing materials they had,'' Mr. Caddell said, asserting that some
materials appeared to have come from Vice President Mondale's offices as well as
Mr. Carter's.

''They clearly had a steady flow of information from the White House,'' he
contended.  The Reagan Administration continued to insist that the Carter
material, while used to prepare Mr. Reagan for the debate, was of marginal value
and that its use was a traditional part of politics.

The level of penetration of the Carter White House is suggested by a note,
hand-written a week before the 1980 Reagan-Carter debate from Wayne Valis, a
Reagan campaign aide, to David R. Gergen, currently President Reagan's director
of communications and a campaign aide in 1980. Mr. Valis said his notes were
''based on a Carter debate staff brain-storming session'' and that he had
obtained them ''from a source intimately connected to a Carter debate staff
member.''

''Reliable,'' Mr. Valis emphasized. ''I gave a copy to Jim Baker.''

Baker Can't Recall Memo

This was a reference to James A. Baker 3d, currently White House chief of staff
and the campaign aide charged in 1980 with preparing Mr. Reagan for the debate.
Mr. Baker said in a cover letter released today that he had no recollection of
having received such a memo.

The intelligence in Mr. Valis's note began with the observation that ''Carter
plans to expose Reagan flip-flops.'' This language is echoed in a separate
document, composed four days later by Reagan officials for their own candidate's
debating preparations, which summarizes ''Carter's Attack Strategy'' for the
challenger and begins: ''Exploit Reagan's flip-flops.''

Mr. Gergen contended today that Mr. Carter's ''flip-flop'' tactic was part of
conventional political wisdom, widely known at the time.Mr. Gergen said he
recalled this private note from the campaign but did not know how Mr. Valis
obtained this information. ''To the best of my knowledge, I took no action on
the basis of it.''

Carter officials have charged that the Reagan campaign had a ''mole,'' or
informer, on the Carter staff who secretly transferred political strategy
documents from the White House to the Reagan camp. They have called for a
special prosecutor to look into the clandestine use of Carter materials by
Reagan campaign officials.

Mr. Gergen and other Reagan officials said today that Mr. Reagan's own debate
strategy book ''does not bear a significant relationship to the materials from
the Carter camp.'' Carter officials have charged, to the contrary, that the
materials taken from their camp provided a significant political advantage to
Mr. Reagan as he confronted President Carter at the debate in Cleveland on Oct.
28, 1980.

The President said it would ''be up to the Attorney General'' whether to appoint
a special prosecutor for the affair, as Democrats demand.

In attempting to explain use of the material, President Reagan said tonight that
it saved aides the trouble of ''having to go out and dig up'' material that was
widely known about the Carter record.Repeatedly, he fenced with reporters in
discussing the ethics of the practice, finally emphasizing that he believed
''politics should be above reproach.''

''There shouldn't be unethical things done in campaigns,'' Mr.  Reagan said,
''even such things'' as accusing an opponent of being ''racist.'' This clearly
was a reference to what the President felt was a comparable slight by the Carter
campaign in characterizing his record on the race issue in the 1980 campaign.

Asked whether the materials should be considered stolen if they did, in fact,
come from a disgruntled Carter campaign worker, Mr.  Reagan said, ''It probably
wasn't too much different from the press rushing into print with the Pentagon
Papers, which were stolen - and they were classified and it was against the
law.'' The Pentagon Papers were a secret history of American involvement in the
Vietnam War.

Reagan Sought Monitoring

Last week, the President initially said the controversy was ''much ado about
nothing.'' But this week, after former Carter aides charged that key strategy
memos had been purloined, Mr. Reagan called for a close monitoring of the affair
by the Justice Department.

Earlier today, before the Reagan Administration released the documents sent to
the Justice Department, former President Carter said through a spokesman in
Atlanta that he was ''surprised'' by the initial revelation that the opposition
had access to his debate strategy. He declined further comment at this time,
according to a spokesman, Dan Lee.

While the Justice Department is described by Reagan officials as ''monitoring''
developments, the only formal inquiry begun thus far into the controversy is
being conducted by Representative Donald J.  Albosta, Democrat of Michigan and
chairman of the Human Resources Subcommittee of the Post Office and Civil
Service Committee, charged with overseeing Government ethics.

The Congressman first learned of the allegations from a recently published book
about Mr. Reagan by Laurence Barrett.

A Compliment From O'Neill

This morning, before the White House released the documents, Speaker O'Neill, a
Democrat, gave an unexpected compliment to President Reagan, saying Mr. Reagan
would have won in 1980 even without secret access to President Carter's briefing
plans because of the extreme unpopularity of Mr. Carter.

''Briefing book or no briefing book, our candidate was extremely unpopular in
the last election,'' Mr. O'Neill said as he expressed personal distaste for a
Congressional inquiry about to begin.

Mr. Caddell contended that the Reagan Administration had not released all the
Carter information it had used in the campaign. He referred particularly to the
comments today of David A. Stockman, currently budget director and the Reagan
strategist who made use of Carter documents in playing the role of Jimmy Carter
in Mr. Reagan's debate rehearsals.

Other Materials Recalled

Mr. Stockman recalled some of the material released today, he said in a letter
to Fred F. Fielding, the White House counsel. But he also indicated recollection
of having used somewhat different materials, too, and Mr. Caddell thought this
was significant.

Repeatedly in their comments, the Reagan principals quarreled over the value of
various pieces of the hundreds of pages of material.  But they nevertheless
confirmed that some of the material was used in the preparation of Mr. Reagan
for the debate.

Mr. Gergen issued a copy of a letter to Representative Albosta correcting his
earlier letter which had minimized his recollections of any Carter material.

''Unfortunately, I wrote that letter to you before completing a thorough search
of all my files,'' Mr. Gergen apologized. ''That was a mistake I very much
regret.'' He noted that he had since found two relevant documents in a search of
his files: the memo from Mr.  Valis, and what he described as ''materials
clearly prepared by the Carter camp relating to foreign policy and national
security issues.''

Significance Played Down

Mr. Gergen added that he and other Reagan officials were ''trying to make a good
faith effort to reconstruct events.'' He insisted that while the Carter material
was ''of interest,'' they did not ''play any significant role in the preparation
of materials or Governor Reagan.''

Other parts of the documents released today drew similar comments from other
principals in the Reagan campaign. These included Mr.  Stockman; Mr. Baker;
Frank Hodsell, a Reagan strategist for the debate, and William J. Casey, Mr.
Reagan's campaign manager and currently director of Central Intelligence.

Mr. Casey re-emphasized that he had no recollection of ever dealing with any of
the released information. Mr. Baker, the White House chief of staff, has said he
recalled that some basic Carter debating information had come to the Reagan
campaign from Mr. Casey.

However, Mr. Casey said today, ''Until recent disclosures, I did not know that
the campaign had any material from the Carter camp that was not publicly
available.''

''The campaign management never contemplated or authorized seeking any inside
information from the Carter camp,'' Mr. Casey declared.  Carter officials
contend that at least one suspected informer was a holdover from the previous
Republican Administrations of Richard M.  Nixon and Gerald R. Ford.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 30, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption yesterday with an article about purloined Carter campaign
documents misidentified the source of the book shown. It was made available to
the White House this week by Patrick H. Caddell, a Carter aide.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of copy of Carter campaign briefing book (page
A19)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 29, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

P.O.W.'S IN VIETNAM AREN'T RULED OUT

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 28


A senior Reagan Administration official said today that the United States had
information that kept it from ruling out the possibility that some Americans
captured during the Vietnam War are still alive.

The official said the Administration ''has information in its possesion that
precludes ruling out the possibility that live Americans are being held captive
in Indochina.''

The official said more than 200 reports from refugees who claimed to have seen
American prisoners in Indochina in recent years could not be dismissed. He said
polygraph tests supported many of the refugees' reports.

Because of these reports, the official said, the Reagan Administration decided
to increase diplomatic efforts to account for missing Americans and to expand
intelligence-collection to try to check the refugees' reports. He said the
Administration had asked Congress to increase by 25 percent the number of
analysts working on the problem in the Defense Intelligence Agency. He said
there were 14 or 15 analysts now.

Shultz Addresses Issue

The issue came up today when Secretary of State George P. Shultz appeared to
endorse private efforts to recover dead American servicemen in Indochina, a
position contradictory to that of the Administration.

Mr. Shultz, speaking at a news conference at the end of a meeting of Southeast
Asian nations, said the American Government was for ''any means that can be
effective'' in locating and recovering the 2,494 Americans listed as missing in
action. He also refused to rule out Government support for a recovery mission
headed by James G. (Bo) Gritz, a former Army Special Forces officer in Vietnam
who led a mission into Laos last year that failed.

Mr. Shultz's comments contradicted assertions by the Reagan Administration that
it considered such private efforts illegal and damaging to official efforts with
the same goal.

Immediately after the news conference, State Department officials traveling with
Mr. Shultz said that he had not meant to endorse such private efforts and that
the Reagan Administration remained opposed to them. They said Mr. Shultz might
have been confused because he was not fully briefed about the issue, was not
familiar with Mr. Gritz's history and had apparently misunderstood a question.

When asked whether the United States would support a mission by Mr. Gritz, Mr.
Shultz said, ''The answer is very unlikely, but these things would have to
looked upon case by case.''

U.S. Sought Asians' Help

Mr. Shultz's remarks grew out of the Administration's effort to make the
recovery of American dead in Indochina a major issue at the meeting here of the
Foreign Ministers of the five countries in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations - Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore and the Philippines - and
their six so-called dialogue partners, Japan, Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
West Germany and the United States.

In a speech to the five Foreign Ministers today Mr. Shultz asked their help in
accounting for the missing. He described the issue as a ''matter of the highest
priority for President Reagan and for the American people.''

The official said that in a closed meeting with the Foreign Ministers, Mr.
Shultz reported that the United States had information indicating that 400 dead
Americans were being ''deliberately withheld'' by Vietnam. Mr. Shultz, an
official said, called the Vietnamese action ''cruel and heartless.''

Later, after the news conference, the official who spoke about the possibility
that Americans are still being held captive said that the information about the
400 American war dead came from a Vietnamese undertaker who defected to the
United States several years ago. The official said the undertaker's account was
also supported by the results of a polygraph test, the so-called lie-detector
test.

The Mission Into Laos

The issue of missing serviceman returned to prominence this year when Mr. Gritz
turned himself in to the Thai authorities, who had sought him for illegally
crossing the border between Thailand and Laos.

Mr. Gritz, a decorated Vietnam War veteran, led a small band of Americans and
Indochinese into Laos last year to try to find the missing dead and check
reports about American prisoners.

Several prominent Americans, including William Shatner, the star of the
television series ''Star Trek,'' later said they had helped pay for the Gritz
mission. It failed when the men were discovered and attacked by Laotian military
forces. Mr. Gritz and his colleagues fled back to Thailand.

After the mission was disclosed, the Reagan Administration denied claims by Mr.
Gritz that he had received support from the Defense Department. The
Administration also condemned the effort, saying it opposed illegal,
cross-border forays.

At the news conference, Mr. Shultz said that working ''through official channels
is probably in the long run the most effective method.'' But he added,
''Clearly, we are anxious to have any method used that would help return the
remains of the deceased and provide information for us and for the families on
those who are missing.''

Asked what sort of methods he would support, Mr. Shultz said, ''The key word is
if it has a good chance of being effective.'' He also said, ''Of course, any
means that can be effective we're for.''

Mr. Shultz is scheduled to fly from to New Delhi on Wednesday for two days of
talks with Indian leaders. His Asian trip will end with a stop in Pakistan.

----

8 War Dead Identified

WASHINGTON, June 28 (AP) - The Pentagon today identified eight Air Force and
Navy dead from the Vietnam war who were turned over to an American delegation in
Hanoi this month.

The Air Force members were Col. Larry W. Biediger of La Coste, Tex.; Col. John
F. Dudash of Manville, N.J.; Col. Farrell Sullivan Jr. of Caddo Mills, Tex., and
Lieut. Col. Merwin L. Morrill of San Carlos, Calif.

The Navy members were Cmdr. Donald F. Lindland of Eugene, Ore.; Lieut. Cmdr.
Charles R. Lee of Costa Mesa, Calif.; Lieut. Cmdr. James T. Ruffin of
Deatsville, Ala., and Capt. Lynn K. Powell of Provo, Utah.

The Pentagon said they were lost in 1966, 1967, and 1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Shultz with King Phumiphol Aduldet

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 29, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BAR MITZVAH WITH A VIETNAMESE FLAVOR

BYLINE: By RON ALEXANDER

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


THE chopsticks were the first clue that this was not to be the customary bar
mitzvah feast. Placed prominently above the dinner plates - which were bracketed
by the usual assortment of flatware - the sticks seemed, on first sight, to be
aliens on the blue-clothed tables of the Kahn Auditorium banquet hall at Central
Synagogue in Rockville Centre, L.I.

Later, after the ceremony and the cocktail hour that followed, when the more
than 150 guests got their first glimpse of the endless platters of exotic fare
on the buffet tables, the chopsticks seemed not only appropriate but necessary.
The food, from the crispy noodles with beef and vegetables to the roast duck
with rice noodles, was strictly Vietnamese. As for the chopsticks, they were
inscribed: ''Paul's Bar Mitzvah, June 25, 1983.''

Paul is Paul Jacob Steinman, son of Ron and Josephine Steinman. Mr. Steinman
Sr., news producer of the ''Today'' show on NBC-TV, met his wife in Saigon - her
name then was Ngoc-Suong Tu and she led an orchestra - in the 1960's while he
was covering the Vietnamese War for his network. The couple married in Hong Kong
and later came to the United States. Mr. Steinman was also able to bring in his
wife's mother, who had owned a Saigon restaurant, as well as 15 other relatives.
Later, after Mrs. Steinman, a Buddhist, converted to Judaism, the couple
repeated their marriage vows in Central Synagogue, a Reform temple.

Mrs. Steinman attended her first bar mitzvah seven years ago. ''It was very
fancy,'' she recalled, ''and obviously very expensive. All in all it was quite
an experience. There was one band for the cocktail hour, another for dancing,
and the family changed their outfits several times.'' But what impressed - or
depressed -her most about that and subsequent bar mitzvahs she attended was the
food served by the caterers sanctioned by synagogues.

''So much money for a piece of chicken, fish, veal or, if you're willing to
spend a little more, filet mignon!'' she said sadly.  Her husband agreed, and
for their first son's bar mitzvah - they have another boy and two girls - the
Steinmans determined to do the cooking themselves, and the food was to be
Vietnamese.

''It was more than a concern with the high cost of catering,'' Mr.  Steinman
said. ''It was a desire to put on a party in one's own image. That became
particularly important with the kind of family we have. After all, there aren't
that many Vietnamese Jewish women.''

Getting the synagogue to agree to change its bylaws was another matter. There
ensued a sort of bar mitzvah battle: on one side the synagogue, on the other
Mrs. Steinman and two friends, Judi Brower and Pommy Levy, whose daughters were
about to have their bat mitzvahs. As Mrs. Brower put it: ''Those package deals
really don't portray one's life style.''

They won their point: ''We convinced them that it's the members, not the
caterers, who support the temple.'' Mrs. Steinman said.  They even went to the
Lower East Side, bought fabric for the tablecloths and napkins, had them made up
and, Mrs. Brower said, it was cheaper than if they had rented.

The remaining problem had to do with recipes calling for pork or shellfish.
Because of Jewish dietary laws, concessions had to be made by the family, with
beef and veal substituted for the pork (''They're both too dry,'' Mrs. Steinman
complained). As for the shellfish, it had to be eliminated, much to the chagrin
of Ba Thai Tu, Mrs.  Steinman's mother, who took time off from her job as a chef
at the Ramada Inn in Rockville, Md., to lend a hand. A dish calling for water
buffalo was also eliminated.

Nor did Mr. Steinman's mother, Ann, sit idly by. ''Look at these Vietnamese
spring rolls,'' she said.  ''I was filling and rolling till 1 o'clock the other
morning.'' Along with the spring rolls, the cocktail food - which the Steinmans
began preparing three weeks ahead - included fried wontons, vegetable dip, mini
hot dogs and, to the delight of traditionalists, potato pancakes and chopped
liver.

What does Ann Steinman think of her daughter-in-law's cooking?  ''Her matzoh
balls are better than mine, I swear to God,'' was the reply. ''And her lobster
and asparagus soup? Fantastic! She had my friends over for lunch years ago and
they're still talking about it.  The only thing she probably doesn't make is
burned pot roast. Jewish boys love burned pot roast.''

Rose Epstein, an old friend of the family, was impressed with the bar mitzvah
even before she ate. ''The paper towels in the ladies' room have an Oriental
motif!'' she said in amazement. ''Look, I'll show you,'' she went on, reaching
into her pocketbook. ''I took some home to show the girls.''

In the banquet hall, after the blessing of the hallah by Paul's paternal
grandfather, Harry Steinman, after a hora and Paul's first dance with his mother
(''You Are the Sunshine of My Life''), the food was carried to the buffet table
to the accompaniment of musical selections by the Charlotte Russe band.

These were the choices: turkey with veal and turkey meat stuffing, chicken with
cabbage and black mushroom sauce, Vietnamese meat balls, crispy noodles with
beef and vegetables, beef chow fun, beef and shredded carrots, chicken and
cashew nuts, fried rice, and roast duck with rice noodles. The youngsters were
served lemon chicken.

''This certainly isn't your conventional bar mitzvah,'' a guest said, abandoning
his chopsticks for a fork. ''Corned beef, salami, pastrami, all the herrings, a
choice of soup, beef or chicken-salad plate, ices or ice cream - that's a
conventional bar mitzvah!''

''A blending of two ancient cultures have met here today,'' said Tamara
Saletsky, Paul's Hebrew teacher.  ''A warm, gratifying experience,'' agreed the
cantor, Joy Parks.  ''The children are putting ketchup on the lemon chicken!''
said a distraught Josephine Steinman.  At the children's table a cousin, Tung
Tu, age 9, decided that this was the best bar mitzvah he'd ever been to.  After
the dozen or so homemade desserts and an equal number of dances, and when the
Oriental-style centerpieces began leaving with the guests, Mrs. Epstein said:
''It's a new world, isn't it? I can't get over how nice it is when people
accept.''

Rabbi Paul Joseph smiled when he read the message in his fortune cookie: ''The
food's pretty good here, you should come back.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Paul Jacob Steinman with his family and friends

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 367 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 740 words


IMAGES OF THE CITY

Instead of being born in a post-World War I American suburb and going to France
to shape an artistic career, Reginald Marsh, the artist, reversed it. He was
born in Paris and grew up in Nutley, N.J., and New Rochelle, N.Y., and developed
his skills in the big city. In New York, he sold illustrations to the original
Vanity Fair, was a staff artist for the New York Daily News and was one of the
first New Yorker magazine cartoonists. His first solo show of oils and
watercolors was held in 1924 in the Whitney Studio Club, forerunner of the
Whitney Museum of American Art, which opened in 1930. That year, the museum
bought Marsh's ''Why Not Take the 'L'?''

Marsh and the Whitney are still together. The newest branch of the museum is the
Whitney Museum at Philip Morris, at the corner of Park Avenue and 42d Street.
There, the museum's summer show, which opened yesterday is ''Reginald Marsh's
New York'' - 38 drawings, prints and paintings, including ''Ten Cents a Dance,''
''Twenty Cent Movie,'' ''Minsky's Chorus'' and ''Negroes on Rockaway Beach.''
There are also photographs and sketches.

The Whitney at Philip Morris is an easy, drop-in gallery and admission is free.
Hours: Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., and tonight, to 7:30 P.M.
Telephone: 570-3633.
ROMANTIC COMEDY

Among Walter Scholz's directorial credits is his staging of ''The Trial of the
Catonsville Nine,'' a courtroom drama written by the Rev. Daniel Berrigan and
based on the trial of Father Berrigan and others who destroyed draft-office
files as part of their anti-Vietnam War campaign. Now Mr. Scholz is mining a
lighter vein, directing a romantic comedy ''Within the Year,'' by the
actor-turned-playwright Sheila Walsh. This new work is the story of a woman over
40 years old who, in order to maintain her life style, has to take over her
husband's business when he dies.

Catherine Burns, a winner of the Clarence Derwent Award, stars. The cast also
includes Lee Billington, Leo Ferstenberg, David Krasner and Rocky Parker.

The play is being presented at the American Theater of Actors, at 314 West 54th
Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues. Curtain time: 8 P.M. Admission: $5.
The play runs Wednesday through Sunday, until July 16. Reservations: 581-3044.
BROTHERS OF NOTE

The Brawner brothers, Kenneth and Everett, are musicians who usually work as
part of a solid contemporary group called ''Raw Sugar,'' a lively collection of
instrumentalists. Joined by a vocalist, they have performed throughout the city
and elsewhere, most notably at The Cellar on Manhattan's Upper West Side.

The two brothers have subtracted themselves from the group for an engagement
that begins tonight and runs through Sunday at Greene Street, the SoHo
restaurant that is festooned with plants and has a balcony. Kenneth Brawner
plays the piano and Everett Brawner the bass, and their style as a duet is an
amalgam of pop and soul. Their performances begin at 8:30, 10 and 11:30 P.M.

The restaurant is at 101 Greene Street, between Prince and Spring Streets. There
is a $10 minimum in the dining room and the balcony.  No minimum at the bar.
Telephone: 925-2415.
THE PHOTOGENIC LINK

This is, of course, the year of the bridge, the Brooklyn Bridge, which provides
the rationale for a variety of exhibitions devoted to the 100-year-old span. The
Midtown Y's photo gallery, a mere 11 years old, has mounted an exhibition of 100
Brooklyn Bridge photographs.

There are color and black-and-white photographs, nighttime views as well as
daylight pictures, collages and painted photographs. When the call went out last
winter for pictures, Michael Spano and Sy Rubin, the curators of the exhibition,
received a thousand photographs.  They made the selection, including what they
felt were varied visions. The show has 50 photographers, including Arthur
Leipzig, Joel Greenberg, Jan Staller, Jill Freedman, Richard Benson, Ben
Fernandez, Daniel Hays, Berenice Abbott, Walter Goodman, Stella Snead, Rebecca
Lepkoff, Theresa Kirby and Elena Siebert,

Gallery hours: Sunday through Thursday, 12 to 8 P.M., Friday from 12 to 5 P.M.
Admission: Free. The gallery is at 344 East 14th Street. Telephone: 674-7200.

Thursday Sports is on page B12.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
